
1. Am J Hematol. 2016 Apr 2. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24377. [Epub ahead of print]

Epidemiology and clinical relevance of mutations in post-polycythemia vera and
post-essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis. A study on 359 patients of the
AGIMM group.

Rotunno G(1,)(2), Pacilli A(1,)(2), Artusi V(3,)(2), Rumi E(4,)(5,)(2), Maffioli 
M(6,)(2), Delaini F(7,)(2), Brogi G(1,)(2), Fanelli T(1,)(8,)(2), Pancrazzi
A(1,)(2), Pietra D(4,)(2), Bernardis I(3,)(2), Belotti C(7,)(2), Pieri L(1,)(2), 
Sant'Antonio E(1,)(2), Salmoiraghi S(7,)(2), Cilloni D(9,)(2), Rambaldi A(7,)(2),
Passamonti F(6,)(2), Barbui T(10,)(2), Manfredini R(3,)(2), Cazzola M(4,)(2),
Tagliafico E(3,)(2), Vannucchi AM(1,)(2), Guglielmelli P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)CRIMM-Center for Research and Innovation of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms, AOU 
Careggi, Department of Experimental and Clinical medicine, DENOTHE Excellence
Center, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Life Sciences, 
Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. (3)Center for Genome Research, and Department of Medical and Surgical
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena. (4)Department of
Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Ospedale di Circolo - Fondazione Macchi, University of Insubria, Varese,
Italia. (7)Hematology and BMT Unit, ASST Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.
(8)University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (9)Department of Clinical and Biological
Sciences University of Turin, San Luigi Hospital Turin. (10)FROM Research
Foundation, Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, Bergamo, Italy.

Transformation to secondary myelofibrosis (MF) occurs as part of the natural
history of polycythemia vera (PPV-MF) and essential thrombocythemia (PET-MF).
Although primary (PMF) and secondary MF are considered similar diseases and
managed similarly, there are few studies specifically focused on the latter. The 
aim of this study was to characterize the mutation landscape, and describe the
main clinical correlates and prognostic implications of mutations, in a series of
359 patients with PPV-MF and PET-MF. Compared with PV and ET, the JAK2V617F and
CALR mutated allele burden was significantly higher in PPV-MF and/or PET-MF,
indicating a role for accumulation of mutated alleles in the process of
transformation to MF. However, neither the allele burden nor the type of driver
mutation influenced overall survival (OS), while absence of any driver mutation
(triple negativity) was associated with significant reduction of OS in PET-MF,
similar to PMF. Of the five interrogated subclonal mutations (ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2,
IDH1 and IDH2), that comprise a prognostically detrimental high molecular risk
(HMR) category in PMF, only SRSF2 mutations were associated with reduced survival
in PET-MF, and no additional mutation profile with prognostic relevance was
highlighted. Overall, these data indicate that the molecular landscape of
secondary forms of MF is different from PMF, suggesting that unknown mutational
events might contribute to the progression from chronic phase disease to
myelofibrosis. These findings also support more extended genotyping approaches
aimed at identifying novel molecular abnormalities with prognostic relevance for 
patients with PPV-MF and PET-MF. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27037840  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Reprod Sci. 2016 Mar 31. pii: 1933719116638186. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Polycomb Group Protein EZH2-Mediated DNA Mismatch Repair Gene
MSH2 in Human Uterine Fibroids.

Yang Q(1), Laknaur A(2), Elam L(2), Ismail N(3), Gavrilova-Jordan L(2), Lue J(2),
Diamond MP(2), Al-Hendy A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA qyang@gru.edu.
(2)Division of Translational Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA. (3)Clinical
Microbiology Division, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Uterine fibroids (UFs) are benign smooth muscle neoplasms affecting up to 70% of 
reproductive age women. Treatment of symptomatic UFs places a significant
economic burden on the US health-care system. Several specific genetic
abnormalities have been described as etiologic factors of UFs, suggesting that a 
low DNA damage repair capacity may be involved in the formation of UF. In this
study, we used human fibroid and adjacent myometrial tissues, as well as an in
vitro cell culture model, to evaluate the expression ofMutS homolog 2(MSH2),
which encodes a protein belongs to the mismatch repair system. In addition, we
deciphered the mechanism by which polycomb repressive complex 2 protein, EZH2,
deregulatesMSH2in UFs. The RNA expression analysis demonstrated the deregulation 
ofMSH2expression in UF tissues in comparison to its adjacent myometrium. Notably,
protein levels ofMSH2were upregulated in 90% of fibroid tissues (9 of 10) as
compared to matched adjacent myometrial tissues. Human fibroid primary cells
treated with 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), chemical inhibitor of EZH2, exhibited a
significant increase inMSH2expression (P< .05). Overexpression ofEZH2using an
adenoviral vector approach significantly downregulated the expression ofMSH2(P<
.05). Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that enrichment of
H3K27me3 in promoter regions ofMSH2was significantly decreased in DZNep-treated
fibroid cells as compared to vehicle control. These data suggest that
EZH2-H3K27me3 regulatory mechanism dynamically changes the expression levels of
DNA mismatch repair geneMSH2,through epigenetic mark H3K27me3. MSH2 may be
considered as a marker for early detection of UFs.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 27036951  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8424. [Epub ahead of print]

Smurf1 regulation of DAB2IP controls cell proliferation and migration.

Li X(1,)(2), Dai X(2), Wan L(2), Inuzuka H(2), Sun L(1), North BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Basic Medical College, Jilin University,
Changchun 130021, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Tumor cell proliferation, survival and migration are regulated by the deletion of
ovarian carcinoma 2/disabled homolog 2 (DOC-2/DAB2) interacting protein (DAB2IP),
a tumor suppressor that serves as a scaffold protein for H-Ras and TRAF2.
Importantly, the oncogenic histone methyl-transferase EZH2 epigenetically
down-regulates DAB2IP in a variety of tumors. Recently, we demonstrated that
DAB2IP is negatively regulated by Akt-dependent phosphorylation and
SCFFbw7-mediated degradation. Here, we further identify the oncoprotein Smurf1,
an E3-ubiquitin ligase, as a novel negative regulator of DAB2IP. Smurf1-mediated 
cellular proliferation and migration are largely dependent on the presence of
DAB2IP, suggesting that DAB2IP is a key effector molecule of Smurf1 oncogenic
function. Additionally, we identify that similar to DAB2IP, Smurf1 is also a
target of phosphorylation by both Akt1 and Akt2 kinases, which enhances Smurf1
abundance, leading to a reduction in DAB2IP. Given the role of DAB2IP in
tumorigenesis and metastasis, our data identify Smurf1 as an upstream oncogenic
factor that negatively regulates DAB2IP to govern aberrant cell growth and
migration.

PMID: 27036023  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Int J Mol Sci. 2016 Mar 24;17(4). pii: E440. doi: 10.3390/ijms17040440.

Molecular and Cellular Mechanisms of Myelodysplastic Syndrome: Implications on
Targeted Therapy.

Gill H(1), Leung AY(2), Kwong YL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China. gillhsh@hku.hk.
(2)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
ayhleung@hku.hk. (3)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong,
China. ylkwong@hkucc.hku.hk.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a group of heterogeneous clonal hematopoietic
stem cell disorders characterized by cytopenia, ineffective hematopoiesis, and
progression to secondary acute myeloid leukemia in high-risk cases. Conventional 
prognostication relies on clinicopathological parameters supplemented by
cytogenetic information. However, recent studies have shown that genetic
aberrations also have critical impacts on treatment outcome. Moreover, these
genetic alterations may themselves be a target for treatment. The mutation
landscape in MDS is shaped by gene aberrations involved in DNA methylation (TET2,
DNMT3A, IDH1/2), histone modification (ASXL1, EZH2), the RNA splicing machinery
(SF3B1, SRSF2, ZRSR2, U2AF1/2), transcription (RUNX1, TP53, BCOR, PHF6, NCOR,
CEBPA, GATA2), tyrosine kinase receptor signaling (JAK2, MPL, FLT3, GNAS, KIT),
RAS pathways (KRAS, NRAS, CBL, NF1, PTPN11), DNA repair (ATM, BRCC3, DLRE1C,
FANCL), and cohesion complexes (STAG2, CTCF, SMC1A, RAD21). A detailed
understanding of the pathogenetic mechanisms leading to transformation is
critical for designing single-agent or combinatorial approaches in target therapy
of MDS.

PMID: 27023522  [PubMed - in process]


5. eNeuro. 2016 Feb 27;3(1). pii: ENEURO.0124-15.2016. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0124-15.2016.

Neurons in Vulnerable Regions of the Alzheimer's Disease Brain Display Reduced
ATM Signaling.

Shen X(1), Chen J(2), Li J(3), Kofler J(4), Herrup K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China; Department of Otolaryngology, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008, Hunan, China. (2)Department 
of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University , Piscataway, New Jersey
08854. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology , Kunming 
650223, Yunnan, China. (4)Department of Pathology and The Alzheimer's Disease
Research Center, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213. (5)Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science 
and Technology , Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a multisystemic disease caused by mutations in the
ATM (A-T mutated) gene. It strikes before 5 years of age and leads to
dysfunctions in many tissues, including the CNS, where it leads to
neurodegeneration, primarily in cerebellum. Alzheimer's disease (AD), by
contrast, is a largely sporadic neurodegenerative disorder that rarely strikes
before the 7th decade of life with primary neuronal losses in hippocampus,
frontal cortex, and certain subcortical nuclei. Despite these differences, we
present data supporting the hypothesis that a failure of ATM signaling is
involved in the neuronal death in individuals with AD. In both, partially
ATM-deficient mice and AD mouse models, neurons show evidence for a loss of ATM. 
In human AD, three independent indices of reduced ATM function-nuclear
translocation of histone deacetylase 4, trimethylation of histone H3, and the
presence of cell cycle activity-appear coordinately in neurons in regions where
degeneration is prevalent. These same neurons also show reduced ATM protein
levels. And though they represent only a fraction of the total neurons in each
affected region, their numbers significantly correlate with disease stage. This
previously unknown role for the ATM kinase in AD pathogenesis suggests that the
failure of ATM function may be an important contributor to the death of neurons
in AD individuals.

PMCID: PMC4770009
PMID: 27022623  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 28;11(3):e0150026. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150026.
eCollection 2016.

MiR-138 Acts as a Tumor Suppressor by Targeting EZH2 and Enhances
Cisplatin-Induced Apoptosis in Osteosarcoma Cells.

Zhu Z(1), Tang J(2), Wang J(1), Duan G(1), Zhou L(1), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical
College, Xuzhou, JiangSu Province, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics,
Affiliated Huai'an Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, Huaian, JiangSu Province, 
China.

Chemotherapeutic insensitivity remains a major obstacle to treating osteosarcoma 
effectively. Recently, increasing evidence has suggested that microRNAs (miRNAs) 
are involved in drug resistance. However, the effect of miR-138 on cisplatin
chemoresistance in osteosarcoma has not been reported. We used real-time PCR to
detect the expression of mature miR-138 in osteosarcoma tissues and cell lines.
Cell proliferation, invasion, and migration assays were used to observe changes
to the osteosarcoma malignant phenotype. MiR-138 was downregulated in
osteosarcoma tissues and cell lines, and miR-138 overexpression negatively
regulated osteosarcoma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. We also
verified that EZH2 is a direct target of miR-138. Furthermore, enhancing EZH2
expression reduced the inhibitory effects of miR-138 on osteosarcoma.
Proliferation, apoptosis assays and caspase-3 activity assay confirmed that
elevated miR-138 expression enhanced osteosarcoma cell chemosensitivity to
cisplatin by targeting EZH2. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that
miR-138 acts as a tumor suppressor by enhancing osteosarcoma cell
chemosensitivity and supports its potential application for treating osteosarcoma
in the future.

PMID: 27019355  [PubMed - in process]


7. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8257. [Epub ahead of print]

Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 promotes malignant development of esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma by targeting ß-catenin via Ezh2.

Wang W(1,)(2), Zhu Y(2), Li S(2), Chen X(1,)(3), Jiang G(4), Shen Z(1,)(3), Qiao 
Y(1,)(3), Wang L(1), Zheng P(5), Zhang Y(1,)(3,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China. (2)The Third People's Hospital of Zhengzhou,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, China. (3)Biotherapy Center, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China. (4)Department
of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450052, China. (5)Department of Gastroenterology, The Fifth Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 470000, China. (6)Engineering 
Key Laboratory for Cell Therapy of Henan Province, Zhengzhou, Henan 450052,
China. (7)School of Life Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan 450001,
China.

Evidences have shown that lncRNAs involve in the initiation and progression of
various cancers including esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The aberrant
expression of lncRNA MALAT1 was investigated in 106 paired ESCC tissues and
adjacent non-cancerous tissues by qRT-PCR. Down-regulated MALAT1 and Ezh2
over-expression plasmid were constructed respectively to analyze the expression
of ß-catenin, Lin28 and Ezh2 genes. We found that the MALAT1 expression level was
higher in human ESCC tissues (P=0.0011), which was closely correlated with WHO
grade (P=0.0395, P=0.0331), lymph node metastasis (P=0.0213) and prognosis
(P=0.0294). Silencing of MALAT1 expression inhibited cell proliferation,
migration and tumor sphere formation, while increasing cell apoptosis of
esophageal cancer in vitro. Down-regulation of MALAT1 decreased the expression of
ß-catenin, Lin28 and Ezh2 genes, while over-expressed Ezh2 combined with MALAT1
down-regulation completely reversed the si-MALAT1-mediated repression of
ß-catenin and Lin28 in esophageal cancer cells. Animal experiments showed that
knockdown of MALAT1 decreased tumor formation and improved survival. MALAT1
promotes the initiation and progression of ESCC, suggesting that inhibition of
MALAT1 might be a potential target for treatment of ESCC.

PMID: 27015363  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 24;7:11081. doi: 10.1038/ncomms11081.

Neuronal activity controls Bdnf expression via Polycomb de-repression and
CREB/CBP/JMJD3 activation in mature neurons.

Palomer E(1), Carretero J(1), Benvegnù S(1), Dotti CG(1), Martin MG(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología Molecular, Centro Biología Molecular 'Severo
Ochoa' CSIC-UAM, 28049 Madrid, Spain. (2)Laboratorio de Neurobiología, Instituto 
de Investigaciones Médicas Mercedes y Martín Ferreyra (INIMEC-CONICET-UNC),
Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, 5016 Córdoba, Argentina.

It has been recently described that in embryonic stem cells, the expression of
some important developmentally regulated genes is repressed, but poised for fast 
activation under the appropriate stimuli. In this work we show that Bdnf
promoters are repressed by Polycomb Complex 2 in mature hippocampal neurons, and 
basal expression is guaranteed by the coexistence with activating histone marks. 
Neuronal stimulation triggered by N-methyl-D-aspartate application induces the
transcription of these promoters by H3K27Me3 demethylation and H3K27Me3
phosphorylation at Serine 28 leading to displacement of EZH2, the catalytic
subunit of Polycomb Repressor Complex 2. Our data show that the fast transient
expression of Bdnf promoters II and VI after neuronal stimulation is dependent on
acetylation of histone H3K27 by CREB-p/CBP. Thus, regulatory mechanisms
established during development seem to remain after differentiation controlling
genes induced by different stimuli, as would be the case of early memory genes in
mature neurons.

PMID: 27010597  [PubMed - in process]


9. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2016 Mar;20(5):830-6.

Mutational status of EZH2 and CD79B hot spots in mature B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphomas: novel CD79B variations have been revealed.

Cetin GO(1), Baris IC, Caner V, Sarikepe B, Sen Turk N, Tepeli E, Hacioglu S,
Sari I, Bagci G, Keskin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School of Pamukkale University,
Denizli, Turkey. ocetin@pau.edu.tr.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the hot spot mutational frequencies of Enhancer 
of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and cluster of differentiation 79B (CD79B) genes in a
cohort of mature B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA samples from formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded
(FFPE) tissues from a total of 37 patients with mature B-cell non-Hodgkin
lymphomas were included in the study. Molecular genetic analysis was performed by
direct sequencing of the DNA samples.
RESULTS: We analyzed formaldehyde fixed-paraffin embedded (FFPE) tumor tissue
samples from 17 female and 20 male patients with a median age of 63.7 years at
the time of diagnosis. None of the patients had previously reported hot spot
mutations in EZH2 and CD79B, but previously unreported single nucleotide
variations of CD79B were present in nine patients. rs779833118 was the most
frequent variation (7/37 patients, 18.9%). A non-synonymous variation
rs757407417, which could have a potentially damaging outcome, was detected in two
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: None of the patients had well-known hot spot mutations in EZH2 and
CD79B. However, we detected novel CD79B variations in mature B-cell non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma patients.

PMID: 27010137  [PubMed - in process]


10. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 24;6:23521. doi: 10.1038/srep23521.

HBx-upregulated lncRNA UCA1 promotes cell growth and tumorigenesis by recruiting 
EZH2 and repressing p27Kip1/CDK2 signaling.

Hu JJ(1), Song W(1), Zhang SD(1), Shen XH(1), Qiu XM(1), Wu HZ(1), Gong PH(1), Lu
S(2), Zhao ZJ(1), He ML(3,)(4), Fan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Developmental Biology, Medical School of
Southeast University, The Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human
Diseases, Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. (2)The
First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)CUHK Shenzhen Research Institute, Shenzhen, China. (4)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

It is well accepted that HBx plays the major role in hepatocarcinogenesis
associated with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections. However, little was known
about its role in regulating long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), a large group of
transcripts regulating a variety of biological processes including carcinogenesis
in mammalian cells. Here we report that HBx upregulates UCA1 genes and
downregulates p27 genes in hepatic LO2 cells. Further studies show that the
upregulated UCA1 promotes cell growth by facilitating G1/S transition through
CDK2 in both hepatic and hepatoma cells. Knock down of UCA1 in HBx-expressing
hepatic and hepatoma cells resulted in markedly increased apoptotic cells by
elevating the cleaved caspase-3 and caspase-8. More importantly, UCA1 is found to
be physically associated with enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), which
suppresses p27Kip1 through histone methylation (H3K27me3) on p27Kip1 promoter. We
also show that knockdown of UCA1 in hepatoma cells inhibits tumorigenesis in nude
mice. In a clinic study, UCA1 is found to be frequently up-regulated in HBx
positive group tissues in comparison with the HBx negative group, and exhibits an
inverse correlation between UCA1 and p27Kip1 levels. Our findings demonstrate an 
important mechanism of hepatocarcinogenesis through the signaling of
HBx-UCA1/EZH2-p27Kip1 axis, and a potential target of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4806364
PMID: 27009634  [PubMed - in process]


11. J Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Mar 21. pii: mjw010. [Epub ahead of print]

microRNA-129-5p, a c-Myc negative target, affects hepatocellular carcinoma
progression by blocking the Warburg effect.

Han H(1), Li W(1), Shen H(1), Zhang J(2), Zhu Y(1), Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan 
430072, China. (2)Department of Surgery, Wuhan Union Hospital, Wuhan 430022,
China. (3)College of Life Sciences, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China liy7@whu.edu.cn.

Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) and c-Myc (Myc) contributes to hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) progression, but how miRNAs and Myc regulate each other in
hepatocarcinogenesis is still poorly understood. Using a functional screen, we
identified miR-129-5p as a miRNA that inhibits HCC cell growth. miR-129-5p
targets the mitochondrial matrix protein pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4), 
which leads to decreased phosphorylation of the E1a subunit of pyruvate
dehyrogenase (PDH) complex, inhibition of glycolysis, retarded tumor growth, and 
impaired lung colonization. Enforced expression of PDK4 refractory to inhibition 
by miR-129-5p rescued all of these phenotypes. Targeting PDK4 by shRNA
recapitulated the effects caused by miR-129-5p. miR-129-5p is transcriptionally
repressed by a complex comprised of Myc, histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3), and
enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb repressive complex 2 (EZH2). Levels of miR-129-5p
negatively correlated with clinical stages in human HCC. Restoring miR-129-5p
expression suppressed the diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced hepatocarcinogenesis
in mice. Thus, we concluded that miR-129-5p, which is a negative target of Myc,
blocks glycolysis to retard hepatocarcinogenesis via targeting PDK4. The critical
link between miR-129-5p and PDK4 in the progression of HCC suggests potential
points of therapeutic intervention for this disease.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27001970  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Tumour Biol. 2016 Mar 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Higher EZH2 expression is associated with extramedullary infiltration in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Zhu Q(1), Zhang L(1), Li X(1), Chen F(1), Jiang L(1), Yu G(1), Wang Z(1), Yin
C(1), Jiang X(1), Zhong Q(1), Zhou H(1), Ding B(1), Wang C(1), Meng F(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China. mengfu@medmail.com.cn. (3)Hematopathy Diagnosis and
Therapy Center, Kanghua Hospital, Dongguan, China. mengfu@medmail.com.cn.

Accumulating evidence indicates that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes 
the metastatic ability of solid tumors, but the role of EZH2 in extramedullary
infiltration (EMI) in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has not been thoroughly
explored. In the present study, we investigated the possible association between 
EZH2 and EMI. We found that the messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression
levels of EZH2 in AML patients were both significantly higher than in idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) patients. Furthermore, a positive correlation
between EZH2 mRNA expression and percentage of peripheral blood blasts wa s found
in AML patients (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.404, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009). The migratory capacities of Kasumi-1 and 
HL-60, which both show a high level of EZH2 expression, were markedly higher than
those of U937 and KG-1a. In contrast, silencing of EZH2 resulted in reduction in 
proliferation and migration ability and an increase in apoptosis. The latter
observation was accompanied by reduced expression of associated proteins p-ERK,
p-cmyc, and matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and an increase in epithelial
cadherin (E-cadherin). These data suggest that higher expression of EZH2 may be
associated with extramedullary infiltration in acute myeloid leukemia and affect 
pathogenesis via activation of the p-ERK/p-cmyc/MMP-2 and E-cadherin signaling
pathways.

PMID: 27000755  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Bioessays. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1002/bies.201500162. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations and deletions of PRC2 in prostate cancer.

Jain P(1,)(2), Di Croce L(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona,
Spain. (3)Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats, Barcelona, Spain.

The Polycomb group of proteins (PcGs) are transcriptional repressor complexes
that regulate important biological processes and play critical roles in cancer.
Mutating or deleting EZH2 can have both oncogenic and tumor suppressive functions
by increasing or decreasing H3K27me3. In contrast, mutations of SUZ12 and EED are
reported to have tumor suppressive functions. EZH2 is overexpressed in many
cancers, including prostate cancer, which can lead to silencing of tumor
suppressors, genes regulating epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), and
interferon signaling. In some cases, EZH2 overexpression also leads to its use of
non-histone substrates. Lastly, PRC2 associated factors can influence the
progression of cancer through progressive mutations or by specific binding to
certain target genes. Here, we discuss which mutations and deletions of the PRC2 
complex have been detected in different cancers, with a specific focus on the
overexpression of EZH2 in prostate cancer.

© 2016 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 27000413  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8135. [Epub ahead of print]

Post-translational modification-regulated leukocyte adhesion and migration.

Loh JT(1), Su IH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Nanyang Technological
University, Republic of Singapore.

Leukocytes undergo frequent phenotypic changes and rapidly infiltrate peripheral 
and lymphoid tissues in order to carry out immune responses. The recruitment of
circulating leukocytes into inflamed tissues depends on integrin-mediated
tethering and rolling of these cells on the vascular endothelium, followed by
transmigration into the tissues. This dynamic process of migration requires the
coordination of large numbers of cytosolic and transmembrane proteins whose
functional activities are typically regulated by post-translational modifications
(PTMs). Our recent studies have shown that the lysine methyltransferase, Ezh2,
critically regulates integrin signalling and governs the adhesion dynamics of
leukocytes via direct methylation of talin, a key molecule that controls these
processes by linking integrins to the actin cytoskeleton. In this review, we will
discuss the various modes of leukocyte migration and examine how PTMs of
cytoskeletal/adhesion associated proteins play fundamental roles in the dynamic
regulation of leukocyte migration. Furthermore, we will discuss molecular details
of the adhesion dynamics controlled by Ezh2-mediated talin methylation and the
potential implications of this novel regulatory mechanism for leukocyte
migration, immune responses, and pathogenic processes, such as allergic contact
dermatitis and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26993608  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2016 Mar 15. pii: 0194599816636612. [Epub ahead of
print]

Tumor Biomarkers in Spindle Cell Variant Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and 
Neck.

Rosko AJ(1), Birkeland AC(1), Wilson KF(2), Muenz DG(3), Bellile E(3), Bradford
CR(1), McHugh JB(4), Spector ME(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (4)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (5)Department of
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA mspector@med.umich.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To determine biomarkers of recurrence and survival in patients with
spindle cell variant squamous cell carcinoma (SpSCC) of the head and neck.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case control study.
SETTING: Tertiary academic center.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Thirty-two SpSCC patients (mean age, 68.8) between 1987 and
2009 were identified and reviewed. A tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed from
tumor specimens. Tumor biomarkers under study included p16, epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), p53, EZH2, cyclin D1, CD104, HGFa, p21, and cMET. An
additional TMA was constructed from patients with non-SpSCC oral cavity squamous 
cell carcinoma for comparative purposes. The main outcomes were overall survival 
(OS), disease-specific survival (DSS), and recurrence-free survival (RFS).
RESULTS: In the SpSCC cohort, tumors positive for cMet had worse OS (P < .001).
Patients positive for cMet (P = .007), cyclin D1 (P = .019), and p16 (P = .004)
had worse DSS. Recurrence-free survival was also worse in patients with tumors
positive for cMet (P = .037), cyclin D1 (P = .012), and p16 (P < .001). Compared 
with the oral cavity cohort, there was a significantly larger proportion of
patients in the SpSCC group with tumors staining positive for cMet and a lower
proportion of tumors positive for cyclin D1.
CONCLUSION: cMet, cyclin D1, and p16 are predictive tumor biomarkers for risk of 
recurrence and worse DSS in patients with SpSCC.

© American Academy of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery Foundation 2016.

PMID: 26980915  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Ovarian Res. 2016 Mar 15;9(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13048-016-0225-z.

Changes in gene expression of histone modification enzymes in rat granulosa cells
undergoing luteinization during ovulation.

Maekawa R(1), Lee L(1), Okada M(1), Asada H(1), Shinagawa M(1), Tamura I(1), Sato
S(1), Tamura H(1), Sugino N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, 755-8505, Japan. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of Medicine,
Minamikogushi 1-1-1, Ube, 755-8505, Japan. sugino@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The ovulatory LH surge rapidly alters the expression of
steroidogenesis-related genes such as steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) in granulosa cells (GCs) undergoing luteinization. We recently reported
that histone modifications contribute to these changes. Histone modifications are
regulated by a variety of histone modification enzymes. This study investigated
the changes in gene expression of histone modification enzymes in rat GCs
undergoing luteinization after the induction of ovulation. The extracellular
regulated kinase (ERK)-1/2 is a mediator in the intracellular signaling pathway
stimulated by the ovulatory LH surge and regulates the expression of a number of 
genes in GCs. We further investigated whether ERK-1/2 is involved in the
regulation of the histone modification at the StAR promoter region in GCs
undergoing luteinization.
RESULTS: GCs were obtained from rats treated with equine chorionic gonadotropin
(CG) before (0 h) and after human (h) CG injection. The expressions of 84 genes
regulating histone modifications or DNA methylation were measured using a PCR
array. Five genes (HDAC4, HDAC10, EZH2, SETDB2, and CIITA) were identified as
histone acetylation- or histone methylation-related genes, and were significantly
altered after hCG injection. None of the genes were related to DNA methylation.
mRNA levels of EZH2, SETDB2, HDAC4, and HDAC10 decreased and CIITA mRNA levels
increased 4 or 12 h after hCG injection. GCs isolated after eCG injection were
incubated with hCG for 4 h to induce luteinization. StAR mRNA levels were
significantly increased by hCG accompanied by the increase in H3K4me3 of the StAR
promoter region. StAR mRNA expression was inhibited by the ERK inhibitor with the
significant decrease of H3K4me3. These results suggest that hCG increases StAR
gene expression through the ERK-1/2-mediated signaling which is also associated
with histone modification of the promoter region.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expressions of histone modification enzymes change in GCs
undergoing luteinization after ovulation induction. This change may play
important roles in regulating the expression of various genes during the early
stage of luteinization, which may be critical for the subsequent corpus luteum
formation.

PMCID: PMC4793631
PMID: 26979106  [PubMed - in process]


17. Urol Oncol. 2016 Mar 11. pii: S1078-1439(16)00044-2. doi:
10.1016/j.urolonc.2016.02.011. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression in bladder cancer.

Warrick JI(1), Raman JD(2), Kaag M(2), Bruggeman T(3), Cates J(4), Clark P(5),
DeGraff DJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Penn State University School of Medicine and Milton
S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA. Electronic address: jwarrick@hmc.psu.edu.
(2)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Penn State University School of
Medicine and Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA. (3)Department of
Pathology, Penn State University School of Medicine and Milton S. Hershey Medical
Center, Hershey, PA. (4)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Nashville, TN. (5)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN. (6)Department of Pathology, Penn State
University School of Medicine and Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA; 
Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Penn State University School of
Medicine and Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Penn State University School of Medicine and 
Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA.

BACKGROUND: Studies evaluating enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression and 
oncologic outcomes in bladder cancer have been discrepant. EZH2 expression in
noninvasive bladder cancer is not well studied. We thus set out to address the
discrepancy in previous reports, and to study expression of EZH2 in noninvasive
bladder cancer and its associations, in a large cystectomy cohort.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EZH2 expression was evaluated in tissue microarray
material (invasive and noninvasive cancer). Associations between EZH2 expression 
and oncologic outcomes, tumor stage, and disease type were determined. Receiver
operating characteristic analysis was performed for EZH2 expression in the
diagnosis of invasive carcinoma and flat carcinoma in situ (CIS) compared to
benign urothelium.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression was most common in CIS, followed by invasive carcinoma, 
noninvasive papillary urothelial carcinoma, and benign urothelium, in decreasing 
order (P<0.05 all comparisons, linear model). The receiver operating
characteristic analysis demonstrated an area under the curve of 0.92 for CIS and 
0.83 for invasive carcinoma, both compared to benign urothelium. At a cutoff
of=4, this corresponded to sensitivities of 89% and 73%, and specificities of 82%
and 82%, for CIS and invasive carcinoma, respectively. The EZH2 expression was
not associated with oncologic outcomes, including recurrence-free survival and
death from bladder cancer. The EZH2 expression status (positive or negative) of
noninvasive and invasive carcinomas taken from the same bladder correlated (P =
0.05, Fisher exact).
CONCLUSION: That EZH2 status of noninvasive and invasive cancer correlated in
individual patients suggests that EZH2 may be a marker of lineage. EZH2 may offer
diagnostic utility, particularly in flat urothelial CIS vs. benign urothelium.
The present study supports that EZH2 expression in bladder cancer is not
predictive of oncologic outcome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26976725  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oncoscience. 2016 Jan 29;3(1):21-30. eCollection 2016.

EZH2 inhibition re-sensitizes multidrug resistant B-cell lymphomas to etoposide
mediated apoptosis.

Smonskey M(1), Lasorsa E(1), Rosario S(2), Kirk JS(1), Hernandez-Ilizaliturri
FJ(3), Ellis L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA; Department of Molecular Pharmacology and
Cancer Therapeutics, State University of New York at Buffalo, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Reactivation of apoptotic pathways is an attractive strategy for patients with
treatment-resistant B-cell lymphoma. The tumor suppressor, p53 is central for
apoptotic response to multiple DNA damaging agents used to treat aggressive
B-cell lymphomas, including etoposide. It has been demonstrated that etoposide
induced DNA damage and therapeutic efficacy is enhanced by combination with
inhibitors of the histone methyltransferase, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). 
Further, EZH2 was identified to regulate cell fate decisions in response to DNA
damage. Using B-cell lymphoma cell lines resistant to etoposide induced cell
death; we show that p53 is dramatically down regulated and MDMX, a negative
regulator of p53, is significantly up regulated. However, these cell lines remain
responsive to etoposide mediated DNA damage and exhibit cell cycle inhibition and
induction of senescence. Furthermore, chemical inhibition of EZH2 directs DNA
damage to a predominant p53 dependent apoptotic response associated with loss of 
MDMX and BCL-XL. These data provide confirmation of EZH2 in determining cell fate
following DNA damage and propose a novel therapeutic strategy for patients with
aggressive treatment-resistant B-cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4751913
PMID: 26973857  [PubMed]


19. Oncoscience. 2016 Jan 29;3(1):9-20. eCollection 2016.

In silico and experimental analyses predict the therapeutic value of an EZH2
inhibitor GSK343 against hepatocellular carcinoma through the induction of
metallothionein genes.

Liu TP(1), Hong YH(2), Tung KY(2), Yang PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical
Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of 
Surgery, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Mackay Junior College of
Medicine, Nursing and Management, New Taipei City, Taiwan; Department of
Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan; Liver Medical Center, 
Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Department of Surgery, Mackay
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and
Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

There are currently no effective molecular targeted therapies for hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC), the third leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide.
Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27)-specific
methyltransferase, has been emerged as novel anticancer target. Our previous
study has demonstrated that GSK343, an S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM)-competitive 
inhibitor of EZH2, induces autophagy and enhances drug sensitivity in cancer
cells including HCC. In this study, an in silico study was performed and found
that EZH2 was overexpressed in cancerous tissues of HCC patients at both gene and
protein levels. Microarray analysis and in vitro experiments indicated that the
anti-HCC activity of GSK343 was associated with the induction of metallothionein 
(MT) genes. In addition, the negative association of EZH2 and MT1/MT2A genes in
cancer cell lines and tissues was found in public gene expression database. Taken
together, our findings suggest that EZH2 inhibitors could be a good therapeutic
option for HCC, and induction of MT genes was associated with the anti-HCC
activity of EZH2 inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4751912
PMID: 26973856  [PubMed]


20. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Mar 1;7:40. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00040. eCollection
2016.

Early Life Adverse Environmental Exposures Increase the Risk of Uterine Fibroid
Development: Role of Epigenetic Regulation.

Yang Q(1), Diamond MP(1), Al-Hendy A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translation Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta GA, USA.

Uterine Fibroids [UF(s), AKA: leiomyoma] are the most important benign neoplastic
threat to women's health. They are the most common cause of hysterectomy imposing
untold personal consequences and 100s of billions of healthcare dollars,
worldwide. Currently, there is no long term effective FDA-approved medical
treatment available, and surgery is the mainstay. The etiology of UFs is not
fully understood. In this regard, we and others have recently reported that
somatic mutations in the gene encoding the transcriptional mediator subunit Med12
are found to occur at a high frequency (~85%) in UFs. UFs likely originate when a
Med12 mutation occurs in a myometrial stem cell converting it into a
tumor-forming stem cell leading to a clonal fibroid lesion. Although the
molecular attributes underlying the mechanistic formation of UFs is largely
unknown, a growing body of literature implicates unfavorable early life
environmental exposures as potentially important contributors. Early life
exposure to EDCs during sensitive windows of development can reprogram normal
physiological responses and alter disease susceptibility later in life. Neonatal 
exposure to the EDCs such as diethylstilbestrol (DES) and genistein during
reproductive tract development has been shown to increase the incidence,
multiplicity and overall size of UFs in the Eker rat model, concomitantly
reprogramming estrogen-responsive gene expression. Importantly, EDC exposure
represses enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) and reduces levels of histone 3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) repressive mark through Estrogen
receptor/Phosphatidylinositide 3-kinases/Protein kinase B non-genomic signaling
in the developing uterus. Considering the fact that distinct Mediator Complex
Subunit 12 (Med12) mutations are detected in different fibroid lesions in the
same uterus, the emergence of each Med12 mutation is likely an independent event 
in an altered myometrial stem cell. It is therefore possible that a chronic
reduction in DNA repair capacity eventually causes the emergence of mutations
such as Med12 in myometrial stem cells converting them into fibroid tumor-forming
stem cells, and thereby leads to the development of UFs. Advancing our
understanding of the mechanistic role epigenetic regulation of stem cells plays
in mediating risk and tumorigenesis will help in pointing the way toward the
development of novel therapeutic options.

PMCID: PMC4772696
PMID: 26973527  [PubMed]


21. Leuk Res. 2016 Feb 26;44:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2016.02.009. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Down-regulation of EZH2 expression in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Cabrero M(1), Wei Y(2), Yang H(2), Ganan-Gomez I(2), Bohannan Z(2), Colla S(2),
Marchesini M(2), Bravo GM(2), Takahashi K(2), Bueso-Ramos C(3), Garcia-Manero
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, United States. Electronic address: ggarciam@mdanderson.org.
(2)Departments of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, United States. (3)Departments of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, United States.

EZH2 genetic mutations are common in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), which
implies that this gene has a pathophysiological role in the disease. To further
characterize molecular alterations of EZH2, and their potential prognostic impact
in MDS, we assessed EZH2 RNA expression in primary bone marrow CD34+ cells from
78 patients. We found that 47% of patients have reduced EZH2 expression compared 
to normal controls. Further analyses revealed that EZH2 is significantly
underexpressed in patients bearing chromosome 7 or 7q deletions (7-alt) when
compared to controls, diploid patients, and patients with other cytogenetic
alterations (p<0.05). In survival analysis, we found a non-significant trend
toward overall survival (OS) being better among patients with EZH2
underexpression (median OS 55 vs. 36 months; p=0.71). Importantly, this trend
became significant when the analysis was restricted to the subset of cases
without alterations in chromosome 7 (62 vs. 36 months; p=0.033). Furthermore, our
previous work has identified a spectrum of innate immune genes in MDS CD34+ cells
that are deregulated via abnormal promoter histone methylation. Because EZH2 is a
key regulator of histone methylation, we assessed the relationship between
deregulation of these genes and EZH2 underexpression. We observed that the mRNA
levels of 11 immune genes were higher in the EZH2 underexpression group and that 
immune gene expression was significantly higher in patients with concomitant EZH2
underexpression and KDM6B (also known as JMJD3, an H3K27 demethylase)
overexpression. Taken together, these data indicate that EZH2 underexpression may
have unique impact on the molecular pathogenesis and prognosis in MDS and be an
important marker for patients without chromosome 7 alteration.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970171  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 10;11(3):e0149118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0149118.
eCollection 2016.

Uropathogenic E.coli (UPEC) Infection Induces Proliferation through Enhancer of
Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2).

Ting K(1,)(2), Aitken KJ(3,)(4), Penna F(4), Samiei AN(3), Sidler M(2,)(3,)(4),
Jiang JX(3), Ibrahim F(3), Tolg C(3), Delgado-Olguin P(3,)(5), Rosenblum
N(3,)(6), Bägli DJ(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Arts and Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Institute of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program,
Research Institute, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Urology Division, Department of Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. (5)Physiology and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute,
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (6)Nephrology Division,
Department of Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Host-pathogen interactions can induce epigenetic changes in the host directly, as
well as indirectly through secreted factors. Previously, uropathogenic
Escherichia coli (UPEC) was shown to increase DNA methyltransferase activity and 
expression, which was associated with methylation-dependent alterations in the
urothelial expression of CDKN2A. Here, we showed that paracrine factors from
infected cells alter expression of another epigenetic writer, EZH2, coordinate
with proliferation. Urothelial cells were inoculated with UPEC, UPEC derivatives,
or vehicle (mock infection) at low moi, washed, then maintained in media with
Gentamycin. Urothelial conditioned media (CM) and extracellular vesicles (EV)
were isolated after the inoculations and used to treat naïve urothelial cells.
EZH2 increased with UPEC infection, inoculation-induced CM, and
inoculation-induced EV vs. parallel stimulation derived from mock-inoculated
urothelial cells. We found that infection also increased proliferation at one day
post-infection, which was blocked by the EZH2 inhibitor UNC1999. Inhibition of
demethylation at H3K27me3 had the opposite effect and augmented
proliferation.CONCLUSION: Uropathogen-induced paracrine factors act
epigenetically by altering expression of EZH2, which plays a key role in early
host cell proliferative responses to infection.

PMCID: PMC4786126
PMID: 26964089  [PubMed - in process]


23. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7899. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations in histone modulators are associated with prolonged survival during
azacitidine therapy.

Tobiasson M(1), McLornan DP(2,)(3), Karimi M(1), Dimitriou M(1), Jansson M(1),
Azenkoud AB(1), Jädersten M(1), Lindberg G(4), Abdulkadir H(1), Kulasekararaj
A(2,)(3), Ungerstedt J(1), Lennartsson A(5), Ekwall K(5), Mufti GJ(2,)(3),
Hellström-Lindberg E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Huddinge, Sweden.
(2)Department of Haematological Medicine, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Haematological Medicine, King's
College, London, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Huddinge, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Early therapeutic decision-making is crucial in patients with higher-risk MDS. We
evaluated the impact of clinical parameters and mutational profiles in 134
consecutive patients treated with azacitidine using a combined cohort from
Karolinska University Hospital (n=89) and from King's College Hospital, London
(n=45). While neither clinical parameters nor mutations had a significant impact 
on response rate, both karyotype and mutational profile were strongly associated 
with survival from the start of treatment. IPSS high-risk cytogenetics negatively
impacted overall survival (median 20 vs 10 months; p<0.001), whereas mutations in
histone modulators (ASXL1, EZH2) were associated with prolonged survival (22 vs
12 months, p=0.01). This positive association was present in both cohorts and
remained highly significant in the multivariate cox model. Importantly, patients 
with mutations in histone modulators lacking high-risk cytogenetics showed a
survival of 29 months compared to only 10 months in patients with the opposite
pattern. While TP53 was negatively associated with survival, neither
RUNX1-mutations nor the number of mutations appeared to influence survival in
this cohort. We propose a model combining histone modulator mutational screening 
with cytogenetics in the clinical decision-making process for higher-risk MDS
patients eligible for treatment with azacitidine.

PMID: 26959885  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Tumour Biol. 2016 Mar 5. [Epub ahead of print]

JMJD1A promotes tumorigenesis and forms a feedback loop with EZH2/let-7c in NSCLC
cells.

Zhan M(1), Wen F(1), Liu L(2), Chen Z(1), Wei H(1), Zhou H(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shen Zhen Children's Hospital, Shenzhen, 510038, People's Republic of China.
(2)Jiangxi Provincial Cancer Hospital, Nanchang, 330029, People's Republic of
China. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China. hhzhou2003@163.com.
(4)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, People's Republic of China. hhzhou2003@163.com. (5)Hunan Key Laboratory
of Pharmacogenetics, Changsha, 410008, People's Republic of China.
hhzhou2003@163.com.

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide, and
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for 80 to 85 % of all lung cancer.
Although the standard treatment regimen has been established, long-term survival 
for NSCLC patients is still generally poor. The histone demethylase Jumonji
domain containing 1A (JMJD1A) has been proposed as an oncogene in several types
of human cancer, but its clinical significance and functional roles in NSCLC
remain largely unclear. In the present study, JMJD1A was frequently upregulated
in NSCLC compared with para-carcinoma tissues. JMJD1A knockdown significantly
inhibited NSCLC cell growth, migration, and invasion in vitro and tumorigenesis
in vivo. Further experiments demonstrated that JMJD1A knockdown could decrease
the expression of EZH2, which has been shown to play a crucial role in the
carcinogenesis of NSCLC and, in turn, increase the expression of anti-tumor
microRNA let-7c. Also, let-7c directly targeted the 3'-untranslated regions of
JMJD1A and EZH2. Taken together, JMJD1A could promote NSCLC tumorigenesis.
JMJD1A/EZH2/let-7c constituted a feedback loop and might represent a promising
therapeutic target for NSCLC.

PMID: 26945572  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7822. [Epub ahead of print]

The epigenetic modifier CHD5 functions as a novel tumor suppressor for renal cell
carcinoma and is predominantly inactivated by promoter CpG methylation.

Du Z(1), Li L(1), Huang X(1), Jin J(2), Huang S(3), Zhang Q(2), Tao Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Oncology, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sir YK Pao Center for Cancer and Li Ka
Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
CUHK-Shenzhen Research Institute, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. (2)Department of
Urology, Peking University First Hospital and Institute of Urology, National
Research Center for Genitourinary Oncology, Beijing, China. (3)Departments of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common urological cancer with steadily
increasing incidence. A series of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) have been
identified methylated in RCC as potential epigenetic biomarkers. We identified a 
1p36.3 TSG candidate CHD5 as a methylated target in RCC through epigenome study. 
As the role of CHD5 in RCC pathogenesis remains elusive, we further studied its
expression and molecular functions in RCC cells. We found that CHD5 was broadly
expressed in most normal genitourinary tissues including kidney, but frequently
silenced or downregulated by promoter CpG methylation in 78% of RCC cell lines
and 44% (24/55) of primary tumors. In addition, CHD5 mutations appear to be rare 
in RCC tumors through genome database mining. In methylated/silenced RCC cell
lines, CHD5 expression could be restored with azacytidine demethylation
treatment. Ectopic expression of CHD5 in RCC cells significantly inhibited their 
clonogenicity, migration and invasion. Moreover, we found that CHD5, as a
chromatin remodeling factor, suppressed the expression of multiple targets
including oncogenes (MYC, MDM2, STAT3, CCND1, YAP1), epigenetic master genes
(Bmi-1, EZH2, JMJD2C), as well as epithelial-mesenchymal transition and stem cell
markers (SNAI1, FN1, OCT4). Further chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
confirmed the binding of CHD5 to target gene promoters. Thus, we demonstrate that
CHD5 functions as a novel TSG for RCC, but is predominantly inactivated by
promoter methylation in primary tumors.

PMID: 26943038  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar 3. pii: molcanther.0750.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

BRD4 regulates EZH2 transcription through up-regulation of C-MYC and represents a
novel therapeutic target in bladder cancer.

Wu X(1), Liu D(1), Tao D(2), Xiang W(3), Xiao X(1), Wang M(1), Wang L(1), Luo
G(1), Li Y(1), Zeng F(1), Jiang G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Urology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology. (2)Oncology, The Fifth Hospital of Wuhan. (3)Urology, The
First Hospital of Wuhan. (4)Urology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology jiangguosongdoc@hotmail.com.

People who develop bladder cancer frequently succumb to the intractable disease. 
Current treatment strategies are limited presumably due to the underlying
molecular complexity and insufficient comprehension. Therefore, exploration of
new therapeutic targets in bladder cancer remains necessary. Here, we identify
that bromodomain-4 protein (BRD4), an important epigenome reader of bromodomain
and extraterminal domain (BET) family member, is a key upstream regulator of
enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), and represents a novel therapeutic target
in bladder cancer. We found that BRD4 was significantly overexpressed in bladder 
cancer cells and tissues. Inhibition of BRD4 decreased bladder cancer cell
proliferation concomitantly with the accumulation of cell apoptosis in vitro and 
suppressed tumor growth in vivo. We further found that suppression of BRD4
decreased the mRNA and protein levels of EZH2, which was reversed by ectopic
expression of C-MYC. In particular, individual silencing of BRD4 using shRNA or
the BET inhibitor JQ1 strikingly diminished the recruitment of C-MYC to EZH2
promoter in bladder cancer. Briefly, our research reveals that BRD4 positively
regulate EZH2 transcription through upregulation of C-MYC, and is a novel
promising target for pharmacological treatment in transcriptional program
intervention against this intractable disease.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26939702  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 3;11(3):e0150518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150518.
eCollection 2016.

Involvement of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 in Maturation of Induced Pluripotent
Stem Cells during Reprogramming of Mouse and Human Fibroblasts.

Khazaie N(1), Massumi M(2,)(3), Wee P(4), Salimi M(1), Mohammadnia A(1), Yaqubi
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Physiology, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Department of Medical Genetics and Signal
Transduction Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provide a reliable source for the study of
regenerative medicine, drug discovery, and developmental biology. Despite
extensive studies on the reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into iPSCs,
the efficiency of reprogramming is still low. Here, we used a bioinformatics and 
systems biology approach to study the two gene regulatory waves governing the
reprogramming of mouse and human fibroblasts into iPSCs. Our results revealed
that the maturation phase of reprogramming was regulated by a more complex
regulatory network of transcription factors compared to the initiation phase.
Interestingly, in addition to pluripotency factors, the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) members Ezh2, Eed, Jarid2, Mtf2, and Suz12 are crucially
recruited during the maturation phase of reprogramming. Moreover, we found that
during the maturation phase of reprogramming, pluripotency factors, via the
expression and induction of PRC2 complex members, could silence the
lineage-specific gene expression program and maintain a ground state of
pluripotency in human and mouse naïve iPSCs. The findings obtained here provide
us a better understanding of the gene regulatory network (GRN) that governs
reprogramming, and the maintenance of the naïve state of iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC4777544
PMID: 26938987  [PubMed - in process]


28. Neoplasia. 2016 Feb;18(2):121-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2016.01.003.

Somatic Copy Number Amplification and Hyperactivating Somatic Mutations of EZH2
Correlate With DNA Methylation and Drive Epigenetic Silencing of Genes Involved
in Tumor Suppression and Immune Responses in Melanoma.

Tiffen J(1), Wilson S(2), Gallagher SJ(1), Hersey P(1), Filipp FV(3).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology Group, The Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia. (2)Systems Biology and Cancer Metabolism,
Program for Quantitative Systems Biology, University of California Merced,
Merced, CA 95343, USA. (3)Systems Biology and Cancer Metabolism, Program for
Quantitative Systems Biology, University of California Merced, Merced, CA 95343, 
USA. Electronic address: filipp@ucmerced.edu.

The epigenetic modifier EZH2 is in the center of a repressive complex controlling
differentiation of normal cells. In cancer EZH2 has been implicated in silencing 
tumor suppressor genes. Its role in melanoma as well as target genes affected by 
EZH2 are poorly understood. In view of this we have used an integrated systems
biology approach to analyze 471 cases of skin cutaneous melanoma (SKCM) in The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) for mutations and amplifications of EZH2. Identified
changes in target genes were validated by interrogation of microarray data from
melanoma cells treated with the EZH2 inhibitor GSK126. We found that EZH2
activation by mutations, gene amplification and increased transcription occurred 
in about 20% of the cohort. These alterations were associated with significant
hypermethylation of DNA and significant downregulation of 11% of transcripts in
patient RNASeq data. GSK126 treatment of melanoma lines containing EZH2
activation reversed such transcriptional repression in 98 candidate target genes.
Gene enrichment analysis revealed genes associated with tumor suppression, cell
differentiation, cell cycle inhibition and repression of metastases as well as
antigen processing and presentation pathways. The identified changes in EZH2 were
associated with an adverse prognosis in the TCGA dataset. These results suggest
that inhibiting of EZH2 is a promising therapeutic avenue for a substantial
fraction of melanoma patients.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26936398  [PubMed - in process]


29. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7763. [Epub ahead of print]

Resveratrol suppresses myofibroblast activity of human buccal mucosal fibroblasts
through the epigenetic inhibition of ZEB1 expression.

Chang YC(1,)(2), Lin CW(3), Yu CC(1,)(2,)(4), Wang BY(5,)(6,)(7), Huang YH(3),
Hsieh YC(3), Kuo YL(8,)(9), Chang WW(3,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Dentistry, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medical Science and
Technology, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Oral
Science, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Division of
Throacic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua,
Taiwan. (7)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)School of Medical Imaging and Radiological Sciences, Chung Shan Medical
University, Taichung, Taiwan. (9)Department of Medical Imaging, Chung Shan
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (10)Department of Medical
Research, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

Oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) is a precancerous condition of the oral mucosa
without specific therapeutic drugs. We previously demonstrated that the zinc
finger E-box binding homeobox 1 (ZEB1) plays a pathogenic role in the induction
of the myofibroblast activity of buccal mucosal fibroblasts (BMFs) and
contributes to the pathogenesis of OSF. Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic
flavonoid with anti-fibrosis activity in various tissues and has the capability
to inhibit ZEB1 in oral cancer cells. We examined the effect of resveratrol on
the myofibroblast activity of human primary fibrotic BMFs (fBMFs) derived from
OSF tissues. With the collagen contraction assay, resveratrol displayed
anti-myofibroblast activity in three fBMF lines. Resveratrol also inhibited the
expression of fibrogenic genes at the mRNA and protein levels in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. The downregulation of ZEB1 in fBMFs by resveratrol was
mediated by epigenetic mechanisms, such as the upregulated expression of miR-200c
and the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), as well as the trimethylated lysine
27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3). Resveratrol also increased the binding of H3K27me3
to the ZEB1 promoter. The knockdown of EZH2 in fBMFs caused the upregulation of
ZEB1 and suppressed the inhibitory effect of resveratrol. Furthermore, the
reversed expression pattern between EZH2 and ZEB1 was observed in 6/8 OSF tissues
with twofold upregulation of ZEB1 expression compared with the adjacent normal
mucosa. In conclusion, our data suggest that resveratrol epigenetically inhibits 
ZEB1 expression to suppress the myofibroblast activity of fBMFs and may serve as 
a dietary supplement for OSF patients.

PMID: 26934322  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7567. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate targets cancer stem-like cells and enhances
5-fluorouracil chemosensitivity in colorectal cancer.

Toden S(1), Tran HM(1), Tovar-Camargo OA(1), Okugawa Y(1), Goel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Charles A. Sammons 
Cancer Center, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy is a major cause of mortality in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) patients. A small subset of cancer cells, termed "cancer stem cells"
(CSCs), are believed to be key contributors of chemoresistance and tumor
recurrence. Recently, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an active catechin
present in green tea, has been shown to suppress CSC growth in various cancers,
but whether it can specifically target CSCs and subsequently sensitize
chemoresistant CRC cells to standard of care chemotherapeutic treatments remains 
unknown. Herein, we investigated the chemosensitizing effects of EGCG in
5-fluorouracil (5FU)-resistant (5FUR) CRC cells and spheroid-derived CSCs
(SDCSCs), and interrogated the underlying molecular mechanisms responsible for
its chemopreventive activity. EGCG enhanced 5FU-induced cytotoxicity and
inhibited proliferation in 5FUR cell lines through enhancement of apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest. The 5FUR cells showed higher spheroid forming capacity
compared to parental cells, indicating higher CSC population. EGCG treatment in
these cells resulted in suppression of SDCSC formation and enhanced 5FU
sensitivity to SDCSCs. Furthermore, EGCG suppressed Notch1, Bmi1, Suz12, and
Ezh2, and upregulated self-renewal suppressive-miRNAs, miR-34a, miR-145, and
miR-200c, which are some of the key pathways targeted in 5FUR CRC cells. These
findings were validated in vivo, wherein EGCG treatment resulted in inhibited
tumor growth in a SDCSC xenograft model. Collectively our data provide novel and 
previously unrecognized evidence for EGCG-induced sensitization to 5FU through
targeting of CSCs in CRC. Our data highlight that in addition to its
chemopreventive ability, EGCG may serve as an adjunctive treatment to
conventional chemotherapeutic drugs in CRC patients.

PMID: 26930714  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Feb 9;9:711-22. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S95279. eCollection
2016.

Higher expression levels of the HOXA9 gene, closely associated with MLL-PTD and
EZH2 mutations, predict inferior outcome in acute myeloid leukemia.

Gao L(1), Sun J(2), Liu F(3), Zhang H(1), Ma Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China; Department of 
Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Although the biological insight of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has
increased in the past few years, the discovery of novel discriminative biomarkers
remains of utmost value for improving outcome predictions. Systematical studies
concerning the clinical implications and genetic correlations of HOXA9
aberrations in patients with AML are relatively promising.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we investigated mutational status and the mRNA
levels of the HOXA9 gene in 258 patients with AML. Furthermore, hematological
characteristics, chromosome abnormalities, and genetic mutations associated with 
AML were analyzed, followed by the assessment of clinical survival. Besides, the 
expression level and mutational status of MEIS1, a cofactor of HOXA9, were also
detected in patients with AML with the aim of a deeper understanding about the
homeodomain-containing transcription factors associated with hematological
characteristics.
RESULTS: HOXA9 and MEIS1 mutations were detected in 4.26% and 3.49% AML cases,
respectively. No correlations were detected between mutation status and clinical 
characteristics, cytogenetic and genetic aberrations, and clinical survival.
Higher HOXA9 expression levels were correlated with white blood cell count and
closely associated with unfavorable karyotype as well as MLL-PTD and EZH2
mutations, whereas, there was an inverse correlation with the
French-American-British M3 subtype. Compared with patients with lower HOXA9
expression levels, those with higher HOXA9 expression levels had a lower complete
remission rate and inferior survivals in both AML and cytogenetically normal AML.
CONCLUSION: HOXA9 expression may serve as a promising biomarker to ameliorate a
prognostic model for predicting clinical outcome and consummating individualized 
treatment in patients with AML.

PMCID: PMC4755436
PMID: 26929642  [PubMed]


32. Br J Haematol. 2016 Feb 25. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13952. [Epub ahead of print]

Genes encoding members of the JAK-STAT pathway or epigenetic regulators are
recurrently mutated in T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia.

López C(1), Bergmann AK(1,)(2), Paul U(1), Murga Penas EM(1), Nagel I(1), Betts
MJ(3), Johansson P(4,)(5), Ritgen M(6), Baumann T(7), Aymerich M(8), Jayne S(9), 
Russell RB(3), Campo E(8), Dyer MJ(9), Dürig J(4,)(10), Siebert R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University
Hospital Schleswig Holstein, Kiel, Germany. (2)Department of Paediatrics,
Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel & University Hospital Schleswig Holstein,
Kiel, Germany. (3)Cell Networks, Bioquant, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany. (4)Department of Haematology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (5)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Cell Biology
(Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (6)Second
Department of Medicine, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Department of Haematology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigaciones
Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. (8)Haematopathology
Unit, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigaciones Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer 
(IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Ernest and Helen Scott
Haematological Research Institute, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK.
(10)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

T-cell prolymphocytic leukaemia (T-PLL) is an aggressive leukaemia. The primary
genetic alteration in T-PLL are the inv(14)(q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) leading to 
TRD/TRA-TCL1A fusion, or the t(X;14)(q28;q11) associated with TRD/TRA-MTCP1
fusion. However, additional cooperating abnormalities are necessary for emergence
of the full neoplastic phenotype. Though the pattern of secondary chromosomal
aberrations is remarkably conserved, targets of the changes are largely unknown. 
We analysed a cohort of 43 well-characterized T-PLL for hotspot mutations in the 
genes JAK3, STAT5B and RHOA. Additionally, we selected a subset of 23 T-PLL cases
for mutational screening of 54 genes known to be recurrently mutated in T-cell
and other haematological neoplasms. Activating mutations in the investigated
regions of the JAK3 and STAT5B genes were detected in 30% (13/43) and 21% (8/39) 
of the cases, respectively, and were mutually exclusive. Further, we identified
mutations in the genes encoding the epigenetic regulators EZH2 in 13% (3/23),
TET2 in 17% (4/23) and BCOR in 9% (2/23) of the cases. We confirmed that the
JAK-STAT pathway is a major mutational target, and identified epigenetic
regulators recurrently mutated in T-PLL. These findings complement the mutational
spectrum of secondary aberrations in T-PLL and underscore the potential
therapeutical relevance of epigenetic regulators in T-PLL.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26917488  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Feb 23. pii: molcanther.0707.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Long non-coding RNA PVT1 promotes non-small cell lung cancer cell proliferation
through epigenetically regulating LATS2 expression.

Wan L(1), Sun M(2), Liu GJ(1), Wei CC(1), Zhang EB(3), Kong R(3), Xu TP(4), Huang
MD(5), Wang ZX(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Nanjing Medical
University. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical 
University. (4)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University. (5)Department of Oncology, Huai'an First People's Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University. (6)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University zhaoxiawang88@hotmail.com.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are a novel class of transcripts with no protein
coding capacity, but with diverse functions in cancer cell proliferation,
apoptosis and metastasis. The lncRNA PVT1 is 1716 nt in length and located in the
chr8q24.21 region, which also contains the myelocytomatosis (MYC) oncogene.
Previous studies demonstrated that MYC promotes PVT1 expression in primary human 
cancers. However, the expression pattern and potential biological function of
PVT1 in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is still unclear. Here we found that
PVT1 was up-regulated in 105 human NSCLC tissues compared with normal samples.
High expression of PVT1 was associated with a higher TNM stage and tumor size, as
well as poorer overall survival. Functional analysis revealed that knockdown of
PVT1 inhibited NSCLC cell proliferation and induced apoptosis both in vitro and
in vivo. RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) and Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays demonstrated that PVT1 recruits EZH2 to the large tumor suppressor kinase 
2 (LATS2) promoter and represses LATS2 transcription. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of LATS2 increased apoptosis and repressed LAD cell proliferation by
regulating the Mdm2-p53 pathway. Taken together, our findings indicated that
PVT1/EZH2/LATS2 interactions might serve as new target for LAD diagnosis and
therapy.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26908628  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7478. [Epub ahead of print]

X-linked FHL1 as a novel therapeutic target for head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Cao W(1,)(2), Liu J(1,)(2), Xia R(3), Lin L(4), Wang X(1,)(2), Xiao M(1,)(2),
Zhang C(1,)(2), Li J(3), Ji T(1,)(2), Chen W(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Maxillofacial-Head and Neck Oncology, Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011,
China. (2)Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology and Shanghai Key Laboratory 
of Stomatology, Shanghai 200011, China. (3)Department of Oral Pathology, Ninth
People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200011, China. (4)Department of Medical Records, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China.

To identify X-linked novel tumor suppressors could provide novel insights to
improve prognostic prediction and therapeutic strategy for some cancers. Using
bioinformatics and Venn analysis of gene transcriptional profiling, we identified
downregulation of X-linked four-and-a-half LIM domains protein 1 (FHL1) gene in
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). FHL1 functions were investigated
and confirmed in vitro and in vivo. FHL1 downregulated mechanisms were analyzed
in HNSCCs by using methylation specific PCR, bisulfate-based sequencing, 5-Aza-dC
treatment and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Two independent HNSCC cohorts
(the training cohort n = 105 and the validation cohort n = 101) were enrolled to 
evaluate clinical implications of FHL1 expression by using real-time PCR or
immunohistochemistry. FHL1 mRNA and protein expressions were frequently decreased
in HNSCCs. FHL1 overexpression or depletion gave rise to suppress or promote cell
growth through Cyclin D1, Cyclin E and p27 dysregulations. Abundant occupy of
EZH2 or H3K27Me3 was observed in FHL1 promoter except for DNA hypermethylation.
Reduced FHL1 mRNA expression was notably associated with poor differentiation (p 
= 0.020). Multivariate analysis demonstrated FHL1 mRNA expression was identified 
as independent prognostic predictors of overall survival (OS) (p = 0.036; HR
0.520; Cl, 0.283-0.958) and disease-free survival (DFS) (p = 0.041; HR 0.527; Cl,
0.284-0.975), which was validated by another independent cohort (p = 0.021; HR
0.404; Cl, 0.187-0.871 for OS; p = 0.011; HR 0.407; Cl, 0.203-0.815 for DFS).
These results suggest epigenetic silencing of X-linked FHL1 may have an important
role in adjuvant therapeutic intervention of HNSCCs and is an independent
prognostic factor in patients with HNSCCs.

PMID: 26908444  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 1;14(8):1953-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.064. Epub 2016 
Feb 18.

Ezh2 Controls an Early Hematopoietic Program and Growth and Survival Signaling in
Early T Cell Precursor Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.

Danis E(1), Yamauchi T(1), Echanique K(1), Zhang X(1), Haladyna JN(1), Riedel
SS(1), Zhu N(2), Xie H(3), Orkin SH(3), Armstrong SA(4), Bernt KM(5), Neff T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow
Transplantation, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (2)Stem
Cell Biology and Hematopoiesis Program, Blood Research Institute, Blood Center of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. (3)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School and HHMI, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Center for Cancer and Blood
Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic
address: kathrin.bernt@ucdenver.edu. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's 
Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic address:
tobias.neff@ucdenver.edu.

Early T cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ETP-ALL) is an aggressive
subtype of ALL distinguished by stem-cell-associated and myeloid transcriptional 
programs. Inactivating alterations of Polycomb repressive complex 2 components
are frequent in human ETP-ALL, but their functional role is largely undefined. We
have studied the involvement of Ezh2 in a murine model of NRASQ61K-driven
leukemia that recapitulates phenotypic and transcriptional features of ETP-ALL.
Homozygous inactivation of Ezh2 cooperated with oncogenic NRASQ61K to accelerate 
leukemia onset. Inactivation of Ezh2 accentuated expression of genes highly
expressed in human ETP-ALL and in normal murine early thymic progenitors.
Moreover, we found that Ezh2 contributes to the silencing of stem-cell- and
early-progenitor-cell-associated genes. Loss of Ezh2 also resulted in increased
activation of STAT3 by tyrosine 705 phosphorylation. Our data mechanistically
link Ezh2 inactivation to stem-cell-associated transcriptional programs and
increased growth/survival signaling, features that convey an adverse prognosis in
patients.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4790111
PMID: 26904942  [PubMed - in process]


36. Zhongguo Fei Ai Za Zhi. 2016 Feb 20;19(2):98-101. doi:
10.3779/j.issn.1009-3419.2016.02.07.

[Development of New Molecular EZH2 on Lung Cancer Invasion and Metastasis].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Xia H(1), Yu C(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang B(1), Zhao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic-cardio Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of
General Hospital of PLA, 100048 Beijing, China.

Lung cancer is a serious threat to human health malignancies upward trend in
morbidity and mortality. It is hot topic to investigate the molecular mechanisms 
of lung cancer development and explore the new therapeutic targets. The
underlying mechanism of EZH2 on lung cancer development will demonstrate the new 
pathway of lung cancer development, invasion and metastasis. The exploration and 
application of new targeted molecular will improve the survival rate and living
quality of lung cancer patients in future.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26903164  [PubMed - in process]


37. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 22. [Epub ahead of print]

The novel EZH2 inhibitor, GSK126, suppresses cell migration and angiogenesis via 
down-regulating VEGF-A.

Chen YT(1), Zhu F(1), Lin WR(2), Ying RB(2), Yang YP(2), Zeng LH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University City College, 
50 Huzhou Rd, Hangzhou, 310015, Zhejiang, China. (2)Taizhou Cancer Hospital,
Wenling, 317500, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Pharmacy, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University City College, 50 Huzhou Rd, Hangzhou, 310015, Zhejiang,
China. zenglh@zucc.edu.cn.

PURPOSE: To explore the effects and mechanisms of GSK126, a novel inhibitor of
histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2, on cancer cell
migration.
METHODS: Gastric cancer cell line MGC803 and human lung adenocarcinoma cell line 
A549 were treated with GSK126 at three doses. Transwell and wound healing assays 
were conducted to detect cell migration. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
tube formation assay and chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane assay were
performed to assess the effects of GSK126 on angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo,
respectively. The mRNA level of VEGF-A was detected by quantitative PCR, and the 
protein levels of VEGF-A were detected both by western blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry. Epi-fluorescent intensity was obtained by in vivo imaging.
RESULTS: GSK126 inhibited cell migration in both MGC803 and A549 in a
dose-dependent manner, as revealed by transwell and wound healing assays. The
effects of GSK 126 were similar to those of gefitinib at the same doses.
Moreover, GSK126 at doses of 20 and 50 µM inhibited angiogenesis both in vitro
and in vivo. GSK126 reduced both the mRNA and protein expression of VEGF-A in a
dose-dependent manner. Finally, in vivo imaging assay revealed that GSK126 at
200 mg/kg significantly inhibited cancer cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: GSK126 inhibits cell migration and angiogenesis in solid tumor cell 
lines through down-regulation of VEGF-A expression. Thus, it may be considered as
a novel anticancer drug candidate for solid tumor.

PMID: 26898301  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. Hepatogastroenterology. 2015 May;62(139):737-41.

EZH2 Mediates the Regulation of S100A4 on E-cadherin Expression and the
Proliferation, Migration of Gastric Cancer Cells.

Liu S, Chen D, Shen W, Chen L, Yu A, Fu H, Sun K, Sun X.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Several reports have showed the inverse correlation between
S100A4 and E-cadherin expression, but the exact molecular mechanism remained
unclear. It has been reported that EZH2 mediates transcriptional silencing of
E-cadherin by trimethylating lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3). Therefore, we
hypothesized that EZH2 might mediate the inhibition of S100A4 on E-cadherin and
further affect the functions of S100A4 in gastric cancer cells.
METHODOLOGY: RT-PCR and Western Blot were used to detect the expression of EZH2
and E-cadherin after inhibiting or increasing S100A4 expression. MTT and
Transwell assay were performed to detect the proliferation and migration of
gastric cancer cells.
RESULTS: Inhibition or overexpression of S100A4 led to decreased or increased
EZH2 expression, and increased or decreased E-cadherin expression. The SET domain
was important for EZH2 in rescuing the decreased proliferation and migration of
the cells after S100A4 inhibition.
CONCLUSION: As a novel downstream target of S100A4, EZH2 mediates the inhibition 
of S100A4 on E-cadherin. The SET domain is important for EZH2 in mediating the
cellular function of S100A4.

PMID: 26897964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Exp Mol Pathol. 2016 Feb 15;100(2):312-320. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2016.02.002.
[Epub ahead of print]

Expression of DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3B correlates with EZH2 and this
3-marker epigenetic signature predicts outcome in glioblastomas.

Purkait S(1), Sharma V(1), Kumar A(1), Pathak P(1), Mallick S(2), Jha P(1),
Sharma MC(1), Suri V(1), Julka PK(2), Suri A(3), Sharma BS(3), Sarkar C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New 
Delhi, India. (2)Radiation Oncology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS), New Delhi, India. (3)Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India. (4)Department of Pathology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India. Electronic address:
sarkar.chitra@gmail.com.

This study aims to analyze expression of EZH2 and DNA-methyltransferases (DNMT1, 
3A and 3B) in astrocytic tumors and investigate their link as well as their
correlation with survival, especially in GBMs. Expression of EZH2 and DNMTs
(DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B) in different grades of astrocytomas (n=93) was
assessed by qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. GBM-U87MG cell line was used for
functional studies. Strong immunopositivity (LI=25%) for EZH2, DNMT1 and DNMT3B
was detected in 52%, 56% and 64% cases of GBMs respectively, which was
significantly higher as compared to Grade II/III cases. Similarly, their median
fold change of mRNA expression was also significantly higher in GBMs. There was
also a significant positive correlation between DNMT1/DNMT3B and EZH2 mRNA and
protein expression, which was in concordance with TCGA data set. Inhibition of
DNMTs in cell line by Azacytidine resulted in down-regulation of EZH2, while
knock-down of EZH2 by siRNA was not associated with any significant alteration of
DNMTs, indicating that EZH2 expression in GBMs is possibly regulated by DNMTs,
but not the reverse. Strong immunopositivity for EZH2, DNMT1 and DNMT3B were
individually associated with significantly shorter survival and showed no
correlation with IDH1 mutation status. In addition, the combination of these 3
markers represented an independent prognostic signature with cases having
weak/negative expression of all 3 markers being associated with best prognosis.
For the first time, the present study describes an epigenetic prognostic
signature in GBMs based on immunohistochemical expression of EZH2, DNMT1 and 3B
which can be used easily in routine neuropathology practice.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26892683  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Epigenetics. 2016 Feb 18:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Differentially methylated genes and androgen receptor re-expression in small cell
prostate carcinomas.

Kleb B(1), Estécio MR(2), Zhang J(3), Tzelepi V(4), Chung W(5), Jelinek J(5),
Navone NM(6), Tahir S(6), Marquez VE(7), Issa JP(5), Maity S(6), Aparicio A(6).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology Unit 1374 , The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston , Texas. (2)b
Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis , Unit 0081, The
University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center , 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston ,
Texas. (3)c Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology , Unit 1410,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston 
, Texas. (4)d Department of Pathology , University of Patras, Panepistimioupoli
Patron , Greece. (5)e Fels Institute of Cancer Research and Molecular Biology,
Temple University , 3307 N Broad Street, Philadelphia , PA. (6)f Department of
Genitourinary Medical Oncology , Unit 1374, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center , 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston , Texas. (7)g Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Building 376 Frederick , MD.

Small cell prostate carcinoma (SCPC) morphology is rare at initial diagnosis but 
often emerges during prostate cancer progression and portends a dismal prognosis.
It does not express androgen receptor (AR) or respond to hormonal therapies.
Clinically applicable markers for its early detection and treatment with
effective chemotherapy are needed. Our studies in patient tumor-derived
xenografts (PDX) revealed that AR-negative SCPC (AR(-)SCPC) expresses neural
development genes instead of the prostate luminal epithelial genes characteristic
of AR-positive castration-resistant adenocarcinomas (AR(+)ADENO). We hypothesized
that the differences in cellular lineage programs are reflected in distinct
epigenetic profiles. To address this hypothesis, we compared the DNA methylation 
profiles of AR(-) and AR(+) PDX using methylated CpG island amplification and
microarray (MCAM) analysis and identified a set of differentially methylated
promoters, validated in PDX and corresponding donor patient samples. We used the 
Illumina 450K platform to examine additional regions of the genome and the
correlation between the DNA methylation profiles of the PDX and their
corresponding patient tumors. Struck by the low frequency of AR promoter
methylation in the AR(-)SCPC, we investigated this region's specific histone
modification patterns by chromatin immunoprecipitation. We found that the AR
promoter was enriched in silencing histone modifications (H3K27me3 and H3K9me2)
and that EZH2 inhibition with 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) resulted in AR
expression and growth inhibition in AR(-)SCPC cell lines. We conclude that the
epigenome of AR(-) is distinct from that of AR(+) castration-resistant prostate
carcinomas, and that the AR(-) phenotype can be reversed with epigenetic drugs.

PMID: 26890396  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. J Parkinsons Dis. 2016 Feb 11;6(1):109-17. doi: 10.3233/JPD-150737.

Transcriptomic Profiling of Extracellular RNAs Present in Cerebrospinal Fluid
Identifies Differentially Expressed Transcripts in Parkinson's Disease.

Hossein-Nezhad A(1), Fatemi RP(1), Ahmad R(1), Peskind ER(2,)(3), Zabetian
CP(4,)(5,)(6), Hu SC(4,)(5,)(6), Shi M(7), Wahlestedt C(1), Zhang J(7), Faghihi
MA(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(3)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs
Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA. (4)Geriatric Research,
Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, 
Seattle, WA, USA. (5)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education, and Clinical
Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
WA, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA, USA. (8)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a debilitating neurological disorder for 
which prognostic and diagnostic biomarkers are lacking. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
is an accessible body fluid that comes into direct contact with the central
nervous system (CNS) and acts as a nuclease-free repository where RNA transcripts
shed by brain tissues can reside for extended periods of time.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the RNA species present in the CSF of PD patients to
identify novel diagnostic biomarkers.
METHODS: Small volumes of CSF from 27 PD patients and 30 healthy age- and
sex-matched controls were used for RNA extraction followed by next-generation
sequencing (RNA-seq) using the Illumina platform. CSF contains a number of
fragmented RNA species that were individually sequenced and analyzed. Comparing
PD to control subjects, we observed a pool of dysregulated sequencing tags that
were further analyzed and validated by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: A total of 201 differentially expressed sequencing tags (DETs),
including 92 up-regulated and 109 down-regulated DETs were identified. We
validated the following DETs by real time PCR in the patient samples: Dnmt1,
Ezh2, CCR3, SSTR5,PTPRC, UBC, NDUFV2, BMP7, SCN9, SCN9 antisense (AC010127.3),
and long noncoding RNAs AC079630 and UC001lva.4 (close to the LRRK2 gene locus), 
as potential PD biomarkers.
CONCLUSIONS: The CSF is a unique environment that contains many species of RNA.
Our work demonstrates that CSF can potentially be used to identify biomarkers for
the detection and tracking of disease progression and evaluation of therapeutic
outcomes.

PMID: 26889637  [PubMed - in process]


42. Biol Reprod. 2016 Mar;94(3):69. Epub 2016 Feb 17.

The Polycomb Group Protein EZH2 Impairs DNA Damage Repair Gene Expression in
Human Uterine Fibroids.

Yang Q(1), Nair S(2), Laknaur A(2), Ismail N(3), Diamond MP(2), Al-Hendy A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translation Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Augusta University, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia qyang@gru.edu.
(2)Division of Translation Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Augusta University, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, Georgia. (3)Clinical
Microbiology Division, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Uterine fibroids are benign, smooth muscle tumors that occur in approximately
70%-80% of women by age 50 yr. The cellular and molecular mechanism(s) by which
uterine fibroids (UFs) develop are not fully understood. Accumulating evidence
demonstrates that several genetic abnormalities, including deletions,
rearrangements, translocations, as well as mutations, have been found in UFs.
These genetic anomalies suggest that low DNA damage repair capacity may be
involved in UF formation. The objective of this study was to determine whether
expression levels of DNA damage repair-related genes were altered, and how they
were regulated in the pathogenesis of UFs. Expression levels of DNA
repair-related genesRAD51andBRCA1were deregulated in fibroid tissues as compared 
to adjacent myometrial tissues. Expression levels of chromatin protein enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) were higher in a subset of fibroids as compared to
adjacent myometrial tissues by both immunohistochemistry and Western blot
analysis. Treatment with an inhibitor of EZH2 markedly increased expression
levels ofRAD51andBRCA1in fibroid cells and inhibited cell proliferation paired
with cell cycle arrest. Restoring the expression ofRAD51andBRCA1by treatment with
EZH2 inhibitor was dependent on reducing the enrichment of trimethylation of
histone 3 lysine 27 epigenetic mark in their promoter regions. This study reveals
the important role of EZH2-regulated DNA damage-repair genes via histone
methylation in fibroid biology, and may provide novel therapeutic targets for the
medical treatment of women with symptomatic UFs.

© 2016 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26888970  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


43. Leuk Lymphoma. 2016 Feb 17:1-9. [Epub ahead of print]

Digital PCR for quantification of recurrent and potentially actionable somatic
mutations in circulating free DNA from patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.

Camus V(1,)(2), Sarafan-Vasseur N(3), Bohers E(2), Dubois S(2), Mareschal S(2),
Bertrand P(2), Viailly PJ(2), Ruminy P(2), Maingonnat C(2), Lemasle E(1,)(2),
Stamatoullas A(1,)(2), Picquenot JM(4), Cornic M(4), Beaussire L(3), Bastard
C(2,)(5), Frebourg T(3), Tilly H(1,)(2), Jardin F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology , Centre Henri Becquerel , Rouen , France ; (2)b
INSERM U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, University of Rouen , Rouen , France ; (3)c 
INSERM U1079, University of Rouen , Rouen , France ; (4)d Department of Pathology
, Centre Henri Becquerel , Rouen , France ; (5)e Department of Genetic Oncology ,
Centre Henri Becquerel , Rouen , France.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive and heterogeneous
malignancy harboring frequent targetable activating somatic mutations. Emerging
evidence suggests that circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) can be used to detect
somatic variants in DLBCL using Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) experiments. In 
this proof-of-concept study, we chose to develop simple and valuable digital PCR 
(dPCR) assays for the detection of recurrent exportin-1 (XPO1) E571K, EZH2 Y641N,
and MYD88 L265P mutations in DLBCL patients, thereby identifying patients most
likely to potentially benefit from targeted therapies. We demonstrated that our
dPCR assays were sufficiently sensitive to detect rare XPO1, EZH2, and MYD88
mutations in plasma cfDNA, with a sensitivity of 0.05%. cfDNA somatic mutation
detection by dPCR seems to be a promising technique in the management of DLBCL,
in addition to NGS experiments.

PMID: 26883583  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Cell Signal. 2016 May;28(5):481-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.02.004. Epub 2016 
Feb 11.

EZH2, an on-off valve in signal network of tumor cells.

Sun S(1), Yu F(2), Zhang L(3), Zhou X(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Maxillary Facial and Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, National Clinical Research Center
for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Huanhuxi
Road, Tiyuanbei, Hexi District, Tianjin 300060, China. (2)Department of Tumor
Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention & Therapy of Tianjin, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, National Clinical Research Center
for Cancer, Huanhu West Road, Hexi District, Tianjin 300060, China. (3)The
Maxillary Facial and Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Tianjin Medical
University Cancer Institute & Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for
Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Huanhuxi Road,
Tiyuanbei, Hexi District, Tianjin 300060, China. Electronic address:
lunzhangchina@163.com. (4)The Maxillary Facial and Otorhinolaryngology Head &
Neck Surgery, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute & Hospital, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention 
and Therapy, Huanhuxi Road, Tiyuanbei, Hexi District, Tianjin 300060, China.
Electronic address: byron2000zhou@163.com.

Enhancer Zeste 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase catalyzing histone
H3K27me3 to mediate gene silence. It is implicated in governing various
biological behaviors of human malignancies. In this review, we over-review EZH2
serves as an "on-off valve"-not only as a critical epigenetic repressor, but as a
brand-new activator for specific downstream targets as well. Time and space it
"switching on-off" depends on the context and its cellular type. Moreover, EZH2
could act as a Tumor-Defender under certain circumstances. Moreover, the
"Mutual-Inhibition" relationship between EZH2 and microRNAs is elaborated. In
addition, we focus on different functions of phosphorylatied EZH2 in tumor cells.
Finally, EZH2 inhibitors are summarized and newly-discovered strategies of
targeting-EZH2 treatment are prospected.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26876615  [PubMed - in process]


45. Endocrine. 2016 Feb 15. [Epub ahead of print]

EZH2 and ZFX oncogenes in malignant behaviour of parathyroid neoplasms.

Sanpaolo E(1), Miroballo M(1), Corbetta S(2), Verdelli C(3), Baorda F(1), Balsamo
T(4), Graziano P(5), Fabrizio FP(4), Cinque L(1), Scillitani A(6), Muscarella
LA(4), Guarnieri V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Poliambulatorio Giovanni Paolo II, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza Hospital, 71013, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (2)Endocrinology
Unit, Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan, IRCCS
Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, MI, Italy. (3)Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, MI, Italy. 
(4)Laboratory of Oncology, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, FG, Italy. (5)Pathology, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (6)Endocrinology, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. (7)Medical Genetics, Poliambulatorio
Giovanni Paolo II, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, 71013, San
Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. v.guarnieri@operapadrepio.it.

Several studies reported somatic mutations of many genes (MEN1, CTNNB1, CDKIs and
others) in parathyroid adenoma, although with different prevalence. Recently,
activating mutations of the EZH2 and ZFX oncogenes were identified in benign
parathyroid adenoma by whole exome sequencing. The same mutations had been found 
in blood and ovary malignant tumours. On one hand, this result raised the
hypothesis that these oncogenes may play a role in the onset of parathyroid
tumour, but it would also suggest they may be involved in malignant, rather
benign, parathyroid neoplasm. Our aim was to verify the occurrence of selected
mutations of the EZH2 and ZFX genes in an Italian cohort of 23 sporadic
parathyroid carcinomas, 12 atypical and 45 typical adenomas. DNA was extracted
from paraffin-embedded tissues, PCR amplified and directly sequenced. No
mutations were detected in the coding sequence and boundaries of both genes in
any of the samples. Two polymorphisms of the EZH2 gene were identified with
different prevalence: the rs2072407 variant was present in the 30 % of the
samples, in keeping with the overall frequency in larger populations, while the
rs78589034 variant, located close to the 5' end of the exon 16, was detected in
only one proband with familial isolated hyperparathyroidism; we investigated the 
possible outcome on the splicing process. EZH2 and ZFX genes do not seem to have 
an impact on the onset of most parathyroid tumours, both benign and malignant,
though further studies on larger cohorts of different ethnicity are needed.

PMID: 26876532  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


46. OMICS. 2016 Feb;20(2):123-5. doi: 10.1089/omi.2015.0113.

The JMJD3 Histone Demethylase and the EZH2 Histone Methyltransferase in Prostate 
Cancer.

Daures M(1,)(2), Ngollo M(1,)(2), Judes G(1,)(2), Rifaï K(1,)(2), Kemeny JL(3),
Penault-Llorca F(1,)(2), Bignon YJ(1,)(2), Guy L(2,)(4), Bernard-Gallon D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Oncogenetics, Centre Jean Perrin , CBRV, Clermont-Ferrand,
France . (2)2 EA 4677 "ERTICA", University of Auvergne , Clermont-Ferrand, France
. (3)3 Department of Pathology, Gabriel Montpied Hospital , Clermont-Ferrand,
France . (4)4 Department of Urology, Gabriel Montpied Hospital ,
Clermont-Ferrand, France .

PMID: 26871869  [PubMed - in process]


47. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7281. [Epub ahead of print]

MALAT1 long ncRNA promotes gastric cancer metastasis by suppressing PCDH10.

Qi Y(1), Ooi HS(2), Wu J(3), Chen J(1), Zhang X(1), Tan S(4), Yu Q(4), Li
YY(5,)(6), Kang Y(1), Li H(1), Xiong Z(4), Zhu T(4), Liu B(1,)(7), Shao Z(1),
Zhao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Bio-ID Research Center, State Key Laboratory
for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. (3)Department
of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (4)Laboratory of
Molecular Tumor Pathology, School of Life Sciences, University of Science and
Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui, China. (5)Shanghai Center for Bioinformatics
Technology, Shanghai, China. (6)Shanghai Engineering Research Center of
Pharmaceutical Translation, Shanghai, China. (7)Department of Surgery, Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

EZH2, the catalytic component of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), is
frequently overexpressed in human cancers and contributes to tumor initiation and
progression, in part through transcriptional silencing of tumor suppressor genes.
A number of noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) recruit EZH2 to specific chromatin loci,
where they modulate gene expression. Here, we used RNA immunoprecipitation
sequencing (RIP-seq) to profile EZH2-associated transcripts in human gastric
cancer cell lines. We identified 8,256 transcripts, including both noncoding and 
coding transcripts, some of which were derived from cancer-related loci. In
particular, we found that long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) MALAT1 binds EZH2,
suppresses the tumor suppressor PCDH10, and promotes gastric cellular migration
and invasion. Our work thus provides a global view of the EZH2-associated
transcriptome and offers new insight into the function of EZH2 in gastric
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26871474  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 8. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7260. [Epub ahead of print]

The relationship between EZH2 expression and microRNA-31 in colorectal cancer and
the role in evolution of the serrated pathway.

Kurihara H(1), Maruyama R(2), Ishiguro K(1), Kanno S(1), Yamamoto I(1), Ishigami 
K(1), Mitsuhashi K(1), Igarashi H(1,)(3), Ito M(1), Tanuma T(1), Sukawa Y(1),
Okita K(4), Hasegawa T(5), Imai K(3), Yamamoto H(6), Shinomura Y(7), Nosho K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Sapporo 
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular
Biology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (3)The
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Surgery, Surgical Oncology and Science, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (5)Department of Surgical
Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
St. Marianna University School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan. (7)Department of
Gastroenterology, Ikeda Municipal Hospital, Ikeda, Japan.

Polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a methyltransferase 
that correlates with the regulation of invasion and metastasis and is
overexpressed in human cancers such as colorectal cancer. MicroRNA-31 (miR-31)
plays an oncogenic role and is associated with BRAF mutation and poor prognosis
in colorectal cancer. EZH2 is functionally considered to suppress miR-31
expression in human cancers; however, no study has reported its relationship with
colon cancer. We therefore evaluated EZH2 expression using immunohistochemistry
and assessed miR-31 and epigenetic alterations using 301 colorectal carcinomas
and 207 premalignant lesions. Functional analysis was performed to identify the
association between EZH2 and miR-31 using cancer cell lines. In the current
study, negative, weak, moderate, and strong EZH2 expressions were observed in
15%, 19%, 25%, and 41% of colorectal cancers, respectively. EZH2 was inversely
associated with miR-31 (P < 0.0001), independent of clinicopathological and
molecular features. In a multivariate stage-stratified analysis, high EZH2
expression was related to favorable prognosis (P = 0.0022). Regarding
premalignant lesions, negative EZH2 expression was frequently detected in sessile
serrated adenomas/polyps (SSA/Ps) (76%; P < 0.0001) compared with hyperplastic
polyps, traditional serrated adenomas, and non-serrated adenomas (25-36%).
Functional analysis demonstrated that the knockdown of EZH2 increased miR-31
expression. In conclusion, an inverse association was identified between EZH2 and
miR-31 in colorectal cancers. Our data also showed that upregulation of EZH2
expression may be rare in SSA/Ps. These results suggest that EZH2 suppresses
miR-31 in colorectal cancer and may correlate with differentiation and evolution 
of serrated pathway.

PMID: 26871294  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 12;6:20864. doi: 10.1038/srep20864.

Selective inhibition of EZH2 by ZLD1039 blocks H3K27methylation and leads to
potent anti-tumor activity in breast cancer.

Song X(1), Gao T(1), Wang N(1), Feng Q(1,)(2), You X(3), Ye T(1), Lei Q(1), Zhu
Y(1), Xiong M(1), Xia Y(1), Yang F(1), Shi Y(1), Wei Y(1), Zhang L(1), Yu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
West China Medical School, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China. (2)College 
of Chemistry and Life Science, Chengdu Normal University, Chengdu 611130, China. 
(3)College of Chemical Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610065, 
China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a candidate oncogenic driver due to its
prevalent overexpression and aberrant repression of tumor suppressor genes in
diverse cancers. Therefore, blocking EZH2 enzyme activity may present a valid
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancers with EZH2 overexpression
including breast cancers. Here, we described ZLD1039 a potent, highly selective, 
and orally bioavailable small molecule inhibitor of EZH2, which inhibited breast 
tumor growth and metastasis. ZLD1039 considerably inhibited EZH2
methyltransferase activity with nanomolar potency, decreased global histone-3
lysine-27 (H3K27) methylation, and reactivated silenced tumor suppressors
connected to increased survival of patients with breast cancer. Comparable to
conditional silencing of EZH2, its inhibition by ZLD1039 decreased cell
proliferation, cell cycle arrest, and induced apoptosis. Comparably, treatment of
xenograft-bearing mice with ZLD1039 led to tumor growth regression and metastasis
inhibition. These data confirmed the dependency of breast cancer progression on
EZH2 activity and the usefulness of ZLD1039 as a promising treatment for breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4751454
PMID: 26868841  [PubMed - in process]


50. Cell Cycle. 2016 Feb 16;15(4):487-8. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1130572. Epub
2016 Feb 11.

SETD1A induced miRNA network suppresses the p53 gene expression module.

Yae T(1,)(2), Tajima K(1,)(2), Maheswaran S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Surgery , Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center,
Harvard Medical School , Charlestown , MA , USA. (2)b Department of Surgery ,
Harvard Medical School , Charlestown , MA , USA.

PMID: 26865005  [PubMed - in process]


51. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12791. [Epub ahead of print]

Prognostic significance of EZH2 expression in patients with oesophageal cancer: a
meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1), Gao F(2), Zhao M(3), Li B(4), Xing D(4), Wang J(4), Yang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electromyography, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Dong Li Hospital, Tianjin, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Hospital,
Tianjin, China. (4)Department of Orthopedics, Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin, China.

Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), a key component of polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), was of great importance in human cancer pathogenesis. Various studies
examined the relationship between EZH2 overexpression with the clinical outcome
in patients with digestive cancers, but yielded conflicting results. Electronic
databases updated to January 2015 were searched to find relevant studies. A
meta-analysis was conducted with eligible studies which quantitatively evaluated 
the relationship between EZH2 overexpression and survival of patients with
digestive cancers. Survival data were aggregated and quantitatively analysed. We 
performed a meta-analysis of 10 studies (n = 1461 patients) that evaluated the
correlation between EZH2 overexpression and survival in patients with digestive
cancers. Combined hazard ratios suggested that EZH2 overexpression was associated
with poor prognosis of overall survival (HR = 1.54, 95% CI: 1.27-1.81) in
patients with oesophageal cancer. In the stratified analysis, no significant
risks were found among gastric cancer (HR = 0.66, 95% CI: 0.16-1.15) and
colorectal cancer (HR = 0.91, 0.63-1.19), indicating that EZH2 was not an
indicator of poor prognosis in gastric cancer or colorectal cancer. Enhancer of
zeste 2 overexpression indicates a poor prognosis for patients with oesophageal
cancer, but not among gastric cancer or colorectal cancer.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMID: 26859127  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Cardiovasc Res. 2016 May 1;110(1):73-84. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvw031. Epub 2016 Feb
7.

Comparative transcriptome profiling of the injured zebrafish and mouse hearts
identifies miRNA-dependent repair pathways.

Crippa S(1), Nemir M(1), Ounzain S(1), Ibberson M(2), Berthonneche C(3), Sarre
A(3), Boisset G(4), Maison D(1), Harshman K(5), Xenarios I(2), Diviani D(6),
Schorderet D(4), Pedrazzini T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Cardiology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Lausanne
Medical School, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland. (2)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics,
Lausanne, Switzerland. (3)Cardiovascular Assessment Facility, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (4)Institute for Research in Ophthalmology,
Sion, Switzerland. (5)Lausanne Genomic Technologies Facility, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (7)Experimental Cardiology Unit,
Department of Medicine, University of Lausanne Medical School, Lausanne 1011,
Switzerland thierry.pedrazzini@chuv.ch.

AIMS: The adult mammalian heart has poor regenerative capacity. In contrast, the 
zebrafish heart retains a robust capacity for regeneration into adulthood. These 
distinct responses are consequences of a differential utilization of
evolutionary-conserved gene regulatory networks in the damaged heart. To
systematically identify miRNA-dependent networks controlling cardiac repair
following injury, we performed comparative gene and miRNA profiling of the
cardiac transcriptome in adult mice and zebrafish.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using an integrated approach, we show that 45
miRNA-dependent networks, involved in critical biological pathways, are
differentially modulated in the injured zebrafish vs. mouse hearts. We study,
more particularly, the miR-26a-dependent response. Therefore, miR-26a is
down-regulated in the fish heart after injury, whereas its expression remains
constant in the mouse heart. Targets of miR-26a involve activators of the cell
cycle and Ezh2, a component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
Importantly, PRC2 exerts repressive functions on negative regulators of the cell 
cycle. In cultured neonatal cardiomyocytes, inhibition of miR-26a stimulates,
therefore, cardiomyocyte proliferation. Accordingly, miR-26a knockdown prolongs
the proliferative window of cardiomyocytes in the post-natal mouse heart.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel strategy identifies a series of miRNAs and associated
pathways, in particular miR-26a, which represent attractive therapeutic targets
for inducing repair in the injured heart.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Cardiology.

PMCID: PMC4798047
PMID: 26857418  [PubMed - in process]


53. Genomics. 2016 Apr;107(4):145-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2016.02.002. Epub 2016 Feb 
4.

Epigenetic suppression of iNOS expression in human endothelial cells: A potential
role of Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3.

Dreger H(1), Ludwig A(2), Weller A(2), Baumann G(2), Stangl V(2), Stangl K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik für Kardiologie und Angiologie, Campus Mitte, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany; DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular
Research). Electronic address: henryk.dreger@charite.de. (2)Medizinische Klinik
für Kardiologie und Angiologie, Campus Mitte, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Germany; DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research).

OBJECTIVE: Cytokines strongly induce expression of the inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) in rodent but not in human endothelial cells. We recently
identified NOS2 as a potential target of the histone methyltransferase enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 which mediates trimethylation of histone 3 at lysine 27
(H3K27me3).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Compared to an unspecific IgG control, chromatin
immunoprecipitation using a H3K27me3-specific antibody followed by DNA
quantification by PCR showed a strong DNA enrichment - indicating that NOS2 is
associated with H3K27me3 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC).
siRNA-mediated knock down of Ezh2 diminished NOS2 DNA enrichment - suggesting
that the association of NOS2 with H3K27me3 is mediated by Ezh2. Ezh2 knock down, 
however, was not sufficient to increase iNOS expression after stimulation of
HUVEC.
CONCLUSION: NOS2 is associated with Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 in HUVEC. This might
contribute to an epigenetic suppression of iNOS inducibility in human endothelial
cells.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26853880  [PubMed - in process]


54. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2016 Mar;22 Suppl 1:S5-6. doi:
10.1097/01.MIB.0000480101.02647.09.

O-015 YI Alterations in the FOXP3-EZH2 Pathway Associates with Increased
Susceptibility to Colitis in Both Mice and Human.

Sarmento O(1), Xiong Y, Sun Z, Svingen P, Bamidele A, Smyrk T, Nair A, Baheti S, 
McGovern D, Friton J, Papadakis K, Goel G, Xavier R, Urrutia R, Faubion W.

Author information: 
(1)*Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, 
California Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; and §Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease is a common intestinal inflammatory disorder of
uncertain etiology and incomplete treatment options. It is characterized by
lesions infiltrated by inflammatory CD4 lymphocytes; yet the mechanism of CD4
mediated pathophysiology is unclear. Through whole genome approaches on clinical 
cohorts of CD patients, combined with functional in-vivo and in-vitro murine
data, we sought to identify and evaluate aberrant transcriptional gene networks
in disease-associated CD4 cells.
METHODS: We comparatively studied the expression profile in CD4 lymphocytes
isolated from the Ileum of 21 CD-affected individuals and 12 age/gender matched
control individuals. Utilizing RNA-seq, we conducted upstream target analysis to 
identify top disease associated regulatory networks. Potential coordinated
function between FOXP3 and EZH2 was identified, and common gene targets were
interrogated for differential expression and pathway analysis.We crossed
FOXP3-driven CRE recombinase expressing mice (B6129S-Tg(Foxp3-EGFP/cre)1aJbs/J)
with EZH2fl/fl animals to better define the effect of EZH2 ablation on Treg
function. Splenocytes were analyzed by cell surface markers for T cell
distribution and phenotype. EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394> FOXP3+ cell function was determined by
in-vitro Treg suppressor function assay. Cytokine analyses were performed on
supernatants of stimulated EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394>FOXP3+ splenocytes and serum from 14 to 17 days
old FOXP3-CRE;EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394> mice. FOXP3-CRE;EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394> or animals treated with EZH2
inhibitors received 3% DSS in an acute model of colitis. Furthermore, RB45high
transfer utilizing WT or EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394>Tregs was used in a chronic model of colitis.
RESULTS: Differential expression analysis between CD and CTRL samples revealed
5328 statistically significant Differentially Expressed Genes (DEGs). Principle
component analysis, and hierarchical clustering, separated patients from control 
subjects. Among the DEGs, 83 were well-defined transcription factors (TFs)
identified by Master Regulatory Analysis. The transcription factor FOXP3 and its 
associated regulatory network emerged as a highly differentially expressed
pathway in diseased samples by Master Regulatory Analysis, Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis, and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis. Additionally, common gene targets for
both FOXP3 and EZH2 were concurrently up regulated in disease. Genetic ablation
of EZH2 in mouse FOXP3+ cells resulted in Treg cells converted to a TH1/TH17-
like effector phenotype, a pattern shared by disease associated CD4 T cells.
These cells exhibited pro-inflammatory cell surface markers, cytokine expression,
and reduced in-vitro suppressive capacity. EZH2<U+0394>/<U+0394> Tregs failed to mitigate both 
DSS and T cell mediated colitis, and mice treated with the EZH2 inhibitor DZNep
were also more susceptible to DSS colitis.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we compare EZH2/Foxp3 co-regulation of gene networks 
between Crohn's lesions and controls, and in multiple mouse models, to clarify
the role of epigenetic regulation in this disease process. Multiple colitis
disease models show us that interfering with EZH2 by genetic or pharmaceutical
methods results in increased susceptibility to colitis. We postulate the
inflammatory milieu found in IBD modulates EZH2 function, thereby making it less 
able to co-repress non-Treg differentiation programs even in the presence of
upregulated FOXP3. Further investigation into EZH2 mutations, signaling cascades 
and relevant post-translation modifications to the FOXP3-EZH2 gene network may
assist to elucidate and predict disease progression and/or severity.

PMID: 26849732  [PubMed - in process]


55. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7156. [Epub ahead of print]

EZH2 promotes cell migration and invasion but not alters cell proliferation by
suppressing E-cadherin, partly through association with MALAT-1 in pancreatic
cancer.

Han T(1,)(2), Jiao F(1,)(2), Hu H(1), Yuan C(3), Wang L(2), Jin ZL(2), Song
WF(1), Wang LW(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Pancreatic Cancer Center, Shanghai General 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 201620,
China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases, Shanghai 201620, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 201620, China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is an essential component of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is required for epigenetic silencing of target
genes, including those affecting cancer progression. Its role in pancreatic
cancer remains to be clarified; therefore, we investigated the effects of
aberrantly expressed EZH2 on pancreatic cancer. We found that EZH2 expression is 
up-regulated in pancreatic cancer tissues and positively correlated with lymph
node metastasis and advanced clinical stage in pancreatic cancer patients. EZH2
knockdown in pancreatic cancer cell lines inhibited cell migration and invasion, 
but did not alter cell proliferation. Silencing of EZH2 also increased E-cadherin
expression in vitro, and E-cadherin expression was inversely correlated with EZH2
expression in pancreatic cancer tissue samples. Patients with high EZH2 and low
E-cadherin expression had the worst prognosis. RIP and ChIP assays suggest that
EZH2 is recruited to the E-cadherin promoter by the long non-coding RNA, MALAT-1 
(metastasis associated in lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1), where it represses
E-cadherin expression. Our results show that EZH2-based therapies may be an
option for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 26848980  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 3. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7152. [Epub ahead of print]

Aberrant epigenetic regulation in clear cell sarcoma of the kidney featuring
distinct DNA hypermethylation and EZH2 overexpression.

Karlsson J(1), Valind A(1), Jansson C(1), O'Sullivan MJ(2), Mengelbier LH(1),
Gisselsson D(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, University and Regional
Laboratories, Lund, Sweden. (2)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's
Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland. (3)Department of Pathology,
Skåne Regional and University Laboratories, Lund, Sweden.

The global methylation profile and the mutational status of 633 specific
epigenetic regulators were analyzed in the pediatric tumor clear cell sarcoma of 
the kidney (CCSK). Methylation array analyses of 30 CCSKs revealed CCSK tumor DNA
to be globally hypermethylated compared to Wilms tumor, normal fetal kidney, and 
adult kidney. The aberrant methylation pattern of CCSKs was associated with
activation of genes involved in embryonic processes and with silencing of genes
linked to normal kidney function. No epigenetic regulator was recurrently mutated
in our cohort, but a mutation in the key epigenetic regulator EZH2 was discovered
in one case. EZH2 mRNA was significantly higher in CCSK compared to Wilms tumor
and normal kidney, and the EZH2 protein was strongly expressed in more than 90 % 
of CCSK tumor cells in 9/9 tumors analyzed. This was in striking contrast to the 
lack of EZH2 protein expression in Wilms tumor stromal elements, indicating that 
EZH2 could be explored further as a diagnostic marker and a potential drug target
for CCSK.

PMID: 26848979  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 4. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4864. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 depletion arrests the proliferation of hepatoblastoma
cells.

Wang Y(1), Xiao Y(2), Chen K(1), Chen S(3), Zhang M(1), Wu Z(1), Wu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xin Hua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China. (2)Shanghai
Institute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.

Hepatoblastoma is the most common type of malignant liver tumor in children.
While outcomes have been greatly improved in the past decades, the treatment of
advanced hepatoblastoma has remained challenging. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2
(EZH2), a member of the polycomb group regulators of gene activity, is amplified 
and overexpressed in a variety of cancers. However, the role of EZH2 in
hepatoblastoma has remained to be fully elucidated. The purpose of the present
study was to investigate the expression patterns of EZH2 in hepatoblastoma cells 
and to assess the anti-cancer effects of EZH2 depletion. Western blot analysis
revealed that EZH2 expression was significantly higher in hepatoblastoma
specimens compared with that in peri-tumor tissues, while p27 was reduced in
hepatoblastoma. Suppression of EHZ2 using lentiviral small hairpin RNA inhibited 
hepatoblastoma cell proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest in G1 phase and
enhanced the expression of G1/S-phase checkpoint protein p27. These results
suggested that EZH2 may represent a potential diagnostic marker and therapeutic
target for the treatment of hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 26848027  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. Nat Med. 2016 Feb 4;22(2):128-34. doi: 10.1038/nm.4036.

Targeting EZH2 in cancer.

Kim KH(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Roberts CW(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Recent genomic studies have resulted in an emerging understanding of the role of 
chromatin regulators in the development of cancer. EZH2, a histone methyl
transferase subunit of a Polycomb repressor complex, is recurrently mutated in
several forms of cancer and is highly expressed in numerous others. Notably, both
gain-of-function and loss-of-function mutations occur in cancers but are
associated with distinct cancer types. Here we review the spectrum of
EZH2-associated mutations, discuss the mechanisms underlying EZH2 function, and
synthesize a unifying perspective that the promotion of cancer arises from
disruption of the role of EZH2 as a master regulator of transcription. We further
discuss EZH2 inhibitors that are now showing early signs of promise in clinical
trials and also additional strategies to combat roles of EZH2 in cancer.

PMID: 26845405  [PubMed - in process]


59. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 30. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7077. [Epub ahead of print]

Long non-coding RNA LINC01133 represses KLF2, P21 and E-cadherin transcription
through binding with EZH2, LSD1 in non small cell lung cancer.

Zang C(1), Nie FQ(2), Wang Q(1), Sun M(3), Li W(1), He J(1), Zhang M(1), Lu
KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Long non-coding RNAs are emerging as crucial regulators and prognostic markers in
multiple cancers including non small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In this study, we 
screened LINCO1133 as a new candidate lncRNA which promotes NSCLC development and
progression, in two independent datasets (GSE18842 and GSE19804) from the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO). LINC01133 is previously found to be over-expressed in
lung squamous cell cancer (LSCC) and knockdown its expression inhibits LSCC cells
invasion. However, its' molecular mechanism and downstream targets involving in
regulation of cancer cells phenotype is not known. Here, we found that LINC01133 
expression is up-regulated in NSCLC tissues, and its' over-expression is
associated with patients poor prognosis and short survival time. LINC01133
knockdown decreased NSCLC cells proliferation, migration, invasion and induced
cell cycle G1/S phase arrest and cell apoptosis. Mechanistic investigations
showed that LINC01133 could interact with EZH2, LSD1 and recruit them to KLF2,
P21 or E-cadherin promoter regions to repress their transcription. Furthermore,
rescue experiments demonstrated that LINC01133 oncogenic function is partly
through regulating KLF2. Lastly, we found that there was negative correlation
between LINC01133 and KLF2, P21 or E-cadherin in NSCLC. Overall, our findings
illuminate how LINC01133 over-expression confers an oncogenic function in NSCLC
that may offer a novel therapy target in this disease.

PMID: 26840083  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


60. Biochemistry. 2016 Mar 22;55(11):1600-14. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01191. Epub 
2016 Feb 17.

PRC2 and SWI/SNF Chromatin Remodeling Complexes in Health and Disease.

Kadoch C(1), Copeland RA(2), Keilhack H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School , 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States. (2)Epizyme Inc. , 400
Technology Square, 4th floor, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

The dynamic structure of histones and DNA, also known as chromatin, is regulated 
by two classes of enzymes: those that mediate covalent modifications on either
histone proteins or DNA and those that use the energy generated by ATP hydrolysis
to mechanically alter chromatic structure. Both classes of enzymes are often
found in large protein complexes. In this review, we describe two such complexes:
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), with the protein methyltransferase EZH2 as 
its catalytic subunit, and the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeler switch/sucrose
non-fermentable (SWI/SNF). EZH2 catalyzes the methylation of lysine 27 on histone
H3, a covalent chromatin modification that is associated with repressed
heterochromatin. The catalytic activity of SWI/SNF, in contrast, leads to a state
of open chromatin associated with active transcription. In this review, we
discuss the biochemical properties of both complexes, outline the principles of
their regulation, and describe their opposing roles in normal development, which 
can be perturbed in disease settings such as cancer.

PMID: 26836503  [PubMed - in process]


61. Mol Cell. 2016 Feb 4;61(3):461-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2016.01.001. Epub 2016
Jan 28.

Cause and Consequence of Tethering a SubTAD to Different Nuclear Compartments.

Wijchers PJ(1), Krijger PH(1), Geeven G(1), Zhu Y(1), Denker A(1), Verstegen
MJ(1), Valdes-Quezada C(1), Vermeulen C(1), Janssen M(1), Teunissen H(1),
Anink-Groenen LC(2), Verschure PJ(2), de Laat W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW & University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8,
3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (2)Synthetic Systems Biology and Nuclear
Organization Group, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of
Amsterdam, 1098 XH Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW &
University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the
Netherlands. Electronic address: w.delaat@hubrecht.eu.

Detailed genomic contact maps have revealed that chromosomes are structurally
organized in megabase-sized topologically associated domains (TADs) that
encompass smaller subTADs. These domains segregate in the nuclear space to form
active and inactive nuclear compartments, but cause and consequence of
compartmentalization are largely unknown. Here, we combined lacO/lacR binding
platforms with allele-specific 4C technologies to track their precise position in
the three-dimensional genome upon recruitment of NANOG, SUV39H1, or EZH2. We
observed locked genomic loci resistant to spatial repositioning and unlocked loci
that could be repositioned to different nuclear subcompartments with distinct
chromatin signatures. Focal protein recruitment caused the entire subTAD, but not
surrounding regions, to engage in new genomic contacts. Compartment switching was
found uncoupled from transcription changes, and the enzymatic modification of
histones per se was insufficient for repositioning. Collectively, this suggests
that trans-associated factors influence three-dimensional compartmentalization
independent of their cis effect on local chromatin composition and activity.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4747903
PMID: 26833089  [PubMed - in process]


62. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16;7(7):8119-30. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6992.

Genomic loss of EZH2 leads to epigenetic modifications and overexpression of the 
HOX gene clusters in myelodysplastic syndrome.

Xu F(1), Liu L(1), Chang CK(1), He Q(1), Wu LY(1), Zhang Z(1), Shi WH(1), Guo
J(1), Zhu Y(1), Zhao YS(1), Gu SC(1), Fei CM(1), Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

The role of EZH2 in cancer is complex and may vary depending on cancer type or
stage. We examined the effect of altered EZH2 levels on H3K27 methylation, HOX
gene expression, and malignant phenotype in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) cell
lines and an in vivo xenograft model. We also studied links between EZH2
expression and prognosis in MDS patients. Patients with high-grade MDS exhibited 
lower levels of EZH2 expression than those with low-grade MDS. Low EZH2
expression was associated with high percentages of blasts, shorter survival, and 
increased transformation of MDS into acute myeloid leukemia (AML). MDS patients
frequently had reductions in EZH2 copy number. EZH2 knockdown increased tumor
growth capacity and reduced H3K27me3 levels in both MDS-derived leukemia cells
and in a xenograft model. H3K27me3 levels were reduced and HOX gene cluster
expression was increased in MDS patients. EZH2 knockdown also increased HOX gene 
cluster expression by reducing H3K27me3, and H3K27 demethylating agents increased
HOX gene cluster expression in MDS-derived cell lines. These findings suggest
genomic loss of EZH2 contributes to overexpression of the HOX gene clusters in
MDS through epigenetic modifications.

PMID: 26812882  [PubMed - in process]


63. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Oct 15;5(11):3475-84. eCollection 2015.

Effects of EZH2 promoter polymorphisms and methylation status on oral squamous
cell carcinoma susceptibility and pathology.

Su KJ(1), Lin CW(2), Chen MK(3), Yang SF(4), Yu YL(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, China Medical
University and Academia Sinica Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Oral Sciences,
Chung Shan Medical UniversityTaichung, Taiwan; Department of Dentistry, Chung
Shan Medical University HospitalTaichung, Taiwan. (3)Institute of Medicine, Chung
Shan Medical UniversityTaichung, Taiwan; Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Changhua Christian HospitalChanghua, Taiwan. (4)Institute of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical UniversityTaichung, Taiwan; Department of Medical
Research, Chung Shan Medical University HospitalTaichung, Taiwan. (5)The Ph.D.
Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, China Medical University and
Academia SinicaTaichung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China
Medical UniversityTaichung, Taiwan; Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical 
University HospitalTaichung, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Asia
UniversityTaichung, Taiwan.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), which is malignant tumors in oral cavity, is
the fourth most common male cancer in Taiwan. EZH2 plays a key role in
transcriptional repression through chromatin remodeling and in cancer
development. Although the EZH2 expression in OSCC is highly correlated with
tumorigenesis, it has not been determined if specific EZH2 genetic variants are
associated with OSCC risk. The aim of this study was to investigate the
relationship between genetic polymorphisms of EZH2 and susceptibility to OSCC in 
Taiwan. Here, four SNPs of EZH2 (rs6950683, rs2302427, rs3757441, and rs41277434)
were analyzed by a real-time PCR genotyping in 576 patients with oral cancer and 
552 cancer-free controls. After adjusting for other co-variants, we found that
carrying CC genotype at EZH2 rs6950683 and rs3757441 had a lower risk of
developing OSCC than did wild-type carriers. The CCCA or CCTA haplotype among the
four EZH2 sites was also associated with a reduced risk of OSCC. Furthermore,
OSCC patients who carried CC genotype at EZH2 rs6950683 had a higher methylation 
than TC genotype. Our results suggest that the two SNPs of EZH2 (rs6950683 and
rs3757441) might contribute to the prediction of OSCC susceptibility. Moreover,
rs6950683 CC genotype exhibits hypermethylation in EZH2 promoter. This is the
first study to provide insight into risk factors associated with EZH2 variants
and epigenetic changes in carcinogenesis of OSCC in Taiwan.

PMCID: PMC4697693
PMID: 26807327  [PubMed]


64. J Pathol. 2016 Apr;238(5):651-64. doi: 10.1002/path.4688.

Yin Yang 1-mediated epigenetic silencing of tumour-suppressive microRNAs
activates nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Tsang DP(1,)(2), Wu WK(1,)(3), Kang W(4), Lee YY(1,)(2), Wu F(4), Yu Z(1), Xiong 
L(4), Chan AW(4), Tong JH(4), Yang W(1,)(2), Li MS(1,)(5), Lau SS(1), Li
X(1,)(2), Lee SD(6), Yang Y(7), Lai PB(1,)(8), Yu DY(9), Xu G(2), Lo KW(4), Chan 
MT(3), Wang H(7), Lee TL(5), Yu J(1,)(2), Wong N(1,)(4), Yip KY(6), To KF(1,)(4),
Cheng AS(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease and State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (2)Department of
Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
China. (3)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (4)Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (5)School of Biomedical
Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(6)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (8)Department of Surgery, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (9)Disease Model
Research Laboratory, Aging Research Center and World Class Institute, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) catalyses histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation 
(H3K27me3) to silence tumour-suppressor genes in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
but the process of locus-specific recruitment remains elusive. Here we
investigated the transcription factors involved and the molecular consequences in
HCC development. The genome-wide distribution of H3K27me3 was determined by
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing or promoter
array analyses in HCC cells from hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein transgenic
mouse and human cell models. Transcription factor binding site analysis was
performed to identify EZH2-interacting transcription factors followed by
functional characterization. Our cross-species integrative analysis revealed a
crucial link between Yin Yang 1 (YY1) and EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 in HCC. Gene
expression analysis of human HBV-associated HCC specimens demonstrated concordant
overexpression of YY1 and EZH2, which correlated with poor survival of patients
in advanced stages. The YY1 binding motif was significantly enriched in both in
vivo and in vitro H3K27me3-occupied genes, including genes for 15
tumour-suppressive microRNAs. Knockdown of YY1 reduced not only global H3K27me3
levels, but also EZH2 and H3K27me3 promoter occupancy and DNA methylation,
leading to the transcriptional up-regulation of microRNA-9 isoforms in HCC cells.
Concurrent EZH2 knockdown and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment synergistically
increased the levels of microRNA-9, which reduced the expression and
transcriptional activity of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B). Functionally, YY1 promoted
HCC tumourigenicity and inhibited apoptosis of HCC cells, at least partially
through NF-<U+03BA>B activation. In conclusion, YY1 overexpression contributes to EZH2
recruitment for H3K27me3-mediated silencing of tumour-suppressive microRNAs,
thereby activating NF-<U+03BA>B signalling in hepatocarcinogenesis. Copyright © 2016
Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26800240  [PubMed - in process]


65. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2016 Jan 22:1-17. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting epigenetic regulators for cancer therapy: modulation of bromodomain
proteins, methyltransferases, demethylases, and microRNAs.

Gelato KA(1), Shaikhibrahim Z(1), Ocker M(1,)(2), Haendler B(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Global Drug Discovery , Bayer Pharma AG , Berlin , Germany. (2)b Department 
of Gastroenterology/Campus Benjamin Franklin , Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin
, Berlin , Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) and DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
were the first epigenetic targets to be successfully addressed for cancer
treatment, but more recently additional families of epigenetic modulators have
been the subject of intense research. Potent inhibitors have been identified in
several instances and have proven to be invaluable tools for studying these
proteins in normal physiology and in disease. Some have now progressed to
clinical studies in hematological and solid tumors, and encouraging early results
have been reported. Areas covered: This article reviews recent advances regarding
the roles of new epigenetic players beyond HDACs and DNMTs in cancer, and
discusses the impact of selective chemical probes on unravelling their function. 
The emerging field of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) and ongoing clinical studies with 
epigenetic drugs and microRNAs (miRNAs) are also addressed. Expert opinion: The
roles of different epigenetic factors in numerous cancers have been unraveled
recently, leading to the initiation of clinical studies. With inhibitors of BET
bromodomain proteins, the histone methyltransferases EZH2 and DOT1L, and the
histone demethylase LSD1 progressing through clinical trials, and the recognition
of the importance of ncRNAs as potential biomarkers and therapeutics, this bears 
the hope that novel epigenetic therapies will be approved soon.

PMID: 26799480  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


66. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6949. [Epub ahead of print]

Long intergenic non-coding RNA 00152 promotes tumor cell cycle progression by
binding to EZH2 and repressing p15 and p21 in gastric cancer.

Chen WM(1), Huang MD(2), Sun DP(1), Kong R(3), Xu TP(4), Xia R(5), Zhang EB(5),
Shu YQ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Jining NO.1 People's Hospital, Jining City, Shandong
Province 272011, China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Huai'an First People's
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province 223300, China. (3)Central 
Laboratory, Subei People's Hospital of Jiangsu province, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
Province 225001, China. (4)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu
Province 210029, China. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play important regulatory roles in several human
cancers. Integrated analysis revealed that expression of long intergenic
non-coding RNA 152 (LINC00152) was significantly upregulated in gastric cancer
(GC). Further analysis in a cohort of 97 GC patients revealed that LINC00152
expression was positively correlated with tumor invasion depth, lymph node
metastasis, higher TNM stage, and poor survival. Gene set enrichment analysis
revealed that cell proliferation and cell cycle progression were increased in
patients with high LINC00152 expression. In both GC cell lines and xenograft
systems, LINC00152 overexpression facilitated GC cell proliferation by
accelerating the cell cycle, whereas LINC00152 knockdown had the opposite effect.
Moreover, by binding to enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), LINC00152 promotes GC
tumor cell cycle progression by silencing the expression of p15 and p21. These
findings suggest that LINC00152 may play contribute to the progression of GC and 
may be an effective therapeutic target.

PMID: 26799422  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


67. Free Radic Biol Med. 2016 Mar;92:39-49. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2016.01.005.
Epub 2016 Jan 12.

miR-214 protects erythroid cells against oxidative stress by targeting ATF4 and
EZH2.

Gao M(1), Liu Y(2), Chen Y(3), Yin C(1), Chen JJ(4), Liu S(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100085, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and
Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; Key Laboratory of Ion Beam Bioengineering, Hefei
Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences and Anhui Province,
Hefei, Anhui 230031, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry
and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; Department of Urology, The Second
Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin
300211, China. (4)Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (5)State Key Laboratory
of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research Center for
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
Electronic address: sjliu@rcees.ac.cn.

Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2) like 2 (Nrf2) is a key regulator in
protecting cells against stress by targeting many anti-stress response genes.
Recent evidence also reveals that Nrf2 functions partially by targeting
mircroRNAs (miRNAs). However, the understanding of Nrf2-mediated cytoprotection
through miRNA-dependent mechanisms is largely unknown. In the current study, we
identified a direct Nrf2 targeting miRNA, miR-214, and demonstrated a protective 
role of miR-214 in erythroid cells against oxidative stresses generated by
radiation, excess iron and arsenic (As) exposure. miR-214 expression was
transcriptionally repressed by Nrf2 through a canonical antioxidant response
element (ARE) within its promoter region, and this repression is ROS-dependence. 
The suppression of miR-214 by Nrf2 could antagonize oxidative stress-induced cell
death in erythroid cells by two ways. First, miR-214 directly targeted ATF4, a
crucial transcriptional factor involved in anti-stress responses, down regulation
of miR-214 releases the repression of ATF4 translation and leads to increased
ATF4 protein content. Second, miR-214 was able to prevent cell death by targeting
EZH2, the catalytic core component of PRC2 complex that is responsible for
tri-methylation reaction at lysine 27 (K27) of histone 3 (H3) (H3K27me3), by
which As-induced miR-214 reduction resulted in an increased global H3K27me3 level
and a compromised overexpression of a pro-apoptotic gene Bim. These two pathways 
downstream of miR-214 synergistically cooperated to antagonize erythroid cell
death upon oxidative stress. Our combined data revealed a protective role of
miR-214 signaling in erythroid cells against oxidative stress, and also shed new 
light on Nrf2-mediated cytoprotective machinery.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26791102  [PubMed - in process]


68. Expert Rev Hematol. 2016 Feb 9:1-23. [Epub ahead of print]

Mutations in epigenetic modifiers in acute myeloid leukemia and their clinical
utility.

Hou HA(1), Tien HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital , National Taiwan University , Taipei , Taiwan.

Recent studies have identified recurrent mutations in genes that encode proteins 
crucial in the epigenetic regulation of gene transcription in hematologic
malignancies. Somatic mutations in epigenetic modifiers, including IDH1, IDH2,
TET2, DNAMT3A, ASXL1, MLL and EZH2 are enriched in patients with acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), especially those with intermediate-risk cytogenetics. Here we
describe the clinic-biologic features of AML patients with these mutations, their
prognostic relevance and potential as therapeutic targets. The epigenetic
alterations are present as the early pre-leukemic events and usually remain
stable during disease evolution, implying the potential to be biomarkers for
minimal residual disease monitoring. The high frequency of mutations in
epigenetic modifiers and their prognostic implications shed light on the
development of epigenetic therapy.

PMID: 26789100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


69. J Autoimmun. 2016 Apr;68:52-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.12.006. Epub 2016 Jan
11.

MicroRNAs in CD4(+) T cell subsets are markers of disease risk and T cell
dysfunction in individuals at risk for type 1 diabetes.

Zhang Y(1), Feng ZP(2), Naselli G(3), Bell F(3), Wettenhall J(3), Auyeung P(3),
Ellis JA(4), Ponsonby AL(4), Speed TP(2), Chong MM(2), Harrison LC(5).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria
3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia; Division of Immunology, Guangzhou Institute 
of Pediatrics, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical
University, 9 Jingsui Road, Tianhe, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510623, China. (2)The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3010, Australia. (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (4)Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, 50 Flemington Rd, Parkville, Victoria,
3052, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Victoria,
3010, Australia. (5)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia. Electronic address:
harrison@wehi.edu.au.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate T cell development and function and the disruption of
miRNAs in natural regulatory CD4(+) FOXP3(+) T cells (nTreg) leads to autoimmune 
disease in mice. To investigate miRNA expression in relation to autoimmune
disease risk in humans we sequenced them in purified CD4(+) T cell subsets from
individuals at high risk of type 1 diabetes (pre-T1D), as well as other healthy
individuals. Differences in miRNA expression patterns were observed between
specific T cell subsets and, within subsets, between pre-T1D and healthy
individuals. Compared to healthy, naive CD4(+) T cells in pre-T1D displayed 32
differentially expressed miRNAs, potentially a template for altered miRNA
expression in effector memory T cells in T1D. Naive nTreg in pre-T1D displayed
two differentially expressed miRNAs, Let-7c and miR-15a. In contrast, nTreg
activated in vivo displayed a large number of differentially expressed miRNAs,
revealing a pro-inflammatory and FOXP3-repressive signature. Differential
expression of specific miRNAs was also a signpost to altered T cell function. For
example, in pre-T1D, increased expression of miR-26a in nTreg activated in vivo
or in vitro was associated with decreased expression of its target, the histone
methyltransferase EZH2. Chemical inhibition of EZH2 decreased the number of
activated naïve nTreg and their expression of nTreg signature genes FOXP3 and
TIGIT. Our findings demonstrate that miRNAs differentially expressed in CD4(+) T 
cell subsets are markers of risk and T cell dysfunction in T1D.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26786119  [PubMed - in process]


70. Carcinogenesis. 2016 Apr;37(4):385-96. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgw009. Epub 2016 Jan 
19.

An ornamental plant targets epigenetic signaling to block cancer stem cell-driven
colon carcinogenesis.

Ahmed I(1), Roy BC(1), Subramaniam D(1), Ganie SA(2), Kwatra D(3), Dixon D(4),
Anant S(5), Zargar MA(2), Umar S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Kashmir, Srinagar 190006, India. (3)Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research, US Food and Drug Adminstration, Silver Spring, MD 20993, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology and. (5)Department of Molecular and Integrative
Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA,
University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (6)Department of 
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, USA, University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS 66160,
USA sumar@kumc.edu.

Phytochemicals modulate key cellular signaling pathways and have proven
anticancer effects.Alcea rosea(AR; Hollyhock) is an ornamental plant with known
anti-inflammatory properties. This study explored its role as an anticancer
agent. The AR seed extract (AR extract) inhibited proliferation and colony
formation in a dose- and time-dependent manner and promoted apoptosis as was
evidenced by cleavage of PARP and increased expression of Bax accompanying
reduced levels of BCL-xl protein in HCT116 and SW480 cells, respectively. In
addition, AR extract-arrested cells at Go/G1 phase of cell cycle and exhibited
decreases in Cyclin D1. AR extract-treated cells exhibited reduced number and
size of colonospheres in a dose-dependent manner concomitant with decreases in
cancer stem cell (CSC) markers ALDH1A1 and Dclk1. Relative levels of ß-catenin,
Notch-ICD, Hes1 and EZH2 were also attenuated by AR extract. TOP-flash reporter
activity, a measure of Wnt signaling, decreased significantly in response to
treatment while overexpression of wild type but not mutant EZH2, reversed the
inhibitory effects. Moreover, WIF1 (a Wnt antagonist) promoter activity increased
dramatically following treatment with AR extract which phenocopied increases in
WIF1 reporter activity following EZH2 knockdown.In vivo, AR extract attenuated
tumor growth due probably to reduced levels of EZH2, ß-catenin, CyclinD1 and
Ki-67 along with reduced levels of CSC markers. Since partial purification via
HPLC yielded a prominent peak, efforts are underway to identify the active
ingredient(s). Taken together, the results clearly suggest that AR extract/active
component(s) can be an effective preventative/therapeutic agent to target colon
cancer.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4806710 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26785732  [PubMed - in process]


71. Int J Oncol. 2016 Mar;48(3):1195-204. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2016.3336. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

A double-negative feedback loop between EZH2 and miR-26a regulates tumor cell
growth in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhuang C(1), Wang P(2), Huang D(1), Xu L(3), Wang X(1), Wang L(1), Hu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.
(3)Regenerative Medicine Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence demonstrates the important roles of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
tumor development and progression. miR-26a has been reported to be downregulated 
in several types of cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma, but the
underlying mechanism of how miR-26a is repressed remains largely unknown. In the 
present study, we performed western blot analysis, qRT-PCR, luciferase reporter
assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay to investigate the relationship
between miR-26a and the enhancer of zest homologue 2 (EZH2). CCK-8 assay and
colony formation assay were carried out to explore the effect of miR-26a on HCC
cells proliferation. We demonstrated that miR-26a was epigenetically repressed by
EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation within the miR-26a promoter. Moreover, we
confirmed that EZH2 was also a direct target of miR-26a in HCC cells, thus,
creating a double-negative feedback loop. Furthermore, miR-26a restoration
increased the expressions of its host genes (CTDSPL and CTDSP2). Overexpression
of EZH2 abrogated miR-26a induction of CTDSPL and CTDSP2. Restoring the balance
of the double-negative feedback loop by miR-26a overpression or EZH2 silence
significantly inhibited HCC cell growth. Overexpression of EZH2 rescued the
growth inhibition effect of miR-26a. These findings suggest that an imbalanced
double-negative feedback loop between EZH2 and miR-26a exists in HCC cells, which
contributes to miR-26a deregulation and regulates tumor cells proliferation.

PMID: 26781064  [PubMed - in process]


72. Gene. 2016 May 1;581(2):95-106. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.01.015. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Osteogenic potential of human adipose-tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells
cultured on 3D-printed porous structured titanium.

Lewallen EA(1), Jones DL(2), Dudakovic A(1), Thaler R(1), Paradise CR(1), Kremers
HM(3), Abdel MP(1), Kakar S(1), Dietz AB(4), Cohen RC(5), Lewallen DG(6), van
Wijnen AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering and Physiology,
Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Department of Health Sciences Research, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (5)Stryker
Orthopedics, 325 Corporate Drive, Mahwah, NJ 07430, USA. (6)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
Electronic address: lewallen.david@mayo.edu. (7)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biomedical
Engineering and Physiology, Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St. SW, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First St. SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. Electronic address:
vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Integration of porous metal prosthetics, which restore form and function of
irreversibly damaged joints, into remaining healthy bone is critical for implant 
success. We investigated the biological properties of adipose-tissue-derived
mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (AMSCs) and addressed their potential to alter the
in vitro microenvironment of implants. We employed human AMSCs as a practical
source for musculoskeletal applications because these cells can be obtained in
large quantities, are multipotent, and have trophic paracrine functions. AMSCs
were cultured on surgical-grade porous titanium disks as a model for orthopedic
implants. We monitored cell/substrate attachment, cell proliferation,
multipotency, and differentiation phenotypes of AMSCs upon osteogenic induction. 
High-resolution scanning electron microscopy and histology revealed that AMSCs
adhere to the porous metallic surface. Compared to standard tissue culture
plastic, AMSCs grown in the porous titanium microenvironment showed differences
in temporal expression for genes involved in cell cycle progression (CCNB2,
HIST2H4), extracellular matrix production (COL1A1, COL3A1), mesenchymal lineage
identity (ACTA2, CD248, CD44), osteoblastic transcription factors (DLX3, DLX5,
ID3), and epigenetic regulators (EZH1, EZH2). We conclude that metal orthopedic
implants can be effectively seeded with clinical-grade stem/stromal cells to
create a pre-conditioned implant.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774799  [PubMed - in process]


73. Exp Hematol. 2016 Apr;44(4):282-296.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.12.009. Epub
2016 Jan 7.

Ezh2 regulates the Lin28/let-7 pathway to restrict activation of fetal gene
signature in adult hematopoietic stem cells.

Oshima M(1), Hasegawa N(2), Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Muto T(2), Miyagi S(1), Koide 
S(1), Yabata S(2), Wendt GR(2), Saraya A(1), Wang C(3), Shimoda K(4), Suzuki
Y(5), Iwama A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School
of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan; College of
Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, China. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki,
Miyazaki, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Functional Genomics, Department of Medical
Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School
of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic
address: aiwama@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

Fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) seed bone marrow (BM) and undergo
reprograming into adult-type HSCs that are largely quiescent and restricted in
their self-renewal activity. Here we report that in the absence of the
polycomb-group gene Ezh2, a cohort of fetal-specific genes, including let-7
target genes, were activated in BM hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs),
leading to acquisition of fetal phenotypes by BM HSPCs, such as enhanced
self-renewal activity and production of fetal-type lymphocytes. The Lin28b/let-7 
pathway determines developmentally timed changes in HSPC programs. Of note, many 
of the fetal-specific let-7 target genes, including Lin28, appear to be
transcriptionally repressed by Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 in BM HSPCs, and Ezh2 loss 
results in their ectopic expression, particularly in hematologic malignancies
that develop in the absence of Ezh2. These findings suggest that Ezh2 cooperates 
with let-7 microRNAs in silencing the fetal gene signature in BM HSPCs and
restricts their transformation.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773568  [PubMed - in process]


74. Blood. 2016 Jan 15. pii: blood-2015-08-662593. [Epub ahead of print]

Polycomb-dependent epigenetic landscape in adult T-cell leukemia.

Fujikawa D(1), Nakagawa S(1), Hori M(1), Kurokawa N(1), Soejima A(1), Nakano
K(1), Yamochi T(1), Nakashima M(1), Kobayashi S(2), Tanaka Y(3), Iwanaga M(4),
Utsunomiya A(5), Uchimaru K(2), Yamagishi M(6), Watanabe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, Department of Computational Biology and 
Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; (2)Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; (3)Graduate School and Faculty of
Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan; (4)Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan; (5)Department of
Hematology, Imamura Bun-in Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan. (6)Graduate School of
Frontier Sciences, Department of Computational Biology and Medical Sciences, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; myamagishi@mgs.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Adult T-cell leukemia-lymphoma (ATL) shows global gene expression alterations
that confer cellular characteristics and unfavorable prognosis. However,
molecular mechanisms of the sustained expression changes are largely unknown,
because there is no study addressing the relationship between landscapes of the
gene expression and epigenetic modifications. Here, we analyzed ATL epigenome and
integrated it with transcriptome from primary ATL cells and those from
corresponding normal CD4+ T cells to decipher ATL-specific 'epigenetic-code' that
was critical for cell identity. We found that polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2)-mediated tri-methylation at histone H3Lys27 (H3K27me3) was significantly
and frequently reprogrammed at half of genes in ATL cells. Large proportion of
the abnormal gene downregulation was detected at early stage of disease
progression and was explained by H3K27me3 accumulation. The global H3K27me3
alterations involved ATL-specific gene expression changes that included several
tumor suppressors, transcription factors, epigenetic modifiers, miRNAs, and
developmental genes, suggesting diverse outcomes by the PRC2-dependent
hierarchical regulation. Interestingly, a key enzyme EZH2 was sensitive to
promiscuous signaling network including NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and was functionally
affected by HTLV-1 Tax. The Tax-dependent immortalized cells showed H3K27me3
reprogramming that was significantly similar to that of ATL cells. Of note,
majority of the epigenetic silencing has occurred in leukemic cells from indolent
ATL and also in HTLV-1-infected T cells from asymptomatic HTLV-1 carriers. Since 
pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 reversed epigenetic disruption and selectively
eliminated leukemic and HTLV-1-infected cells, targeting the epigenetic elements 
will hold great promise in treatment and prevention of ATL and HTLV-1-related
diseases onset.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26773042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Blood. 2016 Jan 15. pii: blood-2015-09-672352. [Epub ahead of print]

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patient-derived xenograft models capture the
molecular and biologic heterogeneity of the disease.

Chapuy B(1), Cheng H(2), Watahiki A(2), Ducar MD(3), Tan Y(4), Chen L(1), Roemer 
MG(1), Ouyang J(1), Christie AL(1), Zhang L(4), Gusenleitner D(4), Abo RP(3),
Farinha P(5), von Bonin F(6), Thorner AR(3), Sun HH(7), Gascoyne RD(5), Pinkus
GS(7), van Hummelen P(3), Wulf GG(6), Aster JC(7), Weinstock DM(1), Monti S(4),
Rodig SJ(7), Wang Y(8), Shipp MA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
United States; (2)Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, BC, Canada; (3)Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, Boston, MA, United States; (4)Section of Computational Biomedicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States; (5)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Center for Lymphoid Cancer, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; (6)Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Georg-August University Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany; (7)Department 
of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States;
(8)Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
United States. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA, United States; margaret_shipp@dfci.harvard.edu.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a clinically and biologically
heterogeneous disease defined by transcriptional classifications, specific
signaling and survival pathways and multiple low-frequency genetic alterations.
Preclinical model systems that capture the genetic and functional heterogeneity
of DLBCL are urgently needed. We have generated and characterized a panel of LBCL
Patient-derived Xenograft (PDX) models including 8 that reflect the
immunophenotypic, transcriptional, genetic and functional heterogeneity of
primary DLBCL and one that is a plasmablastic lymphoma. All LBCL PDX models were 
subjected to whole transcriptome sequencing to classify cell of origin and
consensus clustering classification (CCC) subtypes. Mutations and chromosomal
rearrangements were evaluated by whole exome sequencing with an extended bait
set. Six of the eight DLBCL models were ABC-type tumors that exhibited
ABC-associated mutations such as MYD88, CD79B, CARD11 and PIM1. The remaining 2
DLBCL PDX models were GCB-type, with characteristic alterations of GNA13, CREBBP 
and EZH2, and chromosomal translocations involving IgH and either BCL2 or MYC.
Only 25% (2/8) of the DLBCL PDX models harbored inactivating TP53 mutations
whereas 75% (6/8) of tumors exhibited copy number alterations of TP53 or its
upstream modifier, CDKN2A, consistent with the reported incidence and type of p53
pathway alterations in primary DLBCL. By CCC criteria, 6/8 DLBCL PDX models were 
BCR-type tumors that exhibited selective sIg expression and sensitivity to
entospletinib, a recently developed SYK inhibitor. In summary, we have
established and characterized faithful PDX models of DLBCL and demonstrated their
usefulness in functional analyses of proximal BCR pathway inhibition.

Copyright © 2016 American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26773040  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. J Med Chem. 2016 Feb 25;59(4):1556-64. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01501. Epub
2016 Jan 27.

The Importance of Being Me: Magic Methyls, Methyltransferase Inhibitors, and the 
Discovery of Tazemetostat.

Kuntz KW(1), Campbell JE(1), Keilhack H(1), Pollock RM(1), Knutson SK(1),
Porter-Scott M(1), Richon VM(1), Sneeringer CJ(1), Wigle TJ(1), Allain CJ(1),
Majer CR(1), Moyer MP(1), Copeland RA(1), Chesworth R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme , 400 Technology Square, Fourth Floor, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
United States.

Posttranslational methylation of histones plays a critical role in gene
regulation. Misregulation of histone methylation can lead to oncogenic
transformation. Enhancer of Zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) methylates histone 3 at
lysine 27 (H3K27) and abnormal methylation of this site is found in many cancers.
Tazemetostat, an EHZ2 inhibitor in clinical development, has shown activity in
both preclinical models of cancer as well as in patients with lymphoma or
INI1-deficient solid tumors. Herein we report the structure-activity
relationships from identification of an initial hit in a high-throughput screen
through selection of tazemetostat for clinical development. The importance of
several methyl groups to the potency of the inhibitors is highlighted as well as 
the importance of balancing pharmacokinetic properties with potency.

PMID: 26769278  [PubMed - in process]


77. Am J Hematol. 2016 Jan;91(1):76-89. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24253.

Myelodysplastic syndromes: Contemporary review and how we treat.

Gangat N(1), Patnaik MM(1), Tefferi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of clonal stem cell
disorders with an inherent tendency for leukemic transformation. Diagnosis is
currently based on the presence of peripheral blood cytopenias, peripheral blood 
and bone marrow dysplasia/blasts, and clonal cytogenetic abnormalities. With the 
advent of next generation sequencing, recurrent somatic mutations in genes
involved in epigenetic regulation (TET2, ASXL1, EZH2, DNMT3A, IDH1/2), RNA
splicing (SF3B1, SRSF2, U2AF1, ZRSR2), DNA damage response (TP53),
transcriptional regulation (RUNX1, BCOR, ETV6) and signal transduction (CBL,
NRAS, JAK2) have been identified in MDS. Conventional prognostication is by the
revised International prognostic scoring system (IPSS-R) with additional adverse 
prognosis conferred by presence of ASXL1, EZH2, or TP53 mutations. Currently Food
and Drug administration (FDA)-approved drugs for the treatment of MDS are not
curative and their effect on survival is limited; they include the
hypomethylating agents (HMA) azacitidine and decitabine and lenalidomide for MDS 
with isolated del(5q). To date, allogeneic stem cell transplant (ASCT) remains
the only treatment option for possible cure. Given the current lack of drugs with
convincing evidence of favorable effect on survival, we consider ASCT as the
treatment of choice for most patients with symptomatic disease, and especially
for those with high-risk disease. For nontransplant candidates, participation in 
clinical trials is preferred over conventional therapy. There is not one right
way of treatment for patients who are not candidates for either ASCT or clinical 
trials and palliative drugs of choice depend on the clinical problem, such as
symptomatic anemia (ESAs, danazol, HMA), thrombocytopenia (HMA), or neutropenia
(myeloid growth factors). Conversely, there is no controlled evidence to support 
the use of iron chelating agents in MDS. Going forward, we believe it is time to 
incorporate mutation information in clinically derived prognostic models in MDS
and encourage development of novel drugs with disease-modifying activity. Am. J. 
Hematol. 91:76-89, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26769228  [PubMed - in process]


78. Cancer Cell. 2016 Jan 11;29(1):17-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.12.006.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Is a Barrier to KRAS-Driven Inflammation and
Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition in Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer.

Serresi M(1), Gargiulo G(2), Proost N(1), Siteur B(3), Cesaroni M(4), Koppens
M(1), Xie H(5), Sutherland KD(1), Hulsman D(1), Citterio E(1), Orkin S(5), Berns 
A(1), van Lohuizen M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Centre for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Division of 
Molecular Genetics, Centre for Biomedical Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
g.gargiulo@nki.nl. (3)Mouse Clinic Intervention Unit, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)The Fels Institute, Temple
University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. (5)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Division of Molecular Genetics,
Centre for Biomedical Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Cancer Genomics Centre (CGC.nl), Plesmanlaan 121,
1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: m.v.lohuizen@nki.nl.

Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC) are frequently implicated in human cancer,
acting either as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Here, we show that PRC2 is a
critical regulator of KRAS-driven non-small cell lung cancer progression.
Modulation of PRC2 by either Ezh2 overexpression or Eed deletion enhances
KRAS-driven adenomagenesis and inflammation, respectively. Eed-loss-driven
inflammation leads to massive macrophage recruitment and marked decline in tissue
function. Additional Trp53 inactivation activates a cell-autonomous
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition program leading to an invasive mucinous
adenocarcinoma. A switch between methylated/acetylated chromatin underlies the
tumor phenotypic evolution, prominently involving genes controlled by Hippo/Wnt
signaling. Our observations in the mouse models were conserved in human cells.
Importantly, PRC2 inactivation results in context-dependent phenotypic
alterations, with implications for its therapeutic application.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26766588  [PubMed - in process]


79. Nucleus. 2015 Nov 2;6(6):435-41. doi: 10.1080/19491034.2015.1102814. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Association of ORCA/LRWD1 with repressive histone methyl transferases mediates
heterochromatin organization.

Giri S(1), Prasanth SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Cell and Developmental Biology ; University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign ; Urbana , IL USA.

Heterochromatin mostly constitutes tightly packaged DNA, decorated with
repressive histone marks, including histone H3 methylated at lysine 9, histone H4
methylated at lysine 20 and histone H3 methylated at lysine 27. Each of these
marks is incorporated by specific histone lysine methyl transferases. While
constitutive heterochromatin enriched with H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 occur within
repetitive elements, including centromeres and telomeres, the facultative
heterochromatin resides on the inactive X-chromosome and contains H3K27me3 mark. 
Origin recognition complex-associated (ORCA/LRWD1) protein is required for the
initiation of DNA replication and also plays crucial roles in heterochromatin
organization. ORCA associates with constitutive and facultative heterochromatin
in human cells and binds to repressive histone marks. We demonstrate that ORCA
binds to multiple repressive histone methyl transferases including G9a, GLP,
Suv39h1 (H3K9me2/3), Suv420h1/h2 (H4K20me2/3) and EZH2 (H3K27me3). Removal of
ORCA from human cells causes aberrations in the chromatin architecture. We
propose that ORCA acts as a scaffold protein that enables the formation of
multiple histone lysine methyltransferase complexes at heterochromatic sites
thereby facilitating chromatin organization.

PMID: 26765314  [PubMed - in process]


80. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2016 Mar-Apr;25(2):79-86. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2015.11.001. 
Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Histone acetylation and methylation significantly change with severity of
atherosclerosis in human carotid plaques.

Greißel A(1), Culmes M(1), Burgkart R(2), Zimmermann A(1), Eckstein HH(1),
Zernecke A(3), Pelisek J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar der 
Technischen Universitaet Muenchen, Germany. (2)Clinic of Orthopedics, Klinikum
rechts der Isar der Technischen Universitaet Muenchen, Germany. (3)Department of 
Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen
Universitaet Muenchen, Germany; Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and
Pathobiochemistry, University Hospital, Wuerzburg, Germany. (4)Department of
Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen
Universitaet Muenchen, Germany. Electronic address: jaroslav.pelisek@tum.de.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the study was to analyze histone acetylation, methylation,
and the expression of their corresponding transferases in atherosclerotic plaques
of patients with carotid artery stenosis.
METHODS: Atherosclerotic tissue from our biobank (n=80) was divided into various 
segments covering all plaque stages and classified according to the American
Heart Association. The plaques were assigned to early (types I-III) or advanced
(types V-VII) stage group of atherosclerosis. Ten healthy carotid arteries from
transplant donors served as controls. The expression of histone
acetyltransferases (GNAT group: GCN5L, P300/CBP group: P300, MYST group: MYST1
and MYST2) and histone methyltransferases (H3K4: MLL2/4, SET7/9, and hSET1A;
H3K9: SUV39H1, SUV39H2, ESET/SETDB1, and EHMT1; H3K27: EZH2 and G9a) was analyzed
by SYBR-green-based real-time polymerase chain reaction. Histone
acetylation/methylation in the cells within atherosclerotic plaques was
determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Increased histone acetylation was observed on H3K9 and H3K27 in smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) in advanced atherosclerotic lesions compared to healthy
vessels (P=.002 and .034). H3K9 acetylation in SMCs and macrophages was
associated with plaque severity of atherosclerosis (P=.048 and <.001). Expression
of GCN5L and MYST1 also correlated with the severity of atherosclerosis (P<.001).
Methylation of H3K9 and H3K27 was significantly reduced in atherosclerotic
plaques in SMCs and inflammatory cells (P<.001 and .026). Methylation on H3K4 was
significantly associated with the severity of atherosclerosis. Expression of
methyltransferase MLL2/4 was increased in advanced stages of atherosclerosis
(P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Histone acetylation and methylation seem to play a decisive role in 
atherosclerosis, showing significant differences between healthy vessels and
vessels at different stages of atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26764138  [PubMed - in process]


81. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jan 14. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37562. [Epub ahead of print]

EZH2 mutation in an adolescent with Weaver syndrome developing acute myeloid
leukemia and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.

Usemann J(1,)(2), Ernst T(3), Schäfer V(3), Lehmberg K(4), Seeger K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (2)University Children's Hospital (UKBB) Basel, Basel,
Switzerland. (3)Abteilung Hämatologie und Internistische Onkologie, Klinik für
Innere Medizin II, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany. (4)Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.

Weaver syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by pre- and postnatal
overgrowth with distinctive craniofacial appearance. Mutations in the enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene were found to cause Weaver syndrome, and have been
associated with hematologic malignancies, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
We present the first report of a patient with Weaver syndrome, who developed AML 
and harbored an EZH2 mutation. The clinical course of the 16-year-old female
adolescent patient was complicated by a secondary hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis. Genomic DNA was isolated from bone marrow cells at AML
diagnosis. Polymerase chain reactions were performed with primers covering all
exons of the EZH2 gene. We found a novel heterozygous EZH2 mutation within exon 5
that caused an amino acid change from proline to leucine at position 132
(p.Pro132Leu) within the catalytic D1 domain. Analysis of a remission sample also
showed this mutation, indicating a germline mutation. It remains to be elucidated
whether EZH2 mutations contribute to disease severity in specific AML cases. ©
2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26762561  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


82. J Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Jan 13. pii: mjw002. [Epub ahead of print]

Yin Yang 1 promotes mTORC2-mediated AKT phosphorylation.

Zhang Q(1), Wan M(2), Shi J(3), Horita DA(4), Miller LD(2), Kute TE(5), Kridel
SJ(2), Kulik G(6), Sui G(7).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, China
Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA Present address:
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. 
(3)College of Life Science, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Wake Forest University 
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. (6)Department of Cancer Biology
and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA Life Sciences Program, College of Science & General 
Studies, Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia. (7)College of Life
Science, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin, China Department of Cancer
Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA gcsui@nefu.edu.cn gsui@wakehealth.edu.

Yin Yang 1 (YY1) regulates both gene expression and protein modifications, and
has shown a proliferative role in cancers. In this study, we demonstrate that YY1
promotes AKT phosphorylation at S473, a marker of AKT activation. YY1 expression 
positively correlated with AKT(S473) phosphorylation in a tissue microarray and
cultured cells of breast cancer, but negatively associated with the distant
metastasis-free survival of 166 breast cancer patients. YY1 promotes AKT
phosphorylation at S473 through direct interaction with AKT, and the AKT-binding 
site is mapped to the residues G201-S226 on YY1. These residues are also involved
in YY1 interaction with Mdm2, Ezh2, and E1A, and thus are designated as the
oncogene protein binding (OPB) domain. YY1-promoted AKT phosphorylation relies on
the OPB domain but is independent of either transcriptional activity of YY1 or
the activity of phosphoinositide-3-kinases. We also determine that YY1-promoted
mTORC2 access to AKT leads to its phosphorylation at S473. Importantly, a peptide
based on the OPB domain blocks YY1 interaction with AKT and reduces AKT
phosphorylation and cell proliferation. Thus, we demonstrate for the first time
that YY1 promotes mTORC2-mediated AKT activation and disrupting YY1-AKT
interaction by OPB domain-based peptide may represent a potential strategy for
cancer therapy.

© The Author (2016). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26762111  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


83. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 9;7(6):6809-23. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6843.

Genome-wide profiling of histone H3 lysine 27 and lysine 4 trimethylation in
multiple myeloma reveals the importance of Polycomb gene targeting and highlights
EZH2 as a potential therapeutic target.

Agarwal P(1), Alzrigat M(1), Párraga AA(1), Enroth S(1), Singh U(2), Ungerstedt
J(3), Österborg A(4), Brown PJ(5), Ma A(6), Jin J(6), Nilsson K(1), Öberg F(1),
Kalushkova A(1), Jernberg-Wiklund H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology,
Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Department of
Biological Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, Gujarat,
India. (3)Department of Medicine, Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine
(HERM), Karolinska Institute Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska University Hospital Solna, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (6)Departments of Structural and Chemical Biology, Oncological Sciences, 
and Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignancy of the antibody-producing plasma cells. MM 
is a highly heterogeneous disease, which has hampered the identification of a
common underlying mechanism for disease establishment as well as the development 
of targeted therapy. Here we present the first genome-wide profiling of histone
H3 lysine 27 and lysine 4 trimethylation in MM patient samples, defining a common
set of active H3K4me3-enriched genes and silent genes marked by H3K27me3
(H3K27me3 alone or bivalent) unique to primary MM cells, when compared to normal 
bone marrow plasma cells. Using this epigenome profile, we found increased
silencing of H3K27me3 targets in MM patients at advanced stages of the disease,
and the expression pattern of H3K27me3-marked genes correlated with poor patient 
survival. We also demonstrated that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 had
anti-myeloma effects in both MM cell lines and CD138+ MM patient cells. In
addition, EZH2 inhibition decreased the global H3K27 methylation and induced
apoptosis. Taken together, these data suggest an important role for the Polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in MM, and highlights the PRC2 component EZH2 as a
potential therapeutic target in MM.

PMID: 26755663  [PubMed - in process]


84. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 12;6:19239. doi: 10.1038/srep19239.

Prognostic Significance of EZH2 Expression in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A
Meta-analysis.

Wang X(1), Zhao H(1), Lv L(1), Bao L(1), Wang X(1), Han S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Wuxi
Second Hospital, Wuxi 214002, Jiangsu Province, China.

Various studies examined the relationship between EZH2 overexpression with the
clinical outcome in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), but yielded
inconsistent results. Electronic databases updated to Dec 2014 were searched to
find relevant studies. A meta-analysis was conducted with eligible studies which 
quantitatively evaluated the relationship between EZH2 overexpression and
survival of patients with NSCLC Survival data were aggregated and quantitatively 
analyzed. We performed a meta-analysis of 10 studies (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1,695 patients) that
evaluated the correlation between EZH2 overexpression and survival in patients
with lung cancer. Combined hazard ratios suggested that EZH2 overexpression was
associated with poor prognosis of overall survival (OS) (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.68, 95% CI:
1.42-1.93) in patients with lung cancer. In the stratified analysis,
significantly risks were found among Asians (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.33, 95% CI: 1.62-1.70), lung 
adenocarcinoma patients (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.75, 95% CI: 1.38-2.52, in stage I NSCLC patients 
(HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.51, 95% CI: 1.23-3.79), but not among Caucasians. EZH2 overexpression
indicates a poor prognosis for patients with NSCLC, this effect appears also
significant when the analysis is restricted in Asian population, lung AC and
stage I patients, but not among Caucasians.

PMCID: PMC4709684
PMID: 26754405  [PubMed - in process]


85. Mol Cell. 2016 Jan 7;61(1):68-83. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.12.008. Epub 2015
Dec 31.

MDM2 Associates with Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 and Enhances Stemness-Promoting
Chromatin Modifications Independent of p53.

Wienken M(1), Dickmanns A(1), Nemajerova A(2), Kramer D(1), Najafova Z(3), Weiss 
M(1), Karpiuk O(1), Kassem M(4), Zhang Y(5), Lozano G(6), Johnsen SA(3), Moll
UM(7), Zhang X(8), Dobbelstein M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences
(GZMB), University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY 11794, USA. (3)Department of General, Visceral, and Pediatric Surgery, 
University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany. (4)Molecular
Endocrinology and Stem Cell Research Unit (KMEB), University Hospital of Odense
and University of Southern Denmark, Odense 5000, Denmark. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, the University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA. (6)Department of
Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (7)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular
Biosciences (GZMB), University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37077,
Germany; Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA. (8)Institute of Molecular Oncology, Göttingen Center 
for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen 
37077, Germany. Electronic address: xzhang1@gwdg.de. (9)Institute of Molecular
Oncology, Göttingen Center for Molecular Biosciences (GZMB), University Medical
Center Göttingen, Göttingen 37077, Germany. Electronic address: mdobbel@gwdg.de.

The MDM2 oncoprotein ubiquitinates and antagonizes p53 but may also carry out
p53-independent functions. Here we report that MDM2 is required for the efficient
generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from murine embryonic
fibroblasts, in the absence of p53. Similarly, MDM2 depletion in the context of
p53 deficiency also promoted the differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells 
and diminished clonogenic survival of cancer cells. Most of the MDM2-controlled
genes also responded to the inactivation of the Polycomb Repressor Complex 2
(PRC2) and its catalytic component EZH2. MDM2 physically associated with EZH2 on 
chromatin, enhancing the trimethylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 and the
ubiquitination of histone 2A at lysine 119 (H2AK119) at its target genes.
Removing MDM2 simultaneously with the H2AK119 E3 ligase Ring1B/RNF2 further
induced these genes and synthetically arrested cell proliferation. In conclusion,
MDM2 supports the Polycomb-mediated repression of lineage-specific genes,
independent of p53.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26748827  [PubMed - in process]


86. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2016 Apr;33(2):117-128. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Analysis of EZH2: micro-RNA network in low and high grade astrocytic tumors.

Sharma V(1), Purkait S(1), Takkar S(2), Malgulwar PB(1), Kumar A(1), Pathak P(1),
Suri V(1), Sharma MC(1), Suri A(3), Kale SS(3), Kulshreshtha R(4), Sarkar C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi, 110029, India. (2)Department of Biochemical Engineering and
Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi,
110016, India. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, 110029, India. (4)Department of Biochemical Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, Hauz Khas, New Delhi,
110016, India. ritu@dbeb.iitd.ac.in. (5)Department of Pathology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, 110029, India.
sarkar.chitra@gmail.com.

Enhancer of Zeste homologue2 (EZH2) is an epigenetic regulator that functions as 
oncogene in astrocytic tumors, however, EZH2 regulation remains little studied.
In this study, we measured EZH2 levels in low (Gr-II,DA) and high grade
(Gr-IV,GBM) astrocytic tumors and found significant increased EZH2 transcript
level with grade(median DA-8.5, GBM-28.9).However, a different trend was
reflected in protein levels, with GBMs showing high EZH2 LI(median-26.5) compared
to DA (median 0.3). This difference in correlation of EZH2 protein and RNA levels
suggested post-transcriptional regulation of EZH2, likely mediated by miRNAs. We 
selected eleven miRNAs that strongly predicted to target EZH2 and measured their 
expression. Three miRNAs (miR-26a-5p,miR27a-3p and miR-498) showed significant
correlation with EZH2 protein, suggesting them as regulators of EZH2, however
miR-26a-5p levels decreased with grade. ChIP analyses revealed H3K27me3
modifications in miR-26a promoter suggesting feedback loop between EZH2 and
miR26a. We further measured six downstream miRNA targets of EZH2 and found
significant downregulation of four (miR-181a/b and 200b/c) in GBM. Interestingly,
EZH2 associated miRNAs were predicted to target 25 genes in glioma-pathway,
suggesting their role in tumor formation or progression. Collectively, our work
suggests EZH2 and its miRNA interactors may serve as promising biomarkers for
progression of astrocytic tumors and may offer novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 26746204  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


87. Mod Pathol. 2016 Mar;29(3):240-8. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.154. Epub 2016 Jan 
8.

Next generation sequencing of Cytokeratin 20-negative Merkel cell carcinoma
reveals ultraviolet-signature mutations and recurrent TP53 and RB1 inactivation.

Harms PW(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Collie AM(5), Hovelson DH(1,)(3), Cani AK(1,)(3),
Verhaegen ME(2), Patel RM(1,)(2), Fullen DR(1,)(2), Omata K(1,)(3), Dlugosz
AA(2,)(6), Tomlins SA(1,)(3,)(7), Billings SD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA. (3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of
Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (4)Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (5)Department of
Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (6)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (7)Department 
of Urology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Merkel cell carcinoma is a rare but highly aggressive cutaneous neuroendocrine
carcinoma. Cytokeratin 20 (CK20) is expressed in ~95% of Merkel cell carcinomas
and is useful for distinction from morphologically similar entities including
metastatic small-cell lung carcinoma. Lack of CK20 expression may make diagnosis 
of Merkel cell carcinoma more challenging, and has unknown biological
significance. Approximately 80% of CK20-positive Merkel cell carcinomas are
associated with the oncogenic Merkel cell polyomavirus. Merkel cell carcinomas
lacking Merkel cell polyomavirus display distinct genetic changes from Merkel
cell polyomavirus-positive Merkel cell carcinoma, including RB1 inactivating
mutations. Unlike CK20-positive Merkel cell carcinoma, the majority of
CK20-negative Merkel cell carcinomas are Merkel cell polyomavirus-negative,
suggesting CK20-negative Merkel cell carcinomas predominantly arise through
virus-independent pathway(s) and may harbor additional genetic differences from
conventional Merkel cell carcinoma. Hence, we analyzed 15 CK20-negative Merkel
cell carcinoma tumors (10 Merkel cell polyomavirus-negative, four Merkel cell
polyomavirus-positive, and one undetermined) using the Ion Ampliseq Comprehensive
Cancer Panel, which assesses copy number alterations and mutations in 409
cancer-relevant genes. Twelve tumors displayed prioritized high-level chromosomal
gains or losses (average 1.9 per tumor). Non-synonymous high-confidence somatic
mutations were detected in 14 tumors (average 11.9 per tumor). Assessing all
somatic coding mutations, an ultraviolet-signature mutational profile was
present, and more prevalent in Merkel cell polyomavirus-negative tumors.
Recurrent deleterious tumor suppressor mutations affected TP53 (9/15, 60%), RB1
(3/15, 20%), and BAP1 (2/15, 13%). Oncogenic activating mutations included PIK3CA
(3/15, 20%), AKT1 (1/15, 7%) and EZH2 (1/15, 7%). In conclusion, CK20-negative
Merkel cell carcinoma display overlapping genetic changes with CK20-positive
Merkel cell carcinoma, including RB1 mutations restricted to Merkel cell
polyomavirus-negative tumors. However, some CK20-negative Merkel cell carcinomas 
harbor mutations not previously described in Merkel cell carcinoma. Hence,
CK20-negative Merkel cell carcinomas harbor diverse oncogenic drivers which may
represent therapeutic targets in individual tumors.

PMCID: PMC4769666 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26743471  [PubMed - in process]


88. Chin J Cancer. 2016 Jan 6;35(1):3. doi: 10.1186/s40880-015-0059-x.

Differentiation therapy: a promising strategy for cancer treatment.

Yan M(1,)(2), Liu Q(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 510060,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China. yanmin@sysucc.org.cn. (2)Institute of Cancer
Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University, 116044, Dalian, Liaoning,
P.R. China. yanmin@sysucc.org.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, 510060, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P.R. China.
liuq9@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (4)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian
Medical University, 116044, Dalian, Liaoning, P.R. China. liuq9@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Poor differentiation is an important hallmark of cancer cells, and
differentiation therapy holds great promise for cancer treatment. The restoration
of IkB kinase a (IKKa) leads to the differentiation of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
cells with reduced tumorigenicity. The findings by Yan et al. validate the
polycomb protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) as a target for
intervention.

PMCID: PMC4704415
PMID: 26739838  [PubMed - in process]


89. Autophagy. 2015 Nov;11(12):2309-22. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1117734.

Epigenetic regulation of autophagy by the methyltransferase EZH2 through an
MTOR-dependent pathway.

Wei FZ(1), Cao Z(1), Wang X(1), Wang H(1), Cai MY(2), Li T(3), Hattori N(4), Wang
D(1), Du Y(1), Song B(1), Cao LL(1), Shen C(1), Wang L(1), Wang H(1), Yang Y(1), 
Xie D(2), Wang F(5), Ushijima T(4), Zhao Y(1), Zhu WG(1,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education); State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs; Beijing Key
Laboratory of Protein Posttranslational Modifications and Cell Function;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; Peking University Health
Science Center ; Beijing , China. (2)b State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South 
China; Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center ; Guangzhou , China. (3)c Department 
of Biomedical Informatics ; School of Basic Medical Sciences; Peking University
Health Science Center ; Beijing , China. (4)d Division of Epigenomics; National
Cancer Center Research Institute ; Tokyo , Japan. (5)e Department of Radiation
Medicine; School of Basic Medical Sciences ; Peking University ; Beijing ,
People's Republic of China. (6)f Peking University-Tsinghua University Center for
Life Sciences ; Beijing , China. (7)g School of Medicine; Shenzhen University ;
Shenzhen , China.

Macroautophagy is an evolutionarily conserved cellular process involved in the
clearance of proteins and organelles. Although the autophagy regulation machinery
has been widely studied, the key epigenetic control of autophagy process still
remains unknown. Here we report that the methyltransferase EZH2 (enhancer of
zeste 2 polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit) epigenetically represses several
negative regulators of the MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin
[serine/threonine kinase]) pathway, such as TSC2, RHOA, DEPTOR, FKBP11, RGS16 and
GPI. EZH2 was recruited to these genes promoters via MTA2 (metastasis associated 
1 family, member 2), a component of the nucleosome remodeling and histone
deacetylase (NuRD) complex. MTA2 was identified as a new chromatin binding
protein whose association with chromatin facilitated the subsequent recruitment
of EZH2 to silenced targeted genes, especially TSC2. Downregulation of TSC2
(tuberous sclerosis 2) by EZH2 elicited MTOR activation, which in turn modulated 
subsequent MTOR pathway-related events, including inhibition of autophagy. In
human colorectal carcinoma (CRC) tissues, the expression of MTA2 and EZH2
correlated negatively with expression of TSC2, which reveals a novel link among
epigenetic regulation, the MTOR pathway, autophagy induction, and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 26735435  [PubMed - in process]


90. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 26;291(9):4523-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.677930. Epub 2016 
Jan 5.

Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) Negatively Regulates Thermogenic Program in Brown
Adipocytes via Coordinated Regulation of Histone H3 Lysine 27 (H3K27)
Deacetylation and Methylation.

Li F(1), Wu R(1), Cui X(1), Zha L(1), Yu L(2), Shi H(3), Xue B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Obesity Reversal, Department of Biology, Georgia State
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303 and. (2)the Department of Animal and Avian
Science, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742. (3)From the Center
for Obesity Reversal, Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30303 and hshi3@gsu.edu. (4)From the Center for Obesity Reversal,
Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303 and
bxue@gsu.edu.

Inhibiting class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) increases energy expenditure,
reduces adiposity, and improves insulin sensitivity in obese mice. However, the
precise mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that HDAC1 is a
negative regulator of the brown adipocyte thermogenic program. The Hdac1 level is
lower in mouse brown fat (BAT) than white fat, is suppressed in mouse BAT during 
cold exposure or ß3-adrenergic stimulation, and is down-regulated during brown
adipocyte differentiation. Remarkably, overexpressing Hdac1 profoundly blocks,
whereas deleting Hdac1 significantly enhances, ß-adrenergic activation-induced
BAT-specific gene expression in brown adipocytes. ß-Adrenergic activation in
brown adipocytes results in a dissociation of HDAC1 from promoters of
BAT-specific genes, including uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a (Pgc1a), leading to increased
acetylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), an epigenetic mark of gene
activation. This is followed by dissociation of the polycomb repressive
complexes, including the H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue
(EZH2), suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12), and ring finger protein 2 (RNF2) from
(and concomitant recruitment of H3K27 demethylase ubiquitously transcribed
tetratricopeptide repeat on chromosome X (UTX) to) Ucp1 and Pgc1a promoters,
leading to decreased H3K27 trimethylation, a histone transcriptional repression
mark. Thus, HDAC1 negatively regulates the brown adipocyte thermogenic program,
and inhibiting Hdac1 promotes BAT-specific gene expression through a coordinated 
control of increased acetylation and decreased methylation of H3K27, thereby
switching the transcriptional repressive state to the active state at the
promoters of Ucp1 and Pgc1a. Targeting HDAC1 may be beneficial in prevention and 
treatment of obesity by enhancing BAT thermogenesis.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26733201  [PubMed - in process]


91. J Hematol Oncol. 2016 Jan 6;9(1):1. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0229-y.

MicroRNA-26a suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human hepatocellular
carcinoma by repressing enhancer of zeste homolog 2.

Ma DN(1,)(2), Chai ZT(3), Zhu XD(1,)(2), Zhang N(4), Zhan DH(1,)(2), Ye
BG(1,)(2), Wang CH(1,)(2), Qin CD(1,)(2), Zhao YM(4), Zhu WP(1,)(2), Cao
MQ(1,)(2), Gao DM(1,)(2), Sun HC(1,)(2), Tang ZY(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200032, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan
University), Ministry of Education, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Liver Surgery,
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Cancer Hospital, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (5)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200032, China. zytang88@163.com. (6)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion (Fudan University), Ministry of Education,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. zytang88@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Our previous study reported that microRNA-26a (miR-26a) inhibited
tumor progression by inhibiting tumor angiogenesis and intratumoral macrophage
infiltration in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The direct roles of miR-26a on
tumor cell invasion remain poorly understood. In this study, we aim to explore
the mechanism of miR-26a in modulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
HCC.
METHODS: In vitro cell morphology and cell migration were compared between the
hepatoma cell lines HCCLM3 and HepG2, which were established in the previous
study. Overexpression and down-regulation of miR-26a were induced in these cell
lines, and Western blot and immunofluorescence assays were used to detect the
expression of EMT markers. Xenograft nude mouse models were used to observe tumor
growth and pulmonary metastasis. Immunohistochemical assays were conducted to
study the relationships between miR-26a expression and enhancer of zeste homolog 
2 (EZH2) and E-cadherin expression in human HCC samples.
RESULTS: Down-regulation of miR-26a in HCCLM3 and HepG2 cells resulted in an
EMT-like cell morphology and high motility in vitro and increased in tumor growth
and pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Through down-regulation of EZH2 expression and 
up-regulation of E-cadherin expression, miR-26a inhibited the EMT process in
vitro and in vivo. Luciferase reporter assay showed that miR-26a directly
interacted with EZH2 messenger RNA (mRNA). Furthermore, the expression of miR-26a
was positively correlated with E-cadherin expression and inversely correlated
with EZH2 expression in human HCC tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-26a inhibited the EMT process in HCC by down-regulating EZH2
expression.

PMCID: PMC4702409
PMID: 26733151  [PubMed - in process]


92. Br J Haematol. 2016 Apr;173(1):49-58. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13921. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

Concurrent detection of targeted copy number variants and mutations using a
myeloid malignancy next generation sequencing panel allows comprehensive genetic 
analysis using a single testing strategy.

Shen W(1), Szankasi P(1), Sederberg M(1), Schumacher J(1), Frizzell KA(1), Gee
EP(1), Patel JL(2), South ST(2), Xu X(2), Kelley TW(2).

Author information: 
(1)ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Currently, comprehensive genetic testing of myeloid malignancies requires
multiple testing strategies with high costs. Somatic mutations can be detected by
next generation sequencing (NGS) but copy number variants (CNVs) require
cytogenetic methods including karyotyping, fluorescence in situ hybidization and 
microarray. Here, we evaluated a new method for CNV detection using read depth
data derived from a targeted NGS mutation panel. In a cohort of 270 samples, we
detected pathogenic mutations in 208 samples and targeted CNVs in 68 cases. The
most frequent CNVs were 7q deletion including LUC7L2 and EZH2, TP53 deletion,
ETV6 deletion, gain of RAD21 on 8q, and 5q deletion, including NSD1 and NPM1. We 
were also able to detect exon-level duplications, including so-called KMT2A (MLL)
partial tandem duplication, in 9 cases. In the 63 cases that were negative for
mutations, targeted CNVs were observed in 4 cases. Targeted CNV detection by NGS 
had very high concordance with single nucleotide polymorphism microarray, the
current gold standard. We found that ETV6 deletion was strongly associated with
TP53 alterations and 7q deletion was associated with mutations in TP53, KRAS and 
IDH1. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates the feasibility of using the same 
NGS data to simultaneously detect both somatic mutations and targeted CNVs.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26728869  [PubMed - in process]


93. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Dec;56(12):2419-25. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.2419.

[Identification of novel pathogenic gene mutations in pediatric acute myeloid
leukemia by whole-exome resequencing].

[Article in Japanese]

Shiba N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine.

A new class of gene mutations, identified in the pathogenesis of adult acute
myeloid leukemia (AML), includes DNMT3A, IDH1/2, TET2 and EZH2. However, these
mutations are rare in pediatric AML cases, indicating that pathogeneses differ
between adult and pediatric forms of AML. Meanwhile, the recent development of
massively parallel sequencing technologies has provided a new opportunity to
discover genetic changes across entire genomes or proteincoding sequences. In
order to reveal a complete registry of gene mutations, we performed whole exome
resequencing of paired tumor-normal specimens from 19 pediatric AML cases using
Illumina HiSeq 2000. In total, 80 somatic mutations or 4.2 mutations per sample
were identified. Many of the recurrent mutations identified in this study
involved previously reported targets in AML, such as FLT3, CEBPA, KIT, CBL, NRAS,
WT1 and EZH2. On the other hand, several genes were newly identified in the
current study, including BCORL1 and major cohesin components such as SMC3 and
RAD21. Whole exome resequencing revealed a complex array of gene mutations in
pediatric AML genomes. Our results indicate that a subset of pediatric AML
represents a discrete entity that could be discriminated from its adult
counterpart, in terms of the spectrum of gene mutations.

PMID: 26725349  [PubMed - in process]


94. Drug Discov Today Technol. 2015 Nov;18:62-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ddtec.2015.10.010.
Epub 2015 Nov 21.

Challenges in profiling and lead optimization of drug discovery for
methyltransferases.

Horiuchi KY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reaction Biology Corporation, One Great Valley Parkway, Suite 2, Malvern, PA
19355, USA. Electronic address: kurumi.horiuchi@reactionbiology.com.

The importance of epigenetics in the initiation and progression of disease has
attracted many investigators to incorporate this novel and exciting field in drug
development. Protein methyltransferases are one of the target classes which have 
gained attention as potential therapeutic targets after promising results of
inhibitors for EZH2 and DOT1L in clinical trials. There are many technologies
developed in order to find small molecule inhibitors for protein
methyltransferases. However, in contrast to high throughput screening, profiling 
against different methyltransferases is challenging since each enzyme has a
different substrate preference so that it is hard to profile in one assay format.
Here, different technologies for methyltransferase assays will be overviewed, and
the advantages and disadvantages of each will be discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26723894  [PubMed - in process]


95. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):1083-90. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4467. Epub 2015 Dec 1.

Reciprocal negative feedback loop between EZH2 and miR-101-1 contributes to
miR-101 deregulation in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Huang D(1), Wang X(1), Zhuang C(1), Shi W(1), Liu M(1), Tu Q(1), Zhang D(1), Hu
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China.

Although the tumor suppressive role of miR-101 is well documented in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), how the expression of miR-101 itself is regulated
remains elusive. In the present study, we demonstrated that the miR-101 precursor
pre-miR-101-1 could be regulated by an important epigenetic regulator, the
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). Reporter gene assays revealed that ectopic
expression of EZH2 inhibited the transcriptional activities of miR-101-1
promoter. Subsequent analyses revealed that miR-101-1 directly represses the
expression of EZH2, and miR-101-1 and EZH2 form a reciprocal negative feedback
loop as indicated by the fact that ectopic mature miR-101 could induce endogenous
pre-miR-101-1 expression. This mature miR-101-induced pre-miR-101 expression was 
specific to pre-miR-101-1 and depended on EZH2 activities. Moreover, our results 
also demonstrated that similar antitumor effects can be achieved either by
ectopic miR-101 or EZH2 silencing in HCC cells. These findings show that elevated
EZH2 contributes to miR-101 deregulation in HCC and highlight the coordinated
role of miR-101 and EZH2 in hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 26718325  [PubMed - in process]


96. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Dec 21;21(47):13268-76. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v21.i47.13268.

Potential roles of EZH2, Bmi-1 and miR-203 in cell proliferation and invasion in 
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line Hep3B.

Yang F(1), Lv LZ(1), Cai QC(1), Jiang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fang Yang, Li-Zhi Lv, Qiu-Cheng Cai, Yi Jiang, Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Fuzong Clinical Medical College of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou
350025, Fujian Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the potential roles of enhancer of zeste homolog2 (EZH2),
Bmi-1 and miR-203 in cell proliferation and invasion in hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) cell line Hep3B.
METHODS: A total of 73 patients who underwent surgical resection at Fuzong
Clinical Medical College of Fujian Medical University were enrolled in this
study. Hep3B cells were cultivated in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum at 37 °C. Vectors that containing cDNA of the EZH2 gene or
miR-203 targeted shRNA plasmid were constructed, and then transfected into Hep3B 
cells. The mRNA expression of miR-203, EZH2, and Bmi-1 was analyzed using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis, and the protein levels
of EZH2 and Bmi-1 were detected by Western blot analysis. Effect of EZH2 or
miR-203 on cell proliferation was observed by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium assay,
and cell apoptosis was assessed using flow cytometry. Besides, effect of EZH2 or 
miR-203 on tumor cell invasion was detected using Transwell assay.
RESULTS: The mRNA levels of EZH2 and Bmi-1 in HCC tissues and in Hep3B cells were
significantly higher compared with those in normal samples (P < 0.01), while
miR-203 level was significantly lower in HCC tissues (P < 0.01). Hep3B cells
transfected with EZH2-shRNA or miR-203-shRNA showed lower expression levels of
EZH2 and Bmi-1 (P < 0.05). Compared with controls, Hep3B cells transfected with
EZH2-shRNA had relative slow cell proliferation, indicating that low expression
of EZH2 and Bmi-1 and overexpression of miR-203 could inhibit Hep3B cell
proliferation (P < 0.05). The average apoptosis rate of Hep3B cells transfected
with EZH2-shRNA vector was about 18.631%, while that of Hep3B cells transfected
with shRNA vector was about 5.33%, suggesting that EZH2 was down-regulated by
transfecting with EZH2-shRNA, and the down-regulated EZH2 contributed to the cell
apoptosis. Low expression of EZH2 and Bmi-1 and overexpression of miR-203 could
reduce Hep3B cell invasion (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that EZH2 and Bmi-1 are up-regulated while miR-203
is down-regulated in Hep3B cells. MiR-203 may contribute to the metastasis and
enhance apoptosis of HCC cells by regulating EZH2 and Bmi-1. Our study may
provide a theoretical basis for metastasis of HCC and targeted therapy of HCC.

PMCID: PMC4679758
PMID: 26715809  [PubMed - in process]


97. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 29. [Epub ahead of print]

LncRNAs: key players and novel insights into cervical cancer.

Peng L(1,)(2,)(3), Yuan X(4,)(5), Jiang B(1,)(2,)(3), Tang Z(6), Li
GC(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, China. 
(2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, National Health and Family Planning
Commission, Changsha, 410078, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Changsha, 410078, China. (4)Department of
Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
410008, China. (5)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University;
Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, Changsha, 410078, China. (6)Department 
of Medical Record Management and Statistics, the First Affiliated Hospital,
University of South China, Hengyang, 421002, China. (7)Cancer Research Institute,
Central South University, Changsha, 410078, China. libsun@163.com. (8)Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, National Health and Family Planning Commission,
Changsha, 410078, China. libsun@163.com. (9)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and 
Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Changsha, 410078, China. libsun@163.com.

Cervical cancer contributed the second highest number of deaths in female
cancers, exceeded only by breast cancer, carrying high risks of morbidity and
mortality. There was a great need and urgency in searching novel treatment
targets and prognosis biomarkers to improve the survival rate of cervical cancer 
patients. Many long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) were emerging as pivotal regulators
in various biological processes and took vitally an effect on the oncogenesis and
progression of cervical cancer. In this review, we summarized the origin and
overview function of lncRNAs; highlighted the roles of lncRNAs in cervical cancer
in terms of prognosis and tumor progression, invasion and metastasis, apoptosis, 
and radio-resistance; and outlined the molecular mechanisms of lncRNAs in
cervical cancer from the aspects of the interaction of lncRNAs with
proteins/mRNAs (especially in HPV protein) and miRNAs, as well as RNA
N-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation of lncRNAs. Meanwhile, the application of
lncRNAs as biomarkers in cervical cancer prognosis and predictors for metastasis 
was also discussed. An overview of these researches will be valuable for
broadening horizons into mechanisms, selection of meritorious biomarkers for
diagnosis as well as prognosis, and future targeted therapy of cervical cancer.

PMID: 26715267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


98. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Dec 23. pii: ASN.2015040457. [Epub ahead of print]

Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Inhibition Attenuates Renal Fibrosis by Maintaining
Smad7 and Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog Expression.

Zhou X(1), Zang X(2), Ponnusamy M(3), Masucci MV(3), Tolbert E(3), Gong R(3),
Zhao TC(4), Liu N(5), Bayliss G(3), Dworkin LD(3), Zhuang S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island; Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated 
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China; (2)Department of Medicine, 
Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence,
Rhode Island; Department of Nephrology, Shanghai Songjiang District Central
Hospital, Shanghai, China; (3)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital and
Alpert Medical School, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island; (4)Department 
of Surgery, Boston University Medical School, Roger Williams Medical Center,
Boston University, Providence, Rhode Island; and. (5)Department of Nephrology,
Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital and Alpert Medical School, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island; Department of Nephrology, Shanghai East
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China
szhuang@lifespan.org.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a methyltransferase that induces histone H3
lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and functions as an oncogenic factor in many 
cancer types. However, the role of EZH2 in renal fibrogenesis remains unexplored.
In this study, we found high expression of EZH2 and H3K27me3 in cultured renal
fibroblasts and fibrotic kidneys from mice with unilateral ureteral obstruction
and humans with CKD. Pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 with 3-deazaneplanocin A
(3-DZNeP) or GSK126 or siRNA-mediated silencing of EZH2 inhibited serum- and
TGFß1-induced activation of renal interstitial fibroblasts in vitro, and 3-DZNeP 
administration abrogated deposition of extracellular matrix proteins and
expression of a-smooth muscle actin in the obstructed kidney. Injury to the
kidney enhanced Smad7 degradation, Smad3 phosphorylation, and TGFß receptor 1
expression, and 3-DZNeP administration prevented these effects. 3-DZNeP also
suppressed phosphorylation of the renal EGF and PDGFß receptors and downstream
signaling molecules signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 after injury. Moreover, EZH2 inhibition
increased the expression of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a protein
previously associated with dephosphorylation of tyrosine kinase receptors in the 
injured kidney and serum-stimulated renal interstitial fibroblasts. Finally,
blocking PTEN with SF1670 largely diminished the inhibitory effect of 3-DZNeP on 
renal myofibroblast activation. These results uncovered the important role of
EZH2 in mediating the development of renal fibrosis by downregulating expression 
of Smad7 and PTEN, thus activating profibrotic signaling pathways. Targeted
inhibition of EZH2, therefore, could be a novel therapy for treating CKD.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26701983  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


99. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):5007-22. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6652.

miR-101 reverses hypomethylation of the PRDM16 promoter to disrupt mitochondrial 
function in astrocytoma cells.

Lei Q(1,)(2), Liu X(3), Fu H(2), Sun Y(1,)(2), Wang L(4), Xu G(2), Wang W(2), Yu 
Z(2), Liu C(2), Li P(2), Feng J(2), Li G(1,)(2), Wu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital and The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya
Medical School, Central South University, Changsha 410013, Hunan, China.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Science, Central South
University, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of
Education, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Changsha 410078,
Hunan, China. (3)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, Guangdong, China. (4)Department of 
Oncology, The First Hospital of Chenzhou City, 423000, Hunan, China.

Our previous report identified PR domain containing 16 (PRDM16), a member of the 
PR-domain gene family, as a new methylation associated gene in astrocytoma cells.
This previous study also reported that miR-101 is a tumor suppressor in glioma.
The present study confirms that PRDM16 is a hypomethylated gene that can be
overexpressed in astrocytoma patients and demonstrates that the hypomethylation
status of the PRDM16 promoter can predict poor prognoses for astrocytoma
patients. The results reported herein show that PRDM16 was inhibited by miR-101
directly and also through epigenetic regulation. PRDM16 was confirmed as a new
target of miR-101 and shown to be directly inhibited by miR-101. miR-101 also
decreased the expression of PRDM16 by altering the methylation status of the
PRDM16 promoter. miR-101 was associated with a decrease in the
methylation-related histones H3K4me2 and H3K27me3 and an increase in H3K9me3 and 
H4K20me3 on the PRDM16 promoter. In addition, EZH2, EED and DNMT3A were
identified as direct targets of miR-101, and miR-101 suppressed PRDM16 expression
by targeting DNMT3A which decreases histone H3K27me3 and H3K4me2 at the PRDM16
core promoter. The results reported here demonstrate that miR-101 disrupted
cellular mitochondrial function and induced cellular apoptosis via the
mitochondrial pathway; for example, MMP and ATP levels decreased, while there was
an increase in ADP/ATP ratios and ROS levels, levels of cleaved Caspase-9 and
cleaved-PARP, the Bax/Bcl-2 ratios, and Smac release from the mitochondria to the
cytoplasm. Knockdown of PRDM16 reversed the anti-apoptotic effect of miR-101
inhibition. In summary, miR-101 reversed the hypomethylation of the PRDM16
promoter which suppressed the expression of PRDM16, disrupted cellular
mitochondrial function, and induced cellular apoptosis.

PMID: 26701852  [PubMed - in process]


100. Epigenomics. 2016 Jan;8(1):77-84. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.96. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Epigenetic dysregulation in follicular lymphoma.

Araf S(1), Okosun J(1), Koniali L(1), Fitzgibbon J(1), Heward J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of 
London, John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London, EC1M 6BQ, UK.

The adoption of next-generation sequencing technologies has led to a remarkable
shift in our understanding of the genetic landscape of follicular lymphoma. While
the disease has been synonymous with the t(14;18), the prevalence of alterations 
in genes that regulate the epigenome has been established as a pivotal hallmark
of these lymphomas. Giant strides are being made in unraveling the biological
consequences of these alterations in tumorigenesis opening up new opportunities
for directed therapies.

PMID: 26698557  [PubMed - in process]


101. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2016 Feb;98:375-89. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 Nov 28.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms: Current molecular biology and genetics.

Saeidi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman,
Iran. Electronic address: kolsoum.saeidi@gmail.com.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal disorders characterized by
increased production of mature blood cells. Philadelphia chromosome-negative MPNs
(Ph-MPNs) consist of polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and 
primary myelofibrosis (PMF). A number of stem cell derived mutations have been
identified in the past 10 years. These findings showed that JAK2V617F, as a
diagnostic marker involving JAK2 exon 14 with a high frequency, is the best
molecular characterization of Ph-MPNs. Somatic mutations in an endoplasmic
reticulum chaperone, named calreticulin (CALR), is the second most common
mutation in patients with ET and PMF after JAK2 V617F mutation. Discovery of CALR
mutations led to the increased molecular diagnostic of ET and PMF up to 90%. It
has been shown that JAK2V617F is not the unique event in disease pathogenesis.
Some other genes' location such as TET oncogene family member 2 (TET2),
additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1), casitas B-lineage lymphoma proto-oncogene
(CBL), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1/2 (IDH1/IDH2), IKAROS family zinc finger 1
(IKZF1), DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS), enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), tumor protein p53 (TP53),
runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and high mobility group AT-hook 2
(HMGA2) have also identified to be involved in MPNs phenotypes. Here, current
molecular biology and genetic mechanisms involved in MNPs with a focus on the
aforementioned factors is presented.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26697989  [PubMed - in process]


102. Hum Mutat. 2016 Mar;37(3):301-7. doi: 10.1002/humu.22946. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Weaver Syndrome-Associated EZH2 Protein Variants Show Impaired Histone
Methyltransferase Function In Vitro.

Cohen AS(1,)(2), Yap DB(3,)(4), Lewis ME(1,)(2,)(5), Chijiwa C(1,)(5),
Ramos-Arroyo MA(6), Tkachenko N(7), Milano V(8), Fradin M(9), McKinnon ML(1),
Townsend KN(1,)(2), Xu J(1,)(2), Van Allen MI(1,)(2,)(5), Ross CJ(1,)(10), Dobyns
WB(11,)(12,)(13), Weaver DD(14), Gibson WT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada. (2)Child and Family Research Institute,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 4H4, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
V6T 2B5, Canada. (4)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer
Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 1L3, Canada. (5)Children's and 
Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6H 3N1, 
Canada. (6)Department of Medical Genetics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra,
IdiSNA, Navarra Institute for Health Research, Pamplona, 31008, Spain. (7)Medical
Genetics Service, Medical Genetics Center Dr. Jacinto Magalhães, Porto Hospital
Center, EPE, Porto, 4099-001, Portugal. (8)Instituto di Genetica Medica,
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Policlinico Universitario Agostino Gemelli,
Roma, 00168, Italy. (9)Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence
Anomalies du Développement, CHU Rennes, Rennes, 35203, France. (10)Department of 
Pediatrics, Division of Translation Therapeutics, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6H 3V4, Canada. (11)Center for Integrative Brain
Research, Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, 98101. (12)Department
of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 98195.
(13)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
98105. (14)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, 46202-5251.

Weaver syndrome (WS) is a rare congenital disorder characterized by generalized
overgrowth, macrocephaly, specific facial features, accelerated bone age,
intellectual disability, and susceptibility to cancers. De novo mutations in the 
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) have been shown to cause WS. EZH2 is a histone
methyltransferase that acts as the catalytic agent of the polycomb-repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) to maintain gene repression via methylation of lysine 27 on
histone H3 (H3K27). Functional studies investigating histone methyltransferase
activity of mutant EZH2 from various cancers have been reported, whereas
WS-associated mutations remain poorly characterized. To investigate the role of
EZH2 in WS, we performed functional studies using artificially assembled PRC2
complexes containing mutagenized human EZH2 that reflected the codon changes
predicted from patients with WS. We found that WS-associated amino acid
alterations reduce the histone methyltransferase function of EZH2 in this in
vitro assay. Our results support the hypothesis that WS is caused by
constitutional mutations in EZH2 that alter the histone methyltransferase
function of PRC2. However, histone methyltransferase activities of different EZH2
variants do not appear to correlate directly with the phenotypic variability
between WS patients and individuals with a common c.553G>C (p.Asp185His)
polymorphism in EZH2.

© 2015 The Authors. **Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26694085  [PubMed - in process]


103. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Dec 23. doi: 10.1002/mc.22448. [Epub ahead of print]

The Ezh2 polycomb group protein drives an aggressive phenotype in melanoma cancer
stem cells and is a target of diet derived sulforaphane.

Fisher ML(1), Adhikary G(1), Grun D(1), Kaetzel DM(1,)(2), Eckert
RL(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum
Cancer, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)Department of Reproductive Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland. (4)Department of Dermatology, University of Maryland School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Melanoma is a metastatic cancer associated with poor survival. Here, we study a
subpopulation of melanoma cancer cells displaying melanoma cancer stem cell (MCS 
cells) properties including elevated expression of stem cell markers, increased
ability to survive as spheroids, and enhanced cell migration and invasion. We
show that the Ezh2 stem cell survival protein is enriched in MCS cells and that
Ezh2 knockdown or treatment with small molecule Ezh2 inhibitors, GSK126 or
EPZ-6438, reduces Ezh2 activity. This reduction is associated with a reduced MCS 
cell spheroid formation, migration, and invasion. Moreover, the diet-derived
cancer prevention agent, sulforaphane (SFN), suppresses MCS cell survival and
this is associated with loss of Ezh2. Forced expression of Ezh2 partially
reverses SFN suppression of MCS cell spheroid formation, migration, and invasion.
A375 melanoma cell-derived MCS cells form rapidly growing tumors in
immune-compromised mice and SFN treatment of these tumors reduces tumor growth
and this is associated with reduced Ezh2 level and H3K27me3 formation, reduced
matrix metalloproteinase expression, increased TIMP3 expression and increased
apoptosis. These studies identify Ezh2 as a MCS cell marker and cancer stem cell 
prevention target, and suggest that SFN acts to reduce melanoma tumor formation
via a mechanism that includes suppression of Ezh2 function. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26693692  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


104. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;5(10):3162-73. eCollection 2015.

The long noncoding RNA LINC01207 promotes proliferation of lung adenocarcinoma.

Wang G(1), Chen H(1), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Nursing, Shandong University Jinan 250012,
China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (LAD) and lung squamous cell cancer (LSCC) are two most
common histological types of lung cancer, while they differ in many aspects.
Recent evidence shows that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play an important role 
in the process of cancer initiation and progression. Thus, characterization of
LAD and LSCC associated lncRNAs may help understand the difference between LAD
and LSCC. Here, we analyzed three sets of RNA-seq data, including LAD RNA-seq
data from TCGA project. We identified a novel lncRNA, long intergenic non-protein
coding RNA 1207 (LINC01207) which was significantly up-regulated in LAD tissues
compared with paired non-tumor tissues (5.78 fold increase, P<0.05), while there 
was no significant differences between LSCC tissues and adjacent non-tumor
tissues. The expression level of LINC01207 was associated with TNM stage of LAD
patients, and higher LINC01207 level indicated advanced TNM stage (P<0.05) and
shorter survival (HR=2.53, P<0.05). By small interfering RNA (siRNA) mediated
knockdown of LINC01207, we determined the biological function of LINC01207 in
A549 cell line. After knockdown of LINC01207, cell proliferation ability was
inhibited. Further analysis showed that after silence of LINC01207, the
percentage of apoptotic cells significantly increased. By RNA immunoprecipitation
and Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that LINC01207 could
bind with EZH2 and mediated trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 at the promoter
region of Bad, an important pro-apoptotic gene. Finally, we developed xenograft
tumor models in nude mice and xenograft tumors derived from A549 cells
transfected with siRNA-LINC01207 had significantly lower tumor weight and smaller
tumor volume. In summary, the novel lncRNA, LINC01207 is specifically
up-regulated in LAD but not in LSCC; and LINC01207 could promote LAD cell growth 
both in vivo and in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4656738
PMID: 26693067  [PubMed]


105. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;5(10):2969-79. eCollection 2015.

Genetic alteration and misexpression of Polycomb group genes in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Gao SB(1), Sun SL(2), Zheng QL(3), Zhang L(1), Zhu Y(4), Jin GH(1), Xue LX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College Xiamen 361102, P.R.
China ; Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and
Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Xiamen University Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South
Road, Xiamen 361102, P.R. China. (2)Ministry of Health Key Laboratory of
Radiobiology, Jilin University 1163 Xinmin Road, Changchun 130021, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College Xiamen 361102, P.R.
China. (4)Medical Research Center, Department of Radiation Oncology, Peking
University Third Hospital Beijing 100191, P.R. China.

Although the abnormal expression of Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins is closely
associated with carcinogenesis and the clinicopathological features of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the genetic mutation profile of PcG genes has not
been well established. In this study of human HCC specimens, we firstly
discovered a highly conserved mutation site, G553C, in the Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) gene enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). This site also harbors 
a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), rs2302427, which plays an important
antagonistic role in HCC. Kaplan-Meier survival curves showed that the tumor-free
and overall survival of patients with EZH2 G553C were superior to those without
the mutation. The G allele frequencies in patients and healthy subjects were 0.2%
and 0.122%, respectively, with significant differences in distribution. The
individuals carrying the GG and the GC genotypes at rs2302427 showed 3.083-fold
and 1.827-fold higher risks of HCC, respectively, compared with individuals
carrying the wild-type allele. Furthermore, Immunohistochemical staining revealed
that the expression levels of CBX8 (in 53/123 samples) and BMI1 (in 60/130
samples) were markedly increased in human HCC specimens. Importantly, the overall
and tumor-free survival rates were significantly reduced in the group of patients
who simultaneously expressed PRC1 and PRC2. These results argue that a
combination of PRC1 and PRC2 expression has a significant predictive/prognostic
value for HCC patients. Taken together, our results indicate the abnormal
expression and genetic mutation of PcG members are two independent events;
cumulative genetic and epigenetic alterations act synergistically in liver
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4656724
PMID: 26693053  [PubMed]


106. Mol Cell. 2016 Jan 7;61(1):170-80. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.11.003. Epub 2015
Dec 10.

A Multiplexed System for Quantitative Comparisons of Chromatin Landscapes.

van Galen P(1), Viny AD(2), Ram O(1), Ryan RJ(1), Cotton MJ(3), Donohue L(3),
Sievers C(1), Drier Y(1), Liau BB(1), Gillespie SM(3), Carroll KM(4), Cross
MB(4), Levine RL(2), Bernstein BE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114,
USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Cancer
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. (4)Department of Adult
Reconstruction and Joint Replacement, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, NY 
10021, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA 02114, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Broad Institute of 
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Cancer Research,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address:
bernstein.bradley@mgh.harvard.edu.

Genome-wide profiling of histone modifications can provide systematic insight
into the regulatory elements and programs engaged in a given cell type. However, 
conventional chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) does not
capture quantitative information on histone modification levels, requires large
amounts of starting material, and involves tedious processing of each individual 
sample. Here, we address these limitations with a technology that leverages DNA
barcoding to profile chromatin quantitatively and in multiplexed format. We
concurrently map relative levels of multiple histone modifications across
multiple samples, each comprising as few as a thousand cells. We demonstrate the 
technology by monitoring dynamic changes following inhibition of p300, EZH2, or
KDM5, by linking altered epigenetic landscapes to chromatin regulator mutations, 
and by mapping active and repressive marks in purified human hematopoietic stem
cells. Hence, this technology enables quantitative studies of chromatin state
dynamics across rare cell types, genotypes, environmental conditions, and drug
treatments.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4707994 [Available on 2017-01-07]
PMID: 26687680  [PubMed - in process]


107. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 26;7(4):4584-97. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6612.

Prognostic value of high EZH2 expression in patients with different types of
cancer: a systematic review with meta-analysis.

Jiang T(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou F(1), Gao G(1), Ren S(1), Zhou C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Thoracic Cancer
Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200433, P.R. China.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is a potential independent mechanism for
epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes in cancer. We conducted an
electronic search on PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane library to
perform this up-to-date meta-analysis. Fifty-one studies with a total of 9444
patients were included. The prevalence of high EZH2 expression was 0.54 (95% CI: 
0.47-0.61). High EZH2 expression was significantly associated with poorer
prognosis [overall survival: HR 1.54 (95% CI: 1.30-1.78), P < 0.000; disease free
survival: HR 1.35 (95% CI: 1.00-1.71), P < 0.000]. In breast cancer, high EZH2
expression correlated with histological types [OR: 1.53 (95CI: 1.13-2.06); P <
0.006], histological grade [OR: 1.62 (95CI: 1.35-1.95); P < 0.000], estrogen
receptor (ER) negativity [OR: 2.05 (95CI: 1.67-2.52); P < 0.000], progesterone
receptor (PgR) negativity [OR: 1.42 (95CI: 1.03-1.96); P = 0.034], HER-2
positivity [OR: 1.35 (95CI: 1.08-1.69); P = 0.009], and high p53 expression [OR: 
1.66 (95CI: 1.07-2.59); P = 0.024]. These results suggest that high EZH2
expression may be a promising prognostic factor to different cancers. High EZH2
expression tends to correlate with pathological types, histological grade, ER
negativity, PgR negativity, HER-2 positivity and p53 high expression in breast
cancer.

PMID: 26683709  [PubMed - in process]


108. Nat Immunol. 2015 Dec 17;17(1):41-2. doi: 10.1038/ni.3346.

Glycolysis and EZH2 boost T cell weaponry against tumors.

Bantug GR(1), Hess C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

PMID: 26681461  [PubMed - in process]


109. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Jan 8:1-14. [Epub ahead of print]

New concept: cellular senescence in pathophysiology of cholangiocarcinoma.

Sasaki M(1), Nakanuma Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Human Pathology , Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical Sciences , 
Kanzawa , Japan. (2)b Department of Diagnostic Pathology , Shizuoka Cancer Center
, Shizuoka , Japan.

Cholangiocarcinoma, a malignant tumor arising in the hepatobiliary system,
presents with poor prognosis because of difficulty in its early
detection/diagnosis. Recent progress revealed that cellular senescence may be
involved in the pathophysiology of cholangiocarcinoma. Cellular senescence is
defined as permanent growth arrest caused by several cellular injuries, such as
oncogenic mutations and oxidative stress. "Oncogene-induced" and/or
stress-induced senescence may occur in the process of multi-step
cholangiocarcinogenesis, and overexpression of a polycomb group protein EZH2 may 
play a role in the escape from, and/or bypassing of, senescence. Furthermore,
senescent cells may play important roles in tumor development and progression via
the production of senescence-associated secretory phenotypes. Cellular senescence
may be a new target for the prevention, early diagnosis, and therapy of
cholangiocarcinoma in the near future.

PMID: 26680649  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


110. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):675-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1141. Epub
2015 Dec 16.

Modulation of EZH2 Expression by MEK-ERK or PI3K-AKT Signaling in Lung Cancer Is 
Dictated by Different KRAS Oncogene Mutations.

Riquelme E(1), Behrens C(2), Lin HY(3), Simon G(2), Papadimitrakopoulou V(2),
Izzo J(1), Moran C(4), Kalhor N(4), Lee JJ(3), Minna JD(5), Wistuba II(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical 
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer,
Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer, Houston, Texas. (5)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology, The University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
Department of Pharmacology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas. (6)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer, Houston, Texas. Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck
Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. iiwistuba@mdanderson.org.

EZH2 overexpression promotes cancer by increasing histone methylation to silence 
tumor suppressor genes, but how EZH2 levels become elevated in cancer is not
understood. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms by which EZH2
expression is regulated in non-small cell lung carcinoma cells by oncogenic KRAS.
In cells harboring KRAS(G12C) and KRAS(G12D) mutations, EZH2 expression was
modulated by MEK-ERK and PI3K/AKT signaling, respectively. Accordingly, MEK-ERK
depletion decreased EZH2 expression in cells harboring the KRAS(G12C) mutation,
whereas PI3K/AKT depletion decreased EZH2 expression, EZH2 phosphorylation, and
STAT3 activity in KRAS(G12D)-mutant cell lines. Combined inhibition of EZH2 and
MEK-ERK or PI3K/AKT increased the sensitivity of cells with specific KRAS
mutations to MEK-ERK and PI3K/AKT-targeted therapies. Our work defines EZH2 as a 
downstream effector of KRAS signaling and offers a rationale for combining EZH2
inhibitory strategies with MEK-ERK- or PI3K/AKT-targeted therapies to treat lung 
cancer patients, as stratified into distinct treatment groups based on specific
KRAS mutations. Cancer Res; 76(3); 675-85. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4738155 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26676756  [PubMed - in process]


111. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Dec 16;69:1371-83.

[TET proteins and epigenetic modifications in cancers].

[Article in Polish]

Ciesielski P(1), Józwiak P(1), Krzeslak A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Uniwersytet Lódzki, Wydzial Biologii i Ochrony Srodowiska, Katedra
Cytobiochemii, Lódz

Epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation and histone modifications,
are involved in regulation of gene expression, and alterations in these
modifications are implicated in cancer onset and progression. The specific
pattern of DNA methylation depends on the balance between methylation and
demethylation processes. Recent studies have shown that TET proteins play a key
role in DNA demethylation. TET proteins (TET1, TET2, TET3) are iron(II) and
a-ketoglutarate dependent dioxygenases, and their enzymatic activity involves
hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and further to
5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. These modified cytosines are removed by 
enzymes involved in DNA repair. However, the role of TETs in gene expression
regulation is not limited to their catalytic activity. TETs can interact with
proteins of complexes involved in the modification of histones (i.e. EZH2, OGT,
Sin3a or HCF1) and by affecting their activity and, chromatin binding ability,
they can cause changes in patterns of histone methylation, acetylation and
O-GlcNAcylation. There is growing evidence that decreased expression of TET
proteins and mutation in TET genes are associated with cancer onset and
progression.

PMID: 26671928  [PubMed - in process]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 29;112(52):15988-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1521740112. Epub 2015 Dec 14.

Ezh2 regulates differentiation and function of natural killer cells through
histone methyltransferase activity.

Yin J(1), Leavenworth JW(2), Li Y(1), Luo Q(3), Xie H(4), Liu X(5), Huang S(1),
Yan H(1), Fu Z(6), Zhang LY(7), Zhang L(8), Hao J(9), Wu X(10), Deng X(11),
Roberts CW(12), Orkin SH(13), Cantor H(2), Wang X(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin
for Medical Epigenetics, Laboratory of Epigenetics in Development and
Tumorigenesis, Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Key
Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070,
China; (2)Department of Cancer Immunology and Virology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
Division of Immunology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115;
Jianmei_Leavenworth@dfci.harvard.edu harvey_cantor@dfci.harvard.edu
wangxi@tmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Cell Biology, 2011 Collaborative Innovation
Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Laboratory of Epigenetics in
Development and Tumorigenesis, Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences,
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300070, China; Department of Pharmacology, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300070, China; (4)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115; (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China; (6)Department of Immunology,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China; (7)Division of Rheumatology,
Shanxi Da Yi Hospital, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Taiyuan, Shanxi
030032, China; (8)Department of Dermatology, Tianjin Academy of Traditional
Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital, Tianjin 300120, China; (9)Department of
Neurology and Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical University General 
Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China; (10)Department of Cell Biology, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin 300070, China; (11)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress
Biology, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, School of Life Sciences,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361102, China; (12)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115; Department of 
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (13)Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138; Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115; Department of 
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115. (14)Department of Cell Biology, 2011 Collaborative
Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Laboratory of Epigenetics
in Development and Tumorigenesis, Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical
Sciences, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical
University, Tianjin 300070, China; Jianmei_Leavenworth@dfci.harvard.edu
harvey_cantor@dfci.harvard.edu wangxi@tmu.edu.cn.

Changes of histone modification status at critical lineage-specifying gene loci
in multipotent precursors can influence cell fate commitment. The contribution of
these epigenetic mechanisms to natural killer (NK) cell lineage determination
from common lymphoid precursors is not understood. Here we investigate the impact
of histone methylation repressive marks (H3 Lys27 trimethylation; H3K27(me3)) on 
early NK cell differentiation. We demonstrate that selective loss of the
histone-lysine N-methyltransferase Ezh2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) or
inhibition of its enzymatic activity with small molecules unexpectedly increased 
generation of the IL-15 receptor (IL-15R) CD122(+) NK precursors and mature NK
progeny from both mouse and human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Mechanistic studies revealed that enhanced NK cell expansion and cytotoxicity
against tumor cells were associated with up-regulation of CD122 and the C-type
lectin receptor NKG2D. Moreover, NKG2D deficiency diminished the positive effects
of Ezh2 inhibitors on NK cell commitment. Identification of the contribution of
Ezh2 to NK lineage specification and function reveals an epigenetic-based
mechanism that regulates NK cell development and provides insight into the
clinical application of Ezh2 inhibitors in NK-based cancer immunotherapies.

PMCID: PMC4702963 [Available on 2016-06-29]
PMID: 26668377  [PubMed - in process]


113. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2015 Fall;45(6):692-701.

NUT Midline Carcinoma: Morphoproteomic Characterization with Genomic and
Therapeutic Correlates.

Sun H(1), McGuire MF(1), Zhang S(1), Brown RE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center - Medical School at Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center -
Medical School at Houston, Texas, USA Robert.Brown@uth.tmc.edu.

NUT midline carcinoma is a rare entity arising primarily in the midline of
teenagers and young adults. Genomically, it is associated with a translocation
involving a nuclear protein in testis (NUT) gene with other genes, most commonly,
the BRD4 gene. The resultant is a partial or near total block in differentiation 
of tumor cells into mature squamous elements. Such tumors are resistant to
conventional therapy with a reported mean survival at less than 1 year. In this
study, we investigated two cases with genomic confirmation as NUT midline
carcinoma by morphoproteomic analysis using immunohistochemical antibodies. Our
results showed overexpression, largely in the undifferentiated cells of the
tumors of: 1) Stemness marker, SRY (sex determining region Y)-box 2 (Sox2); 2)
Constitutive activation of the mTORC2 pathway with expression of total
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R[Tyr1165/1166]), and nuclear p-mTOR 
(Ser 2448) and p-Akt (Ser 473); and 3) c-Myc, silent mating type information
regulation 2 homolog 1 (Sirt1) and histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste,
Drosophila, homolog 2 (EZH2) as molecular impediments to differentiation. These
data were analyzed through the use of QIAGEN's Ingenuity(®) Pathway Analysis
(IPA(®), QIAGEN Redwood City, www.qiagen.com/ingenuity). The results established 
the interconnection of these pathways and molecules, and identified several
pharmacogenomic agents--melatonin, metformin, vorinostat, curcumin, and
sulforaphane--that have the potential to remove the block in differentiation and 
lead to the establishment of a more benign form of NUT midline carcinoma.

© 2015 by the Association of Clinical Scientists, Inc.

PMID: 26663801  [PubMed - in process]


114. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Feb;14(2):163-72. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0313. Epub
2015 Dec 9.

Integrative Analysis Reveals the Transcriptional Collaboration between EZH2 and
E2F1 in the Regulation of Cancer-Related Gene Expression.

Xu H(1), Xu K(2), He HH(2), Zang C(1), Chen CH(1), Chen Y(1), Qin Q(3), Wang
S(3), Wang C(3), Hu S(3), Li F(3), Long H(3), Brown M(4), Liu XS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. Center for 
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts. Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Center for
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts. (4)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
xsliu@jimmy.harvard.edu myles_brown@dfci.harvard.edu. (5)Department of
Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts. Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts. School of Life 
Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
xsliu@jimmy.harvard.edu myles_brown@dfci.harvard.edu.

Overexpression of EZH2 is frequently linked to the advanced and metastatic stage 
of cancers. The mechanisms of its oncogenic function can be context specific, and
may vary depending on the protein complexes that EZH2 interacts with. To identify
novel transcriptional collaborators of EZH2 in cancers, a computational approach 
was developed that integrates protein-DNA binding data, cell perturbation gene
expression data, and compendiums of tumor expression profiles. This holistic
approach identified E2F1, a known mediator of the Rb tumor suppressor, as a
transcriptional collaborator of EZH2 in castration-resistant prostate cancer.
Subsequent analysis and experimental validation found EZH2 and E2F1 cobind to a
subset of chromatin sites lacking H3K27 trimethylation, and activate genes that
are critical for prostate cancer progression. The collaboration of EZH2 and E2F1 
in transcriptional regulation is also observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
cell lines, where activation of the transcriptional network is concordant with
the cellular response to the EZH2 inhibitor.IMPLICATIONS: The direct
collaboration between EZH2 and Rb/E2F1 pathway provides an innovative mechanism
underlying the cascade of tumor progression, and lays the foundation for the
development of new anticancer targets/strategies. Mol Cancer Res; 14(2); 163-72. 
©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26659825  [PubMed - in process]


115. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):3440-52. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6497.

Inhibition of EZH2 by chemo- and radiotherapy agents and small molecule
inhibitors induces cell death in castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Wu C(1), Jin X(2), Yang J(1,)(2), Yang Y(2), He Y(2), Ding L(2), Pan Y(2), Chen
S(3), Jiang J(1), Huang H(2,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biological Treatment, The Third Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Changzhou 213003, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
(3)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou
510060, China. (4)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (5)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Androgen deprivation therapy is the mainstay of treatment of advanced prostate
cancer (PCa). However, a significant portion of patients experience disease
relapse and tumors ultimately evolve into castration resistant prostate cancer
(CRPC), for which there is no cure in the clinic. The Polycomb protein enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is frequently overexpressed in CRPC. It is unclear
whether EZH2 can be a therapeutic target in CRPC. Here, we demonstrated that
chemo- and radiotherapy agents such as camptothecin (CPT) and <U+03B3> irradiation
decrease EZH2 expression in various PCa cell lines. We provided evidence that
functional p53 and RB proteins are required for CPT- and irradiation-induced
downregulation of EZH2 in CRPC cells. We demonstrated that EZH2-specific small
molecule inhibitors mitigate CRPC cell growth. We further showed that the EZH2
inhibitor GSK126 inhibits both Polycomb-dependent and -independent functions of
EZH2 in PCa cells. Importantly, we found that inhibition of EZH2 by genetic and
pharmacological means sensitizes CRPC cells to CPT-induced apoptotic death and
growth inhibition in culture and in mice. Our data suggest that concomitant
administration of small molecule inhibitors of EZH2 may significantly increase
the anti-tumor efficacy of conventional chemo- and radiotherapies in CRPC.

PMID: 26657505  [PubMed - in process]


116. Gene. 2016 Feb 15;577(2):193-201. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.11.045. Epub 2015 Dec 
2.

miR-340 impedes the progression of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma by targeting
EZH2.

Yu W(1), Zhang G(1), Lu B(1), Li J(1), Wu Z(1), Ma H(1), Wang H(1), Lian R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang
Medical College, Weihui 453100, Henan, PR China.

Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is a common malignant tumor of the
otolaryngeal region and accounts for 1-2% of all malignancies diagnosed
worldwide. miR-340 down-regulation and EZH2 up-regulation have been frequently
identified in multiple cancers, but the role of miR-340 and EZH2 in LSCC has not 
been explored. In this study, we investigated the regulative role of miR-340 in
EZH2 expression and LSCC progression. The results showed that EZH2 was
up-regulated and miR-340 was down-regulated in both Hep-2 cells and LSCC tissues.
Molecularly, our results confirmed that miR-340 directly targeted EZH2 gene and
inhibited EZH2 expression. MTT assay and BrdU assay showed that miR-340
transfection reduced the cell proliferation ability of Hep-2 cells. The transwell
assay indicated that the invasion and migration ability of Hep-2 cells was
dramatically inhibited by miR-340 transfection. In addition, miR-340 transfection
induced cell apoptosis with concomitant enhancement of Bax, increase of Caspase-3
expression and activity, and reduction of Bcl-2 expression in Hep-2 cells. Both
miR-340 transfection and EZH2 knockdown induced p27 expression and suppressed
PI3K/Akt activation in Hep-2 cells. Strikingly, EZH2 knockdown reduced cell
proliferation, and EZH2 overexpression significantly rescued the miR-340-mediated
suppressive effect on cell proliferation. Moreover, miR-340 could obviously
induce the inhibition of Hep-2 cell-derived tumor growth and EZH2/p27 expression 
ratio in vivo. Taken together, these data suggest that miR-340 impedes LSCC
progression by targeting EZH2 with the possible mechanism to enhance the
expression of anti-oncogene p27 and suppress PI3K/Akt activation, providing a
novel target and a potential therapeutic pathway against LSCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656176  [PubMed - in process]


117. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 19;291(8):3785-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.678029. Epub 2015 
Dec 10.

Wilms Tumor Suppressor, WT1, Cooperates with MicroRNA-26a and MicroRNA-101 to
Suppress Translation of the Polycomb Protein, EZH2, in Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Akpa MM(1), Iglesias D(2), Chu L(2), Thiébaut A(2), Jentoft I(2), Hammond L(2),
Torban E(3), Goodyer PR(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A
1B1. (2)the Department of Pediatrics, Research Institute of the McGill University
Health Center, Montréal, Québec H4A 3J1, Canada. (3)the Department of
Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Québec H3A 1A3, and. (4)From 
the Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A 1B1,
the Department of Pediatrics, Research Institute of the McGill University Health 
Center, Montréal, Québec H4A 3J1, Canada the Department of Experimental Medicine,
McGill University, Montreal, Québec H3A 1A3, and paul.goodyer@mcgill.ca.

Hereditary forms of Wilms arise from developmentally arrested clones of renal
progenitor cells with biallelic mutations of WT1; recently, it has been found
that Wilms tumors may also be associated with biallelic mutations in DICER1 or
DROSHA, crucial for miRNA biogenesis. We have previously shown that a critical
role for WT1 during normal nephrogenesis is to suppress transcription of the
Polycomb group protein, EZH2, thereby de-repressing genes in the differentiation 
cascade. Here we show that WT1 also suppresses translation of EZH2. All major WT1
isoforms induce an array of miRNAs, which target the 3' UTR of EZH2 and other
Polycomb-associated transcripts. We show that the WT1(+KTS) isoform binds to the 
5' UTR of EZH2 and interacts directly with the miRNA-containing RISC to enhance
post-transcriptional inhibition. These observations suggest a novel mechanism
through which WT1 regulates the transition from resting stem cell to activated
progenitor cell during nephrogenesis. Our findings also offer a plausible
explanation for the fact that Wilms tumors can arise either from loss of WT1 or
loss of miRNA processing enzymes.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4759161 [Available on 2017-02-19]
PMID: 26655220  [PubMed - in process]


118. Leukemia. 2015 Dec 9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.337. [Epub ahead of print]

Age-related mutations and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.

Mason CC(1,)(2), Khorashad JS(1), Tantravahi SK(1), Kelley TW(3), Zabriskie
MS(1), Yan D(1), Pomicter AD(1), Reynolds KR(1), Eiring AM(1), Kronenberg Z(4),
Sherman RL(5), Tyner JW(6), Dalley BK(1), Dao KH(6), Yandell M(4), Druker BJ(6), 
Gotlib J(7), O'Hare T(1,)(8), Deininger MW(1,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(5)North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, Springfield, IL, USA.
(6)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR,
USA. (7)Division of Hematology, Stanford University School of Medicine/Stanford
Cancer Institute, Stanford, CA, USA. (8)Division of Hematology and Hematologic
Malignancies, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is a hematologic malignancy nearly
confined to the elderly. Previous studies to determine incidence and prognostic
significance of somatic mutations in CMML have relied on candidate gene
sequencing, although an unbiased mutational search has not been conducted. As
many of the genes commonly mutated in CMML were recently associated with
age-related clonal hematopoiesis (ARCH) and aged hematopoiesis is characterized
by a myelomonocytic differentiation bias, we hypothesized that CMML and aged
hematopoiesis may be closely related. We initially established the somatic
mutation landscape of CMML by whole exome sequencing followed by gene-targeted
validation. Genes mutated in <U+2A7E>10% of patients were SRSF2, TET2, ASXL1, RUNX1,
SETBP1, KRAS, EZH2, CBL and NRAS, as well as the novel CMML genes FAT4, ARIH1,
DNAH2 and CSMD1. Most CMML patients (71%) had mutations in <U+2A7E>2 ARCH genes and 52% 
had <U+2A7E>7 mutations overall. Higher mutation burden was associated with shorter
survival. Age-adjusted population incidence and reported ARCH mutation rates are 
consistent with a model in which clinical CMML ensues when a sufficient number of
stochastically acquired age-related mutations has accumulated, suggesting that
CMML represents the leukemic conversion of the myelomonocytic-lineage-biased aged
hematopoietic system.Leukemia advance online publication, 29 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/leu.2015.337.

PMID: 26648538  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


119. Int J Oncol. 2016 Jan;48(1):145-52. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3258. Epub 2015 Nov 20.

A crucial epithelial to mesenchymal transition regulator, Sox4/Ezh2 axis is
closely related to the clinical outcome in pancreatic cancer patients.

Hasegawa S(1), Nagano H(1), Konno M(2), Eguchi H(1), Tomokuni A(1), Tomimaru
Y(1), Asaoka T(1), Wada H(1), Hama N(1), Kawamoto K(1), Marubashi S(1), Nishida
N(2), Koseki J(3), Mori M(1), Doki Y(1), Ishii H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Department of Frontier Science for
Cancer and Chemotherapy, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (3)Department of Cancer Profiling Discovery, Osaka
University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Pancreatic cancer has a poor prognosis because of its high invasiveness and
recurrence, and these properties closely link to the phenomenon of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Recently, it has been reported that Sox4
is indispensable for EMT in vitro and in vivo and regulates various master
regulators of EMT including Zeb, Twist and Snail. Moreover, Sox4 induces the
transcription of Ezh2 which is the histone methyltransferase, and reprograms the 
cancer epigenome to promote EMT and metastasis. Therefore, the present study
evaluated the importance of Sox4, Ezh2 and miR-335, which regulate Sox4
expression epigenetically, in clinical samples with pancreatic cancer. This
retrospective analysis included data from 36 consecutive patients who underwent
complete surgical resection for pancreatic cancer and did not undergo any
preoperative therapies. We assessed the clinical significance of Sox4/Ezh2 axis
and miR-335 expression, using immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR with laser
captured microdissection (LCM). The Sox4 positive patients had significantly
worse prognosis as for disease-free survival (DFS) (P=0.0154) and the
Ezh2-positive patients had significantly worse prognosis as for overall survival 
(OS) (P=0.0347). The miR-335 expression was inversely correlated with Sox4
expression in the identical clinical specimens, but it was not related to the
prognosis. Sox4/Ezh2 axis was closely associated with the prognosis in pancreatic
cancer patients.

PMID: 26648239  [PubMed - in process]


120. Epigenomics. 2015 Dec;7(8):1313-25. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.83. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Mining the epigenetic landscape of tissue polarity in search of new targets for
cancer therapy.

Atrian F(1), Lelièvre SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences and Center for Cancer Research, Purdue
University, 625 Harrison Street, Lynn Hall, West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA.

The epigenetic nature of cancer encourages the development of inhibitors of
epigenetic pathways. Yet, the clinical use for solid tumors of approved
epigenetic drugs is meager. We argue that this situation might improve upon
understanding the coinfluence between epigenetic pathways and tissue
architecture. We present emerging information on the epigenetic control of the
polarity axis, a central feature of epithelial architecture created by the
orderly distribution of multiprotein complexes at cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix contacts and altered upon cancer onset (with apical
polarity loss), invasive progression (with basolateral polarity loss) and
metastatic development (with basoapical polarity imbalance). This information
combined with the impact of polarity-related proteins on epigenetic mechanisms of
cancer enables us to envision how to guide the choice of drugs specific for
distinct epigenetic modifiers, in order to halt cancer development and counter
the consequences of polarity alterations.

PMID: 26646365  [PubMed - in process]


121. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2015;2015:522-8. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2015.1.522.

Advances in therapies for non-Hodgkin lymphoma in children.

Kobos R(1), Terry W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY.

Pediatric patients with newly diagnosed, non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) have an
excellent overall survival. However, therapy regimens are associated with acute
toxicity and late effects. Furthermore, patients with relapsed or refractory
disease have relatively few options with proven clinical benefit. Both histologic
and molecular differences exist between adult and pediatric NHL preventing simple
translation of adult NHL successes into improvements in pediatric NHL treatment. 
This review summarizes the introduction of targeted therapies into frontline
treatments for patients with anaplastic large-cell lymphoma and CD20-positive
tumors, with the goal of improving overall survival while limiting both short-
and long-term toxicities. In addition, newer approaches that have limited data in
children but may have a significant role in how we treat pediatric NHL in the
future are reviewed, which include CD19 directed therapy, Notch inhibition, the
tri-functional antibody, FBTA05, and EZH2 inhibition.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26637768  [PubMed - in process]


122. Genes Dev. 2015 Dec 15;29(24):2547-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.269522.115. Epub 2015 Dec
4.

Impaired PRC2 activity promotes transcriptional instability and favors breast
tumorigenesis.

Wassef M(1), Rodilla V(1), Teissandier A(2), Zeitouni B(2), Gruel N(3), Sadacca
B(3), Irondelle M(3), Charruel M(1), Ducos B(4), Michaud A(1), Caron M(1),
Marangoni E(3), Chavrier P(3), Le Tourneau C(5), Kamal M(6), Pasmant E(7), Vidaud
M(7), Servant N(2), Reyal F(3), Meseure D(8), Vincent-Salomon A(3), Fre S(1),
Margueron R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, 75005 Paris,
France; U934, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, 75005
Paris, France; UMR3215, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 75005
Paris, France; (2)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, 
75005 Paris, France; U900, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, 75005 Paris, France; Mines ParisTech, 77300 Fontainebleau, France;
(3)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, 75005 Paris,
France; (4)Laboratoire de Physique Statistique-Ecole Normale Supérieure de Paris,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 75005 Paris, France; UMR 8550,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 75005 Paris, France; Plateforme de 
PCR Quantitative à Haut Débit Genomic Paris Centre, Institut de Biologie de
l'École Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France; (5)Department of Medical
Oncology, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France; EA7285, Université de Versailles, 
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, 78000 Versailles, France; (6)Department of Medical
Oncology, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France; (7)UMR_S745, EA7331, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, 75006 Paris, France; Facultée
des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, 75006 Paris, France; Service de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin, 75014 Paris, France;
(8)Institut Curie, Paris Sciences et Lettres Research University, 75005 Paris,
France; Platform of Investigative Pathology, 75005 Paris, France.

Alterations of chromatin modifiers are frequent in cancer, but their functional
consequences often remain unclear. Focusing on the Polycomb protein EZH2 that
deposits the H3K27me3 (trimethylation of Lys27 of histone H3) mark, we showed
that its high expression in solid tumors is a consequence, not a cause, of
tumorigenesis. In mouse and human models, EZH2 is dispensable for prostate cancer
development and restrains breast tumorigenesis. High EZH2 expression in tumors
results from a tight coupling to proliferation to ensure H3K27me3 homeostasis.
However, this process malfunctions in breast cancer. Low EZH2 expression relative
to proliferation and mutations in Polycomb genes actually indicate poor prognosis
and occur in metastases. We show that while altered EZH2 activity consistently
modulates a subset of its target genes, it promotes a wider transcriptional
instability. Importantly, transcriptional changes that are consequences of EZH2
loss are predominantly irreversible. Our study provides an unexpected
understanding of EZH2's contribution to solid tumors with important therapeutic
implications.

© 2015 Wassef et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4699384
PMID: 26637281  [PubMed - in process]


123. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 4;10(12):e0144398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144398.
eCollection 2015.

The Role of H3K4me3 in Transcriptional Regulation Is Altered in Huntington's
Disease.

Dong X(1), Tsuji J(1), Labadorf A(2,)(3), Roussos P(4,)(5), Chen JF(2), Myers
RH(2,)(3,)(6), Akbarian S(4), Weng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States of America. (2)Department of
Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of
America. (3)Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, United States 
of America. (4)Friedman Brain Institute, Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States of America. (5)Department of
Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY,
United States of America. (6)Genome Science Institute, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of America.

Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative disorder
resulting from expansion of CAG repeats in the Huntingtin (HTT) gene. Previous
studies have shown mutant HTT can alter expression of genes associated with
dysregulated epigenetic modifications. One of the most widely studied chromatin
modifications is trimethylated lysine 4 of histone 3 (H3K4me3). Here, we
conducted the first comprehensive study of H3K4me3 ChIP-sequencing in neuronal
chromatin from the prefrontal cortex of six HD cases and six non-neurologic
controls, and its association with gene expression measured by RNA-sequencing. We
detected 2,830 differentially enriched H3K4me3 peaks between HD and controls,
with 55% of them down-regulated in HD. Although H3K4me3 signals are expected to
be associated with mRNA levels, we found an unexpected discordance between
altered H3K4me3 peaks and mRNA levels. Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment
analysis of the genes with differential H3K4me3 peaks, revealed statistically
significantly enriched GO terms only in the genes with down-regulated signals in 
HD. The most frequently implicated biological process terms are organ
morphogenesis and positive regulation of gene expression. More than 9,000 H3K4me3
peaks were located not near any recognized transcription start sites and
approximately 36% of these "distal" peaks co-localized to known enhancer sites.
Six transcription factors and chromatin remodelers are differentially enriched in
HD H3K4me3 distal peaks, including EZH2 and SUZ12, two core subunits of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Moreover, PRC2 repressive state was
significantly depleted in HD-enriched peaks, suggesting the epigenetic role of
PRC2 inhibition associated with up-regulated H3K4me3 in Huntington's disease. In 
summary, our study provides new insights into transcriptional dysregulation of
Huntington's disease by analyzing the differentiation of H3K4me3 enrichment.

PMCID: PMC4670094
PMID: 26636336  [PubMed - in process]


124. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Dec 2;16(12):28669-82. doi: 10.3390/ijms161226121.

Gga-miR-101-3p Plays a Key Role in Mycoplasma gallisepticum (HS Strain) Infection
of Chicken.

Chen J(1), Wang Z(2), Bi D(3), Hou Y(4), Zhao Y(5), Sun J(6), Peng X(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
chenjiao123@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (2)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal
Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. wangzaiwei@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (3)China
National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. bidingren@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (4)Key Laboratory of
Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Education,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
houyue@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics,
Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. zyb@webmail.hzau.edu.cn. (6)Department of
Biological Sciences and Border Biomedical Research Center, University of Texas at
El Paso, El Paso, TX 79968, USA. jsun@utep.edu. (7)Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, Ministry of Education, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. xlpengsishun@mail.hzau.edu.cn.
(8)China National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. xlpengsishun@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Mycoplasma gallisepticum (MG), one of the most pathogenic Mycoplasma, has caused 
tremendous economic loss in the poultry industry. Recently, increasing evidence
has suggested that micro ribonucleic acids (miRNAs) are involved in microbial
pathogenesis. However, little is known about potential roles of miRNAs in MG
infection of chicken. In the present study, using miRNA Solexa sequencing we have
found that gga-miR-101-3p was up-regulated in the lungs of MG-infected chicken
embryos. Moreover, gga-miR-101-3p regulated expression of the host enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) through binding to the 3' un-translated region (3'-UTR) of
EZH2 gene. Over-expression of gga-miR-101-3p significantly inhibited EZH2
expression and hence inhibited proliferation of chicken embryonic fibroblast
(DF-1 cells) by blocking the G1-to-S phase transition. Similar results were
obtained in MG-infected chicken embryos and DF-1 cells, where gga-miR-101-3p was 
significantly up-regulated, while EZH2 was significantly down-regulated. This
study reveals that gga-miR-101-3p plays an important role in MG infection through
regulation of EZH2 expression and provides a new insight into the mechanisms of
MG pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4691068
PMID: 26633386  [PubMed - in process]


125. FEBS Lett. 2015 Dec 21;589(24 Pt B):4106-11. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.11.033. 
Epub 2015 Nov 26.

EZH2 phosphorylation regulates Tat-induced HIV-1 transactivation via ROS/Akt
signaling pathway.

Zhang HS(1), Liu Y(2), Wu TC(2), Du GY(2), Zhang FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science & Bioengineering, Beijing University of Technology,
Pingleyuan 100(#), District of Chaoyang, Beijing 100124, China. Electronic
address: zhanghs@bjut.edu.cn. (2)College of Life Science & Bioengineering,
Beijing University of Technology, Pingleyuan 100(#), District of Chaoyang,
Beijing 100124, China.

EZH2 plays a major role in HIV-1 latency, however, the molecular linkage between 
Tat-induced HIV-1 transactivation and EZH2 activity is not fully understood. It
was shown Tat induced HIV-1 transactivation through inhibiting EZH2 activity. Tat
decreased the levels of H3K27me3 and EZH2 occupy at the long terminal repeat
(LTR) of HIV-1. We further showed for the first time that transfected with Tat
construct resulted in an increase in phosphorylated EZH2 (p-EZH2), mediated by
active Akt. ROS/Akt-dependent p-EZH2 was correlated with Tat-induced
transactivation. Our study reveals that novel mechanisms allow Tat-induced HIV-1 
transactivation by ROS/Akt-dependent downregulating the EZH2 epigenetic silencing
machinery.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26632198  [PubMed - in process]


126. Biomarkers. 2016 Feb;21(1):80-90. doi: 10.3109/1354750X.2015.1118537. Epub 2015
Dec 3.

Aberrant overexpression of EZH2 and H3K27me3 serves as poor prognostic biomarker 
for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients.

Liu F(1), Gu L(2), Cao Y(1), Fan X(2), Zhang F(3), Sang M(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Tumor Research Institute . (2)b Research Center , and. (3)c Ultrasonography 
Department, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University , Hebei , China.

It has been reported that the trimethylation of histone 3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
is required for enhancer of zeste homology 2 (EZH2)-mediated repression of
various genes essential for tumorigenesis and tumor development. Here, we
reported the expression of EZH2 and H3K27me3 in esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) specimens was higher than the pericarcinoma esophageal
specimens. Their expression was positively associated with the poor prognosis of 
ESCC patients. EZH2 expression, histological grade and distant lymph node
metastasis were all independent factors for poor prognosis of ESCC. In addition, 
enforced expression of EZH2 in esophageal cancer-derived cells could increase the
overall H3K27me3 level. Our results suggested the expression of EZH2 and H3K27me3
could serve as biomarkers in the prediction of ESCC patients' survival and ESCC
metastasis.

PMID: 26631178  [PubMed - in process]


127. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 2. [Epub ahead of print]

Interference with endogenous EZH2 reverses the chemotherapy drug resistance in
cervical cancer cells partly by up-regulating Dicer expression.

Cai L(1), Wang Z(1), Liu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, 430022,
China. (2)Department of Neurology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Avenue 1095, Wuhan, Hubei,
430030, China. denghua_liu@sina.com.

Cervical cancer is one of the most common female malignancies in the world, and
chemotherapeutic drug resistance is a major obstacle to cancer therapy. Enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is an enzymatic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 
2 (PRC2) and catalyzes the repressive histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3). However, the role of EZH2 on the chemotherapy drug resistance in
cervical cancers remains unclear. In the present study, the cervical carcinoma
specimens and paired normal tissue specimens were obtained and the expression of 
EZH2 was detected by western blotting. The results showed that high levels of
EZH2 were detected in cervical carcinoma tissues, compared with paired control
tissues (**p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Next, three pairs of shRNA specific to EZH2 were designed
and used to interfere with endogenous EZH2 expression. Cell viability was
assessed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT)
assays following treatment with various concentrations of cisplatin in HeLa and
HeLa/DDP cells. The MTT assay results showed that knockdown of EZH2 in HeLa/DDP
cells caused a 2.29- or 1.83-fold decrease in the cisplatin IC50 values (for
shRNA1-EZH2, 34.88 vs. 15.21 µg/mL; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01; for shRNA3-EZH2, 34.88 vs.
19.09 µg/mL; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). The EZH2 activity was also suppressed by
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), EZH2 inhibitor, and the results demonstrated that,
meanwhile, DZNep potently inhibited cell viability of HeLa/DDP cells, partly by
suppression the levels of EZH2 and H3K27me3, but not H3K27me2, which was detected
by western blotting analysis. Moreover, cell migration assay results showed that 
knockdown of EZH2 decreased cell metastasis of cervical cancer cells.
Furthermore, cell cycle was detected by fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) assay and the results demonstrated that interference with EZH2 expression 
increased the percentage of cells at G0/G1 phase and the HeLa/DDP cells were
blocked at G0/G1 phase. Interestingly, western blotting results revealed that
higher expression of EZH2 was related with lower level of Dicer in HeLa/DDP
cells. Finally, in vivo tumorigenicity experiments results demonstrated that
interference with endogenous EZH2 by shRNA specific to EZH2 or inhibition EZH2 by
DZNep could significantly increase antitumor effects in nude mice. Thus,
inhibiting the levels of endogenous EZH2 effectively reversed the cisplatin
resistance and increased the cisplatin sensitivity in cisplatin-resistant
HeLa/DDP cells. EZH2 might be a potential target for treating chemotherapeutic
drug-resistant cervical cancers.

PMID: 26631032  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


128. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):16043-9. eCollection 2015.

Prognostic significance of EZH2 expression in patients with digestive cancers: a 
meta-analysis.

Wang W(1), Wang F(1), Zong G(1), Liu R(1), Zhang Y(1), Luan Y(1), Xu L(1), Xuan
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The 81st hospital of P.L.A., P.L.A. cancer
center Nanjing, P. R. China.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), a key component of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), was of great importance in human cancer pathogenesis. Various
studies examined the relationship between EZH2 overexpression with the clinical
outcome in patients with digestive cancers, but yielded inconsistent results.
METHODS: Electronic databases updated to January 2015 were searched to find
relevant studies. A meta-analysis was conducted with eligible studies which
quantitatively evaluated the relationship between EZH2 overexpression and
survival of patients with digestive cancers. Survival data were aggregated and
quantitatively analyzed.
RESULTS: We performed a meta-analysis of 10 studies (n = 1,461 patients) that
evaluated the correlation between EZH2 overexpression and survival in patients
with digestive cancers. Combined hazard ratios suggested that EZH2 overexpression
was associated with poor prognosis of overall survival (HR = 1.54, 95% CI:
1.27-1.81) in patients with esophageal cancer. In the stratified analysis, no
significantly risks were found among gastric cancer (HR = 0.66, 95% CI:
0.16-1.15) and colorectal cancer (HR = 0.91, 0.63-1.19), indicating EZH2 was not 
an indicator of poor prognosis in gastric cancer or colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 overexpression indicates a poor prognosis for patients with
esophageal cancer, but not among gastric cancer or colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4658999
PMID: 26629110  [PubMed]


129. Oncol Lett. 2015 Aug;10(2):857-862. Epub 2015 Jun 4.

Prognostic significance of histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 
in patients with cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

Jin M(1), Yang Z(1), Ye W(1), Yu X(2), Hua X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 220023, P.R. China.

Histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been reported to
be associated with certain malignant phenotypes in cervical cancer. However,
clinicopathological parameters and clinical outcomes of EZH2 in cervical cancer, 
particularly in cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC) remain largely unknown.
The retrospective cohort comprising of 117 consecutive patients with CSCC was
incorporated into a tissue microarray which also included 23 paired normal
tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed to evaluate the correlation
between EZH2 expression and clinicopathological implications. Aberrant
overexpression of EZH2 was frequently observed in CSCCs as compared with adjacent
normal tissues (P=0.0005). Expression of EZH2 is associated with poor tumor
differentiation grade (P=0.020) and lymphovascular invasion (P=0.012). Univariate
analysis revealed that the patients with CSCC whose tumors exhibited higher EZH2 
levels had inferior overall survival (OS) compared to those whose tumors
expressed lower EZH2 (log rank P=0.004). In the multivariate analysis, EZH2
expression was an independent predictor of OS (hazard ratio = 1.836, 95%
confidence interval: 1.090-2.993, P=0.022). EZH2 overexpression is common in the 
development of CSCC and is a promising prognostic predictor for patients with
CSCC.

PMCID: PMC4508988
PMID: 26622583  [PubMed]


130. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2016 Mar;15(3):765-75. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.053363. Epub
2015 Nov 30.

Quantitative Histone Mass Spectrometry Identifies Elevated Histone H3 Lysine 27
(Lys27) Trimethylation in Melanoma.

Sengupta D(1), Byrum SD(1), Avaritt NL(1), Davis L(1), Shields B(1), Mahmoud
F(2), Reynolds M(1), Orr LM(1), Mackintosh SG(1), Shalin SC(3), Tackett AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. (2)¶Department of 
Hematology Oncology and Internal Medicine, and. (3)<U+2016>Department of Pathology,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205
ajtackett@uams.edu scshalin@uams.edu. (4)From the Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, <U+2016>Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205 ajtackett@uams.edu scshalin@uams.edu.

Normal cell growth is characterized by a regulated epigenetic program that drives
cellular activities such as gene transcription, DNA replication, and DNA damage
repair. Perturbation of this epigenetic program can lead to events such as
mis-regulation of gene transcription and diseases such as cancer. To begin to
understand the epigenetic program correlated to the development of melanoma, we
performed a novel quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of histone
post-translational modifications mis-regulated in melanoma cell culture as well
as patient tumors. Aggressive melanoma cell lines as well as metastatic melanoma 
were found to have elevated histone H3 Lys(27) trimethylation (H3K27me3)
accompanied by overexpressed methyltransferase EZH2 that adds the specific
modification. The altered epigenetic program that led to elevated H3K27me3 in
melanoma cell culture was found to directly silence transcription of the tumor
suppressor genes RUNX3 and E-cadherin. The EZH2-mediated silencing of RUNX3 and
E-cadherin transcription was also validated in advanced stage human melanoma
tissues. This is the first study focusing on the detailed epigenetic mechanisms
leading to EZH2-mediated silencing of RUNX3 and E-cadherin tumor suppressors in
melanoma. This study underscores the utility of using high resolution mass
spectrometry to identify mis-regulated epigenetic programs in diseases such as
cancer, which could ultimately lead to the identification of biological markers
for diagnostic and prognostic applications.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26621846  [PubMed - in process]


131. BMC Biol. 2015 Nov 30;13:103. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0210-9.

Loss of Ezh2 promotes a midbrain-to-forebrain identity switch by direct gene
derepression and Wnt-dependent regulation.

Zemke M(1), Draganova K(2), Klug A(3), Schöler A(4), Zurkirchen L(5), Gay MH(6), 
Cheng P(7), Koseki H(8), Valenta T(9), Schübeler D(10), Basler K(11), Sommer
L(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
martina.zemke@anatom.uzh.ch. (2)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland. kalina.draganova@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (3)Institute of
Anatomy, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. annika.klug@uzh.ch.
(4)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
anne.schoeler@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (5)Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. luis.zurkirchen@uzh.ch. (6)Institute of Anatomy,
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. max.g@unibas.ch. (7)Department of
Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. Phil.Cheng@usz.ch. 
(8)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN Yokohama Institute,
Yokohama, Japan. koseki@rcai.riken.go.jp. (9)Institute of Molecular Life
Sciences, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. tomas.valenta@imls.uzh.ch.
(10)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
Dirk.Schubeler@fmi.ch. (11)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. konrad.basler@imls.uzh.ch. (12)Institute of Anatomy,
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. lukas.sommer@anatom.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Precise spatiotemporal control of gene expression is essential for
the establishment of correct cell numbers and identities during brain
development. This process involves epigenetic control mechanisms, such as those
mediated by the polycomb group protein Ezh2, which catalyzes trimethylation of
histone H3K27 (H3K27me3) and thereby represses gene expression.
RESULTS: Herein, we show that Ezh2 plays a crucial role in the development and
maintenance of the midbrain. Conditional deletion of Ezh2 in the developing
midbrain resulted in decreased neural progenitor proliferation, which is
associated with derepression of cell cycle inhibitors and negative regulation of 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Of note, Ezh2 ablation also promoted ectopic expression 
of a forebrain transcriptional program involving derepression of the forebrain
determinants Foxg1 and Pax6. This was accompanied by reduced expression of
midbrain markers, including Pax3 and Pax7, as a consequence of decreased
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
CONCLUSION: Ezh2 is required for appropriate brain growth and maintenance of
regional identity by H3K27me3-mediated gene repression and control of canonical
Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC4665911
PMID: 26621269  [PubMed - in process]


132. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 1;5:17675. doi: 10.1038/srep17675.

Evidence for transcriptional interference in a dual-luciferase reporter system.

Wu GQ(1), Wang X(1), Zhou HY(1), Chai KQ(2), Xue Q(1), Zheng AH(1), Zhu XM(1),
Xiao JY(3), Ying XH(2), Wang FW(1), Rui T(1), Xu LY(4), Zhang YK(5), Liao YJ(6), 
Xie D(6), Lu LQ(1), Huang DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology &Cancer Biotherapy Center, Zhejiang Provincial People's
Hospital, 158 Shangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310014, China. (2)Zhejiang
Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tongde Hospital of Zhejiang Province,
234 Gucui Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310012, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, 
Guangzhou University of Chinese Medicine, 232 Waihuang Road East, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510006, China. (4)Cell and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Zhoushan
Hospital, Zhoushan, Zhejiang 316000, China. (5)Department of Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery, Zhoushan Hospital, Zhoushan, Zhejiang 316000, China. (6)State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 651
Dongfeng Road East, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, China.

The dual-luciferase reporter assay is widely used for microRNA target
identification and the functional validation of predicted targets. To determine
whether curcumin regulates expression of the histone methyltransferase enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) by targeting its 3'untranslated region (3'UTR), two
luciferase reporter systems containing exactly the same sequence of the EZH2
3'UTR were used to perform dual-luciferase reporter assays. Surprisingly, there
were certain discrepancies between the luciferase activities derived from these
two reporter constructs. We normalized luciferase activity to an internal control
to determine the amount of the reporter construct successfully transfected into
cells, induced a transcriptional block with flavopiridol, quantified renilla
luciferase mRNA levels, and compared the absolute luciferase activity among the
different groups. The results suggested that curcumin promoted the transcription 
of the luciferase genes located downstream of the simian vacuolating virus 40
(SV40) early enhancer/promoter, but not those located downstream of the human
cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate-early or the herpes simplex virus thymidine
kinase (HSV-TK) promoters. These results explain the discrepancies between the
two luciferase reporter systems. The current study underscores the importance of 
taking caution when interpreting the results of dual-luciferase reporter assays
and provides strategies to overcome the potential pitfall accompanying
dual-luciferase reporter systems.

PMCID: PMC4664949
PMID: 26620302  [PubMed - in process]


133. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:634749. doi: 10.1155/2015/634749. Epub 2015 Nov 4.

The Roles of miR-26, miR-29, and miR-203 in the Silencing of the Epigenetic
Machinery during Melanocyte Transformation.

Gasque Schoof CR(1), Izzotti A(2), Jasiulionis MG(3), Vasques Ldos R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Federal University of Sao Paulo, 04044-020 Sao
Paulo, SP, Brazil ; Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, University
of Sao Paulo, 05508-090 Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Health Sciences, 
University of Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy ; IRCCS AOU San Martino IST, 16132 Genoa,
Italy. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, 04039-032 
Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil.

The epigenetic marks located throughout the genome exhibit great variation
between normal and transformed cancer cells. While normal cells contain
hypomethylated CpG islands near gene promoters and hypermethylated repetitive
DNA, the opposite pattern is observed in cancer cells. Recently, it has been
reported that alteration in the microenvironment of melanocyte cells, such as
substrate adhesion blockade, results in the selection of anoikis-resistant cells,
which have tumorigenic characteristics. Melanoma cells obtained through this
model show an altered epigenetic pattern, which represents one of the first
events during the melanocytes malignant transformation. Because microRNAs are
involved in controlling components of the epigenetic machinery, the aim of this
work was to evaluate the potential association between the expression of miR-203,
miR-26, and miR-29 family members and the genes Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Mecp2, and Ezh2
during cells transformation. Our results show that microRNAs and their validated 
or predicted targets are inversely expressed, indicating that these molecules are
involved in epigenetic reprogramming. We also show that miR-203 downregulates
Dnmt3b in mouse melanocyte cells. In addition, treatment with 5-aza-CdR promotes 
the expression of miR-26 and miR-29 in a nonmetastatic melanoma cell line.
Considering the occurrence of CpG islands near the miR-26 and miR-29 promoters,
these data suggest that they might be epigenetically regulated in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4649077
PMID: 26618174  [PubMed - in process]


134. Cancer Discov. 2016 Jan;6(1):13. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2015-224. Epub 2015 
Nov 25.

Noncatalytic EZH2 Activity Is Required in SWI/SNF-Mutant Cancers.

[No authors listed]

Tumors with SWI/SNF subunit mutations depend on both catalytic and noncatalytic
activity of EZH2.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26608895  [PubMed - in process]


135. Oral Oncol. 2016 Jan;52:66-74. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2015.11.002. Epub 2015
Nov 18.

EZH2 is associated with poor prognosis in head-and-neck squamous cell carcinoma
via regulating the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and chemosensitivity.

Chang JW(1), Gwak SY(1), Shim GA(1), Liu L(1), Lim YC(2), Kim JM(3), Jung MG(3), 
Koo BS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Research Institute for
Medical Science, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery,
Research Institute of Medical Science, Konkuk University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (3)Research Institute for Medical Sciences and
Pathology, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Research Institute 
for Medical Science, Chungnam National University College of Medicine, Daejeon,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: bskoo515@cnuh.co.kr.

OBJECTIVES: Increasing evidence suggests that epigenetic regulation is
responsible for tumor initiation and progression in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC). Although the polycomb group protein enhancer zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) is upregulated and a key epigenetic modifier implicated in various
cancers, its molecular mechanism in HNSCC remains unknown. Herein, we
investigated the role of EZH2 in HNSCC progression and its clinical implication
as an HNSCC risk predictor.
MATERIALS AND METHOD: A retrospective analysis was performed on 90 HNSCC patients
who had curative surgery between 1999 and 2011. Patients with high and low EZH2
expression were compared by the various clinicopathological factors. Survival
rates were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method and log-rank test was used to
determine significance. For functional in vitro analysis, migration/invasion
assay and Western blotting were performed after EZH2 knockdown using siRNA. In
addition, cell proliferation was measured to clarify the role of EZH2 on
cisplatin chemotherapy.
RESULTS: In patients with HNSCC, high EZH2 expression was correlated with
advanced T stage and poor survival outcome. RNAi analysis revealed that EZH2
silencing increased E-cadherin expression while decreasing that of N-cadherin and
Vimentin without altering Snail/Slug signaling, which led to decreased cell
migration/invasion. EZH2 is also associated with tumor aggressiveness via
regulating the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Furthermore, we show that
high EZH2 expression decreases sensitivity to cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that EZH2 may not be only a predictive and
prognostic biomarker but also a potential personalized therapeutic target for the
treatment of HNSCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26604082  [PubMed - in process]


136. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 23;5:16965. doi: 10.1038/srep16965.

EZH2 is highly expressed in pituitary adenomas and associated with proliferation.

Schult D(1), Hölsken A(1), Siegel S(2,)(3), Buchfelder M(2), Fahlbusch R(4),
Kreitschmann-Andermahr I(2,)(3), Buslei R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg 
(FAU), Schwabachanlage 6, 91054 Erlangen. (2)Department of Neurosurgery,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Schwabachanlage 6, 91054 
Erlangen. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Duisburg-Essen,
Hufelandstraße 55, 45122 Essen. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, International
Neuroscience Institute, Rudolf-Pichlmayr-Straße 4, 30625 Hannover.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a core epigenetic regulator, playing a
crucial role in cell cycle regulation. The protein is known to be associated with
proliferation and worse outcome in several tumor entities. In this study, we
immunohistochemically investigated the expression pattern of EZH2 in a large
cohort of pituitary tumors. These results were correlated with clinical features 
and double immunofluorescence stainings (DIS) were conducted to evaluate
co-expression of EZH2 and proliferation marker Ki-67. Furthermore, we analyzed
the effect of EZH2 inhibition on cell proliferation in vitro using the pituitary 
cell line AtT-20. While in the normal anterior pituitary EZH2 was almost absent, 
the cohort of tumors showed enhanced expression levels (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005). This was
positively associated with Ki-67 indices (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.834, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005) and DIF
confirmed a predominant co-expression of both markers. In vitro experiments
revealed a significant (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05) decrease of tumor cell proliferation using the 
EZH2 inhibitor GSK126. Our results further support that epigenetic events are
involved in the pathogenesis and biology of pituitary adenomas (PA). Therefore,
EZH2 may function as a new potential target for therapeutic interventions in PA.

PMCID: PMC4655333
PMID: 26593398  [PubMed - in process]


137. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 23;5:16895. doi: 10.1038/srep16895.

Biophysical Regulation of Chromatin Architecture Instills a Mechanical Memory in 
Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Heo SJ(1,)(2), Thorpe SD(3), Driscoll TP(1,)(2,)(4), Duncan RL(5), Lee DA(3),
Mauck RL(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)McKay Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Applied Science,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Institute of
Bioengineering, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. (4)Translational Musculoskeletal Research
Center, Philadelphia VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (5)Department of
Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.

Mechanical cues direct the lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
In this study, we identified the operative molecular mechanisms through which
dynamic tensile loading (DL) regulates changes in chromatin organization and
nuclear mechanics in MSCs. Our data show that, in the absence of exogenous
differentiation factors, short term DL elicits a rapid increase in chromatin
condensation, mediated by acto-myosin based cellular contractility and the
activity of the histone-lysine N-methyltransferase EZH2. The resulting change in 
chromatin condensation stiffened the MSC nucleus, making it less deformable when 
stretch was applied to the cell. We also identified stretch induced ATP release
and purinergic calcium signaling as a central mediator of this chromatin
condensation process. Further, we showed that DL, through differential
stabilization of the condensed chromatin state, established a 'mechanical memory'
in these cells. That is, increasing strain levels and number of loading events
led to a greater degree of chromatin condensation that persisted for longer
periods of time after the cessation of loading. These data indicate that, with
mechanical perturbation, MSCs develop a mechanical memory encoded in structural
changes in the nucleus which may sensitize them to future mechanical loading
events and define the trajectory and persistence of their lineage specification.

PMCID: PMC4655352
PMID: 26592929  [PubMed - in process]


138. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 23. [Epub ahead of print]

EZH2 mediates ATO-induced apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia cell lines through 
the Wnt signaling pathway.

Zhang H(1,)(2), Gu H(3), Li L(4), Ren Y(1), Zhang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, China, 110001. (2)Breast Disease and Reconstruction Center, Breast
Cancer Key Lab of Dalian, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University,
Dalian, China, 116027. (3)Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian, China, 116027. (4)Department of Hematology, The
People's Hospital of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, China, 110016. (5)Department of
Hematology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China,
110001. 13514201170@126.com.

In this study, we examined the mechanisms associated with EZH2 mediation of
apoptosis and chemoresistance to arsenic trioxide (ATO) in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) cell lines through the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. The induction of
spontaneous apoptosis observed in multiple EZH2-silenced leukemic cell lines was 
assessed by flow cytometry, and levels of Wnt/ß-catenin-related expression were
determined by western blot analysis. In comparison with AML control cells,
EZH2-knockdown cells exhibited increased apoptosis and significant downregulation
of ß-catenin expression, as well as decreases in GSK-3ß phosphorylation and
ß-catenin activation (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 for all measurements). Additionally, EZH2
knockdown sensitized AML cells to induced cell death following administration of 
chemotherapeutic ATO. Our results suggested that EZH2 in leukemic cell lines
might inhibit ATO-induced apoptosis and that EZH2 may be a potential therapeutic 
target in AML patients undergoing ATO treatment. Our findings provide new
insights into the role of ATO and EZH2 in regulating AML progression.

PMID: 26592252  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


139. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Feb;15(2):287-98. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0486. Epub 
2015 Nov 20.

EZH2 Inhibition Blocks Multiple Myeloma Cell Growth through Upregulation of
Epithelial Tumor Suppressor Genes.

Hernando H(1), Gelato KA(1), Lesche R(1), Beckmann G(1), Koehr S(1), Otto S(1),
Steigemann P(1), Stresemann C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Global Drug Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany. (2)Global Drug
Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany. carlo.stresemann@bayer.com.

Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell malignancy characterized by marked
heterogeneous genomic instability including frequent genetic alterations in
epigenetic enzymes. In particular, the histone methyltransferase Enhancer of
Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in multiple myeloma. EZH2 is the
catalytic component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), a master
transcriptional regulator of differentiation. EZH2 catalyzes methylation of
lysine 27 on histone H3 and its deregulation in cancer has been reported to
contribute to silencing of tumor suppressor genes, resulting in a more
undifferentiated state, and thereby contributing to the multiple myeloma
phenotype. In this study, we propose the use of EZH2 inhibitors as a new
therapeutic approach for the treatment of multiple myeloma. We demonstrate that
EZH2 inhibition causes a global reduction of H3K27me3 in multiple myeloma cells, 
promoting reexpression of EZH2-repressed tumor suppressor genes in a subset of
cell lines. As a result of this transcriptional activation, multiple myeloma
cells treated with EZH2 inhibitors become more adherent and less proliferative
compared with untreated cells. The antitumor efficacy of EZH2 inhibitors is also 
confirmed in vivo in a multiple myeloma xenograft model in mice. Together, our
data suggest that EZH2 inhibition may provide a new therapy for multiple myeloma 
treatment and a promising addition to current treatment options. Mol Cancer Ther;
15(2); 287-98. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26590165  [PubMed - in process]


140. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 29;6(42):44660-74. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6350.

Mutant p53 induces EZH2 expression and promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition
by disrupting p68-Drosha complex assembly and attenuating miR-26a processing.

Jiang FZ(1), He YY(1), Wang HH(2), Zhang HL(1), Zhang J(2), Yan XF(1), Wang
XJ(1), Che Q(1), Ke JQ(1), Chen Z(1), Tong H(1), Zhang YL(1), Wang FY(1), Li
YR(1), Wan XP(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated International 
Peace Maternity & Child Health Hospital of The China Welfare Institute, Shanghai,
China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First Maternity and
Infant Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The tumor suppressor p53 and the transcriptional repressor Enhancer of Zeste
Homolog 2 (EZH2) have both been implicated in the regulation of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis via their impacts on
microRNA expression. Here, we report that mutant p53 (mutp53) promotes EMT in
endometrial carcinoma (EC) by disrupting p68-Drosha complex assembly.
Overexpression of mutp53 has the opposite effect of wild-type p53 (WTp53),
repressing miR-26a expression by reducing pri-miR-26a-1 processing in p53-null EC
cells. Re-expression of miR-26a in mutp53 EC cells decreases cell invasion and
promotes mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). Rescuing miR-26a expression
also inhibits EZH2, N-cadherin, Vimentin, and Snail expression and induces
E-cadherin expression both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, patients with higher
serum miR-26a levels have a better survival rate. These results suggest that p53 
gain-of-function mutations accelerate EC tumor progression and metastasis by
interfering with Drosha and p68 binding and pri-miR-26a-1 processing, resulting
in reduced miR-26a expression and EZH2 overexpression.

PMCID: PMC4792583
PMID: 26587974  [PubMed - in process]


141. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 19;5:16714. doi: 10.1038/srep16714.

Linker histone H1.2 establishes chromatin compaction and gene silencing through
recognition of H3K27me3.

Kim JM(1,)(2), Kim K(1,)(2,)(3), Punj V(2,)(4), Liang G(5), Ulmer TS(1,)(6), Lu
W(1,)(7), An W(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (2)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Department of
Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju,
Chungbuk 361-763, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (5)Department of Urology, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. (6)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (7)Eli and Edythe Broad Center
for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Linker histone H1 is a protein component of chromatin and has been linked to
higher-order chromatin compaction and global gene silencing. However, a growing
body of evidence suggests that H1 plays a gene-specific role, regulating a
relatively small number of genes. Here we show that H1.2, one of the H1 subtypes,
is overexpressed in cancer cells and contributes to gene silencing. H1.2 gets
recruited to distinct chromatin regions in a manner dependent on EZH2-mediated
H3K27me3, and inhibits transcription of multiple growth suppressive genes via
modulation of chromatin architecture. The C-terminal tail of H1.2 is critical for
the observed effects, because mutations of three H1.2-specific amino acids in
this domain abrogate the ability of H1.2 to bind H3K27me3 nucleosomes and
inactivate target genes. Collectively, these results provide a molecular
explanation for H1.2 functions in the regulation of chromatin folding and
indicate that H3K27me3 is a key mechanism governing the recruitment and activity 
of H1.2 at target loci.

PMCID: PMC4652225
PMID: 26581166  [PubMed - in process]


142. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Nov 13;16(11):27107-32. doi: 10.3390/ijms161126000.

EZH2 in Bladder Cancer, a Promising Therapeutic Target.

Martínez-Fernández M(1,)(2), Rubio C(3,)(4), Segovia C(5,)(6), López-Calderón
FF(7,)(8), Dueñas M(9,)(10), Paramio JM(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas,
Medioambientales y Tecnológicas), Avenida Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain. 
monica.martinez@ciemat.es. (2)Biomedical Research Institute I+12, University
Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
monica.martinez@ciemat.es. (3)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (Centro de
Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas), Avenida
Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain. carolina.rubio@externos.ciemat.es.
(4)Biomedical Research Institute I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av
Córdoba s/n, 28041 Madrid, Spain. carolina.rubio@externos.ciemat.es. (5)Molecular
Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y 
Tecnológicas), Avenida Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain.
Cristina.Segovia@ciemat.es. (6)Biomedical Research Institute I+12, University
Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
Cristina.Segovia@ciemat.es. (7)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (Centro de
Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas), Avenida
Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain.
FernandoFeliciano.Lopez@externos.ciemat.es. (8)Biomedical Research Institute
I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
FernandoFeliciano.Lopez@externos.ciemat.es. (9)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT
(Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas), Avenida
Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain. marta.duenas@ciemat.es. (10)Biomedical
Research Institute I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n,
28041 Madrid, Spain. marta.duenas@ciemat.es. (11)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT 
(Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas), Avenida
Complutense nº40. 28040 Madrid, Spain. jesusm.paramio@ciemat.es. (12)Biomedical
Research Institute I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n,
28041 Madrid, Spain. jesusm.paramio@ciemat.es.

Bladder Cancer (BC) represents a current clinical and social challenge. The
recent studies aimed to describe the genomic landscape of BC have underscored the
relevance of epigenetic alterations in the pathogenesis of these tumors. Among
the epigenetic alterations, histone modifications occupied a central role not
only in cancer, but also in normal organism homeostasis and development. EZH2
(Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2) belongs to the Polycomb repressive complex 2 as its
catalytic subunit, which through the trimethylation of H3 (Histone 3) on K27
(Lysine 27), produces gene silencing. EZH2 is frequently overexpressed in
multiple tumor types, including BC, and plays multiple roles besides the
well-recognized histone mark generation. In this review, we summarize the present
knowledge on the oncogenic roles of EZH2 and its potential use as a therapeutic
target, with special emphasis on BC pathogenesis and management.

PMCID: PMC4661858
PMID: 26580594  [PubMed - in process]


143. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 May;5(3):188-93. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.011. Epub
2015 Apr 7.

DZNep inhibits the proliferation of colon cancer HCT116 cells by inducing
senescence and apoptosis.

Sha M(1), Mao G(2), Wang G(2), Chen Y(3), Wu X(3), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Geriatrics & Geriatrics Institute of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang
Hospital, Hangzhou 310013, China. (3)Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Sixth 
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510655, China.

EZH2 is over-expressed in human colon cancer and is closely associated with tumor
proliferation, metastasis and poor prognosis. Targeting and inhibiting EZH2 may
be an effective therapeutic strategy for colon cancer. 3-Deazaneplanocin A
(DZNep), as an EZH2 inhibitor, can suppress cancer cell growth. However, the
anti-cancer role of DZNep in colon cancer cells has been rarely studied. In this 
study, we demonstrate that DZNep can inhibit the growth and survival of colon
cancer HCT116 cells by inducing cellular senescence and apoptosis. The study
provides a novel view of anti-cancer mechanisms of DZNep in human colon cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC4629229
PMID: 26579445  [PubMed]


144. Biol Proced Online. 2015 Nov 14;17:15. doi: 10.1186/s12575-015-0028-4.
eCollection 2015.

A Medium-Throughput Single Cell CRISPR-Cas9 Assay to Assess Gene Essentiality.

Grassian AR(1), Scales TM(2), Knutson SK(1), Kuntz KW(1), McCarthy NJ(2), Lowe
CE(2), Moore JD(2), Copeland RA(1), Keilhack H(1), Smith JJ(1), Wickenden JA(2), 
Ribich S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc., 400 Technology Square, 4th Floor, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.
(2)Horizon Discovery Ltd, 7100 Cambridge Research Park, Waterbeach, Cambridge,
CB25 9TL UK.

BACKGROUND: Target selection for oncology is a crucial step in the successful
development of therapeutics. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats (CRISPR)-Cas9 editing of specific loci offers an alternative method to
RNA interference and small molecule inhibitors for determining whether a cell
line is dependent on a specific gene product for proliferation or survival. In
our initial studies using CRISPR-Cas9 to verify the dependence on EZH2 activity
for proliferation of a SMARCB1/SNF5/INI1 mutant malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT)
cell line, we noted that the initial reduction in proliferation was lost over
time. We hypothesized that in the few cells that retain proliferative capacity,
at least one allele of EZH2 remains functional. To verify this, we developed an
assay to analyze 10s-100s of clonal cell populations for target gene disruption
using restriction digest and fluorescent fragment length analyses.
RESULTS: Our results clearly show that in cell lines in which EZH2 is essential
for proliferation, at least one potentially functional allele of EZH2 is retained
in the clones that survive.
CONCLUSION: This assay clearly indicates whether or not a specific gene is
essential for survival and/or proliferation in a given cell line. Such data can
aid the development of more robust therapeutics by increasing confidence in
target selection.

PMCID: PMC4647477
PMID: 26578851  [PubMed]


145. Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 15;75(24):5309-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0795. Epub 
2015 Nov 16.

miR-124 and Androgen Receptor Signaling Inhibitors Repress Prostate Cancer Growth
by Downregulating Androgen Receptor Splice Variants, EZH2, and Src.

Shi XB(1), Ma AH(2), Xue L(2), Li M(2), Nguyen HG(3), Yang JC(2), Tepper CG(4),
Gandour-Edwards R(5), Evans CP(6), Kung HJ(4), deVere White RW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of California at Davis, 
Sacramento, California. ralph.devere-white@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu xbshi@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of California at Davis, 
Sacramento, California. (3)Department of Urology, University of California, San
Francisco, California. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
School of Medicine, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, California. UC
Davis Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at Davis, Sacramento,
California. (5)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of
California at Davis, Sacramento, California. (6)Department of Urology, School of 
Medicine, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, California. UC Davis
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California at Davis, Sacramento,
California. (7)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, University of
California at Davis, Sacramento, California. UC Davis Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, California.
ralph.devere-white@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu xbshi@ucdavis.edu.

miR-124 targets the androgen receptor (AR) transcript, acting as a tumor
suppressor to broadly limit the growth of prostate cancer. In this study, we
unraveled the mechanisms through which miR-124 acts in this setting. miR-124
inhibited proliferation of prostate cancer cells in vitro and sensitized them to 
inhibitors of androgen receptor signaling. Notably, miR-124 could restore the
apoptotic response of cells resistant to enzalutamide, a drug approved for the
treatment of castration-resistant prostate cancer. We used xenograft models to
examine the effects of miR-124 in vivo when complexed with
polyethylenimine-derived nanoparticles. Intravenous delivery of miR-124 was
sufficient to inhibit tumor growth and to increase tumor cell apoptosis in
combination with enzalutamide. Mechanistic investigations revealed that miR-124
directly downregulated AR splice variants AR-V4 and V7 along with EZH2 and Src,
oncogenic targets that have been reported to contribute to prostate cancer
progression and treatment resistance. Taken together, our results offer a
preclinical rationale to evaluate miR-124 for cancer treatment. Cancer Res;
75(24); 5309-17. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4681619 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26573802  [PubMed - in process]


146. Oncol Rep. 2016 Feb;35(2):607-13. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4421. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

ARID1A gene mutation in ovarian and endometrial cancers (Review).

Takeda T(1), Banno K(1), Okawa R(1), Yanokura M(1), Iijima M(1), Irie-Kunitomi
H(1), Nakamura K(1), Iida M(1), Adachi M(1), Umene K(1), Nogami Y(1), Masuda
K(1), Kobayashi Y(1), Tominaga E(1), Aoki D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

The AT-rich interacting domain-containing protein 1A gene (ARID1A) encodes
ARID1A, a member of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex. Mutation of ARID1A 
induces changes in expression of multiple genes (CDKN1A, SMAD3, MLH1 and PIK3IP1)
via chromatin remodeling dysfunction, contributes to carcinogenesis, and has been
shown to cause transformation of cells in association with the PI3K/AKT pathway. 
Information on ARID1A has emerged from comprehensive genome-wide analyses with
next-generation sequencers. ARID1A mutations have been found in various types of 
cancer and occur at high frequency in endometriosis-associated ovarian cancer,
including clear cell adenocarcinoma and endometrioid adenocarcinoma, and also
occur at endometrial cancer especially in endometrioid adenocarcinoma. It has
also been suggested that ARID1A mutation occurs at the early stage of canceration
from endometriosis to endometriosis-associated carcinoma in ovarian cancer and
also from atypical endometrial hyperplasia to endometrioid adenocarcinoma in
endometrial cancer. Therefore, development of a screening method that can detect 
mutations of ARID1A and activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway might enable early
diagnosis of endometriosis-associated ovarian cancers and endometrial cancers.
Important results may also emerge from a current clinical trial examining a
multidrug regimen of temsirolimus, a small molecule inhibitor of the PI3K/AKT
pathway, for treatment of advanced ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma with ARID1A 
mutation and PI3K/AKT pathway activation. Also administration of sorafenib, a
multikinase inhibitor, can inhibit cancer proliferation with PIK3CA mutation and 
resistance to mTOR inhibitors and GSK126, a molecular-targeted drug can inhibit
proliferation of ARID1A-mutated ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma cells by
targeting and inhibiting EZH2. Further studies are needed to determine the
mechanism of chromatin remodeling dysregulation initiated by ARID1A mutation, to 
develop methods for early diagnosis, to investigate new cancer therapy targeting 
ARID1A, and to examine the involvement of ARID1A mutations in development,
survival and progression of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4689482
PMID: 26572704  [PubMed - in process]


147. Anticancer Agents Med Chem. 2015 Nov 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Current Status of Epigenetics and Anticancer Drug Discovery.

Chen X, Jin P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Maternity & Child Healthcare Hospital affiliated Southern Medical
University, Shenzhen, 518028, China. pingjin66@sina.com.

In recent years, there has been an expansion of the understanding of how
epigenetic dysregulation plays a role in tumorigenesis, progression, metastasis
and treatment resistance. Evidence has focused on two common and well-studied
"epigenetic codes<U+201F>, i.e., DNA methylation and histone posttranslational
modification, which regulate the transcriptional status in various types of
cancer and the corresponding target agents. Aside from "writers<U+201F> and "erasers<U+201F>,
which refer to enzymes that catalyze and remove posttranslational modifications, 
respectively, "readers<U+201F> bind to target proteins and recruit "writers<U+201F> and
"erasers<U+201F> for regulating gene expression. A number of selective and potent
anticancer compounds have been reported, some of which are in preclinical or
clinical trials that have shown promising results, primarily against malignant
neoplasms such as hematologic malignancies, with the subsequent emerging
development of both monotherapy and co-administration with traditional cytotoxic 
medicines against solid tumors. Second-generation epigenetic agents such as EZH2 
and BET inhibitors have greatly progressed. Epigenetic dysregulation has also
provided feasibility for the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. In this review,
we summarize the progress in epigenetics and drug discovery for cancer and
certain clinical trials that may provide a perspective for future development.

PMID: 26567620  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


148. Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 15;76(2):275-82. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1938. Epub
2015 Nov 13.

PRC2 Epigenetically Silences Th1-Type Chemokines to Suppress Effector T-Cell
Trafficking in Colon Cancer.

Nagarsheth N(1), Peng D(2), Kryczek I(1), Wu K(3), Li W(4), Zhao E(4), Zhao L(5),
Wei S(2), Frankel T(2), Vatan L(2), Szeliga W(2), Dou Y(6), Owens S(6), Marquez
V(7), Tao K(3), Huang E(8), Wang G(3), Zou W(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. Graduate Programs in Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Department of Surgery,
University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of 
Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, China. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Department of Surgery, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
China. (5)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of Medicine,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (7)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for Cancer 
Research, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland. (8)Departments of Colorectal
Surgery and Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio. (9)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan
School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Graduate Programs in Immunology and
Cancer Biology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan School
of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan. wzou@med.umich.edu.

Infiltration of tumors with effector T cells is positively associated with
therapeutic efficacy and patient survival. However, the mechanisms underlying
effector T-cell trafficking to the tumor microenvironment remain poorly
understood in patients with colon cancer. The polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) is involved in cancer progression, but the regulation of tumor immunity by
epigenetic mechanisms has yet to be investigated. In this study, we examined the 
relationship between the repressive PRC2 machinery and effector T-cell
trafficking. We found that PRC2 components and demethylase JMJD3-mediated histone
H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) repress the expression and subsequent
production of Th1-type chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10, mediators of effector T-cell 
trafficking. Moreover, the expression levels of PRC2 components, including EZH2, 
SUZ12, and EED, were inversely associated with those of CD4, CD8, and Th1-type
chemokines in human colon cancer tissue, and this expression pattern was
significantly associated with patient survival. Collectively, our findings reveal
that PRC2-mediated epigenetic silencing is not only a crucial oncogenic
mechanism, but also a key circuit controlling tumor immunosuppression. Therefore,
targeting epigenetic programs may have significant implications for improving the
efficacy of current cancer immunotherapies relying on effective T-cell-mediated
immunity at the tumor site. Cancer Res; 76(2); 275-82. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4715964 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26567139  [PubMed - in process]


149. Pathobiology. 2016;83(1):1-12. doi: 10.1159/000439135. Epub 2015 Nov 14.

BRCA Mutation-Related and Claudin-Low Breast Cancer: Blood Relatives or
Stepsisters.

Madaras L(1), Balint N, Gyorffy B, Tokes AM, Barshack I, Yosepovich A, Friedman
E, Paluch-Shimon S, Zippel D, Baghy K, Timar J, Kovalszky I, Kulka J, Szasz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: BRCA mutation-associated (BRCAmut) breast cancer represents a
heterogeneous group displaying certain molecular features. Claudin-low breast
cancers (CLBC) overlap with characteristics of BRCAmut tumors; therefore, we have
investigated whether these are identical subtypes.
METHODS: Using public gene expression data, CLDN, CDH1, 9-cell line claudin-low
predictor (9CLCLP) and PAM50 expression was evaluated in BRCAmut and BRCA
wild-type (BRCAwt) breast cancer cases focusing on their possible overlap with
the CLBC subtype. A separate formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) cohort of
22 BRCAmut and 19 BRCAwt tumor tissues was used for immunohistochemical
examination of AR, CD24, CD44, CK5/6, claudin-1, -3, -4 and -7, E-cadherin, EGFR,
estrogen receptor (ER), EZH2, HER2, Ki67, p53, progesterone receptor (PgR) and
vimentin expression.
RESULTS: In the data sets, CLDN1 (ROC = 0.785, p < 0.001), CDH1 (ROC = 0.785, p <
0.001), CLDN7 (ROC = 0.723, p < 0.001), CLDN3 (ROC = 0.696, p = 0.020) and CLDN4 
(ROC = 0.685, p = 0.027) were expressed at higher level in BRCAmut than BRCAwt
tumor tissue. The PAM50 subtype differed from the assigned immunohistochemistry
(IHC)-based subtype in 30%. Based on accessible 9CLCLP predictor genes, BRCAmut
breast cancer does not display the claudin-low phenotype. Utilizing FFPE samples,
claudins were evidently expressed in both BRCAmut and BRCAwt cases. However, at
the protein level, only claudin-3 expression was higher in BRCAmut tumors, while 
claudin-1, -4 and -7 and E-cadherin expression was lower compared to BRCAwt
cases. A CD24low/CD44high phenotype was found in BRCAmut tumors upon comparison
with BRCAwt cases (p < 0.001 and p = 0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: There is a prominent correlation between the genes under focus
herein and BRCA mutation status. BRCAmut tumors bear stem cell characteristics
displaying a distinct cell adhesion molecule profile characterized by high
expression of CDH1 and CLDN4 according to public gene expression data set
analysis, and higher claudin-3 expression as detected by IHC; thus, BRCAmut
breast carcinomas are not identical with the previously identified claudin-low
subtype of breast cancer.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26566278  [PubMed - in process]


150. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Jan 1;27(1):177-96. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-08-0605. Epub 2015
Nov 12.

Epigenetic engineering shows that a human centromere resists silencing mediated
by H3K27me3/K9me3.

Martins NM(1), Bergmann JH(1), Shono N(2), Kimura H(3), Larionov V(4), Masumoto
H(5), Earnshaw WC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9
3JR, Scotland, United Kingdom. (2)Laboratory of Cell Engineering, Department of
Frontier Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu 292-0818, Japan
Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan. (3)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Molecular
Pharmacology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892. (5)Laboratory of Cell Engineering, Department of Frontier Research,
Kazusa DNA Research Institute, Kisarazu 292-0818, Japan. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre
for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JR, Scotland, United
Kingdom bill.earnshaw@ed.ac.uk.

Centromeres are characterized by the centromere-specific H3 variant CENP-A, which
is embedded in chromatin with a pattern characteristic of active transcription
that is required for centromere identity. It is unclear how centromeres remain
transcriptionally active despite being flanked by repressive pericentric
heterochromatin. To further understand centrochromatin's response to repressive
signals, we nucleated a Polycomb-like chromatin state within the centromere of a 
human artificial chromosome (HAC) by tethering the methyltransferase EZH2. This
led to deposition of the H3K27me3 mark and PRC1 repressor binding. Surprisingly, 
this state did not abolish HAC centromere function or transcription, and this
apparent resistance was not observed on a noncentromeric locus, where
transcription was silenced. Directly tethering the reader/repressor PRC1 bypassed
this resistance, inactivating the centromere. We observed analogous responses
when tethering the heterochromatin Editor Suv39h1-methyltransferase domain
(centromere resistance) or reader HP1a (centromere inactivation), respectively.
Our results reveal that the HAC centromere can resist repressive pathways driven 
by H3K9me3/H3K27me3 and may help to explain how centromeres are able to resist
inactivation by flanking heterochromatin.

© 2016 Martins et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4694756
PMID: 26564795  [PubMed - in process]


151. BMC Cancer. 2015 Nov 9;15:874. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1889-2.

Molecular and pathological characterization of the EZH2 rs3757441 single
nucleotide polymorphism in colorectal cancer.

Fornaro L(1), Faviana P(2), De Gregorio V(3), Vivaldi C(4), Paolicchi E(5), Masi 
G(6), Loupakis F(7), Sensi E(8), Lupi C(9), Fontanini G(10), Wang Y(11,)(12),
Danesi R(13), Falcone A(14), Crea F(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto
Toscano Tumori, Pisa, Italy. lorenzo.fornaro@gmail.com. (2)Unit of Pathology,
Department of Surgical, Medical and Molecular Pathology and Critical Care,
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. pinuccia.faviana@med.unipi.it. (3)Unit of
Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto Toscano
Tumori, Pisa, Italy. veronicadegregorio@libero.it. (4)Unit of Medical Oncology 2,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Pisa, Italy.
caterinavivaldi@gmail.com. (5)Department of Biology, Unit of Genetics, University
of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. eli.paolicchi@gmail.com. (6)Unit of Medical Oncology 2,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Pisa, Italy.
gl.masi@tin.it. (7)Unit of Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria 
Pisana, Istituto Toscano Tumori, Pisa, Italy. fotiosloupakis@gmail.com. (8)Unit
of Pathology, Department of Surgical, Medical and Molecular Pathology and
Critical Care, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. e.sensi@med.unipi.it. (9)Unit of 
Pathology, Department of Surgical, Medical and Molecular Pathology and Critical
Care, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. cristianalupi@libero.it. (10)Unit of
Pathology, Department of Surgical, Medical and Molecular Pathology and Critical
Care, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. gabriella.fontanini@med.unipi.it.
(11)Experimental Therapeutics, BCCA Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. ywang@bccrc.ca. (12)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
ywang@bccrc.ca. (13)Pharmacology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. romano.danesi@med.unipi.it. (14)Unit
of Medical Oncology 2, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto Toscano
Tumori, Pisa, Italy. alfredo.falcone@med.unipi.it. (15)Experimental Therapeutics,
BCCA Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. francesco.crea@open.ac.uk.
(16)Department of Life Health and Chemical Sciences, The Open Universit, Milton
Keynes, UK. francesco.crea@open.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The enhancer of zeste-homolog 2 (EZH2) is involved in cancer
development through gene silencing by trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone 3
(H3K27me3). The C/C genotype for the EZH2 rs3757441 single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) is linked with poor prognosis in metastatic colorectal cancer 
(CRC), but molecular and pathological characterization of this SNP is lacking.
METHODS: 119 primary CRCs were analyzed. SNP was evaluated by real-time PCR from 
colonic healthy tissue, while EZH2 and H3K27me3 expression were studied by
immunohistochemistry. We primarily looked for correlation between EZH2 rs3757441 
genotypes and EZH2/H3K27me3 expression. Potential associations between
EZH2/H3K27me3 expression and clinico-pathological features or KRAS exon 2 and
BRAF exon 15 mutations were secondary endpoints. Statistical analysis was
performed by chi-square test, T-test or ANOVA.
RESULTS: The C/C genotype was significantly associated with higher EZH2 (100 vs. 
44 %; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019) and H3K27me3 (100 vs. 38 %; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009) staining intensity
compared with C/T and T/T. EZH2 3+ staining significantly correlated with
stronger H3K27me3 expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.039). KRAS and BRAF mutations were not
associated with EZH2 or H3K27me3 expression.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 rs3757441 C/C genotype is associated with stronger EZH2 and
H3K27me3 immunoreactivity in primary CRC: this SNP may serve as a promising
biomarker for EZH2-targeting agents and may add independent information to KRAS
and BRAF testing.

PMCID: PMC4640238
PMID: 26553291  [PubMed - in process]


152. Neurosci Lett. 2016 Jan 1;610:182-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.074. Epub 2015
Nov 10.

Chromatin remodeling gene EZH2 involved in the genetic etiology of autism in
Chinese Han population.

Li J(1), You Y(1), Yue W(1), Yu H(2), Lu T(1), Wu Z(1), Jia M(1), Ruan Y(1), Liu 
J(3), Zhang D(4), Wang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of Health & National Clinical
Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking University), Beijing, PR China.
(2)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of Health & National Clinical
Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking University), Beijing, PR China;
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, PR China.
(3)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, PR
China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of Health & National Clinical
Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking University), Beijing, PR China.
Electronic address: ljyuch@bjmu.edu.cn. (4)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth 
Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, PR China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health, 
Ministry of Health & National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders
(Peking University), Beijing, PR China; Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing, PR China; PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Peking University, Beijing, PR China. Electronic address:
daizhang@bjmu.edu.cn. (5)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth Hospital, Peking
University, Beijing, PR China; Key Laboratory of Mental Health, Ministry of
Health & National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking
University), Beijing, PR China. Electronic address: lifangwang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a group of severe neurodevelopmental disorders.
Epigenetic factors play a critical role in the etiology of ASD. Enhancer of zest 
homolog 2 (EZH2), which encodes a histone methyltransferase, plays an important
role in the process of chromatin remodeling during neurodevelopment. Further,
EZH2 is located in chromosome 7q35-36, which is one of the linkage regions for
autism. However, the genetic relationship between autism and EZH2 remains
unclear. To investigate the association between EZH2 and autism in Chinese Han
population, we performed a family-based association study between autism and
three tagged single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that covered 95.4% of the
whole region of EZH2. In the discovery cohort of 239 trios, two SNPs (rs740949
and rs6464926) showed a significant association with autism. To decrease false
positive results, we expanded the sample size to 427 trios. A SNP (rs6464926) was
significantly associated with autism even after Bonferroni correction (p=0.008). 
Haplotype G-T (rs740949 and rs6464926) was a risk factor for autism (Z=2.655,
p=0.008, Global p=0.024). In silico function prediction for SNPs indicated that
these two SNPs might be regulatory SNPs. Expression pattern of EZH2 showed that
it is highly expressed in human embryonic brains. In conclusion, our findings
demonstrate that EZH2 might contribute to the genetic etiology of autism in
Chinese Han population.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26552012  [PubMed - in process]


153. Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1491-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.3968. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

SWI/SNF-mutant cancers depend on catalytic and non-catalytic activity of EZH2.

Kim KH(1,)(2,)(3), Kim W(1,)(2,)(3), Howard TP(1,)(2,)(3), Vazquez F(4),
Tsherniak A(4), Wu JN(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Wang W(1,)(2,)(3), Haswell JR(1,)(2,)(3),
Walensky LD(1,)(2,)(3), Hahn WC(4,)(5,)(6), Orkin SH(1,)(2,)(3,)(7), Roberts
CW(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (6)Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Human cancer genome sequencing has recently revealed that genes that encode
subunits of SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complexes are frequently mutated across 
a wide variety of cancers, and several subunits of the complex have been shown to
have bona fide tumor suppressor activity. However, whether mutations in SWI/SNF
subunits result in shared dependencies is unknown. Here we show that EZH2, a
catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), is essential in
all tested cancer cell lines and xenografts harboring mutations of the SWI/SNF
subunits ARID1A, PBRM1, and SMARCA4, which are several of the most frequently
mutated SWI/SNF subunits in human cancer, but that co-occurrence of a Ras pathway
mutation is correlated with abrogation of this dependence. Notably, we
demonstrate that SWI/SNF-mutant cancer cells are primarily dependent on a
non-catalytic role of EZH2 in the stabilization of the PRC2 complex, and that
they are only partially dependent on EZH2 histone methyltransferase activity.
These results not only reveal a shared dependency of cancers with genetic
alterations in SWI/SNF subunits, but also suggest that EZH2 enzymatic inhibitors 
now in clinical development may not fully suppress the oncogenic activity of
EZH2.

PMID: 26552009  [PubMed - in process]


154. Elife. 2015 Nov 9;4. pii: e09571. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09571.

Chromatin dynamics and the role of G9a in gene regulation and enhancer silencing 
during early mouse development.

Zylicz JJ(1,)(2,)(3), Dietmann S(3), Günesdogan U(1,)(2), Hackett JA(1,)(2),
Cougot D(1,)(2), Lee C(1,)(2), Surani MA(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research United Kingdom Gurdon Institute, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Physiology, Development
and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Wellcome
Trust/Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Early mouse development is accompanied by dynamic changes in chromatin
modifications, including G9a-mediated histone H3 lysine 9 dimethylation
(H3K9me2), which is essential for embryonic development. Here we show that
genome-wide accumulation of H3K9me2 is crucial for postimplantation development, 
and coincides with redistribution of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)-dependent
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). Loss of G9a or EZH2 results in
upregulation of distinct gene sets involved in cell cycle regulation, germline
development and embryogenesis. Notably, the H3K9me2 modification extends to
active enhancer elements where it promotes developmentally-linked gene silencing 
and directly marks promoters and gene bodies. This epigenetic mechanism is
important for priming gene regulatory networks for critical cell fate decisions
in rapidly proliferating postimplantation epiblast cells.

PMCID: PMC4729692
PMID: 26551560  [PubMed - in process]


155. Nat Neurosci. 2015 Dec;18(12):1746-55. doi: 10.1038/nn.4165. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

G9a is essential for epigenetic silencing of K(+) channel genes in
acute-to-chronic pain transition.

Laumet G(1), Garriga J(2), Chen SR(1), Zhang Y(1), Li DP(1), Smith TM(1), Dong
Y(1,)(3), Jelinek J(2), Cesaroni M(2), Issa JP(2), Pan HL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Pain Research, Department of Anesthesiology and
Perioperative Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology,
Temple University Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Institute and Hospital of Stomatology, Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, China.

Neuropathic pain is a debilitating clinical problem and difficult to treat. Nerve
injury causes a long-lasting reduction in K(+) channel expression in the dorsal
root ganglion (DRG), but little is known about the epigenetic mechanisms
involved. We found that nerve injury increased dimethylation of Lys9 on histone
H3 (H3K9me2) at Kcna4, Kcnd2, Kcnq2 and Kcnma1 promoters but did not affect
levels of DNA methylation on these genes in DRGs. Nerve injury increased activity
of euchromatic histone-lysine N-methyltransferase-2 (G9a), histone deacetylases
and enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2), but only G9a inhibition consistently
restored K(+) channel expression. Selective knockout of the gene encoding G9a in 
DRG neurons completely blocked K(+) channel silencing and chronic pain
development after nerve injury. Remarkably, RNA sequencing analysis revealed that
G9a inhibition not only reactivated 40 of 42 silenced genes associated with K(+) 
channels but also normalized 638 genes down- or upregulated by nerve injury. Thus
G9a has a dominant function in transcriptional repression of K(+) channels and in
acute-to-chronic pain transition after nerve injury.

PMCID: PMC4661086 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26551542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Nov 3. pii: ASN.2014090898. [Epub ahead of print]

The Histone Methyltransferase Enzyme Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 Protects against
Podocyte Oxidative Stress and Renal Injury in Diabetes.

Siddiqi FS(1), Majumder S(1), Thai K(1), Abdalla M(1), Hu P(2), Advani SL(1),
White KE(3), Bowskill BB(1), Guarna G(1), Dos Santos CC(1), Connelly KA(1),
Advani A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science and Li Ka Shing Knowledge
Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Medical Genetics and George and Fay Yee Centre for Healthcare
Innovation, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada; and. (3)Electron 
Microscopy Research Services, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom. (4)Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science and Li Ka Shing
Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
advania@smh.ca.

Epigenetic regulation of oxidative stress is emerging as a critical mediator of
diabetic nephropathy. In diabetes, oxidative damage occurs when there is an
imbalance between reactive oxygen species generation and enzymatic antioxidant
repair. Here, we investigated the function of the histone methyltransferase
enzyme enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in attenuating oxidative injury in
podocytes, focusing on its regulation of the endogenous antioxidant inhibitor
thioredoxin interacting protein (TxnIP). Pharmacologic or genetic depletion of
EZH2 augmented TxnIP expression and oxidative stress in podocytes cultured under 
high-glucose conditions. Conversely, EZH2 upregulation through inhibition of its 
regulatory microRNA, microRNA-101, downregulated TxnIP and attenuated oxidative
stress. In diabetic rats, depletion of EZH2 decreased histone 3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3), increased glomerular TxnIP expression, induced
podocyte injury, and augmented oxidative stress and proteinuria. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed H3K27me3 enrichment at the promoter of
the transcription factor Pax6, which was upregulated on EZH2 depletion and bound 
to the TxnIP promoter, controlling expression of its gene product. In high
glucose-exposed podocytes and the kidneys of diabetic rats, the lower EZH2
expression detected coincided with upregulation of Pax6 and TxnIP. Finally, in a 
gene expression array, TxnIP was among seven of 30,854 genes upregulated by high 
glucose, EZH2 depletion, and the combination thereof. Thus, EZH2 represses the
transcription factor Pax6, which controls expression of the antioxidant inhibitor
TxnIP, and in diabetes, downregulation of EZH2 promotes oxidative stress. These
findings expand the extent to which epigenetic processes affect the diabetic
kidney to include antioxidant repair.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 26534922  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


157. Nat Immunol. 2016 Jan;17(1):95-103. doi: 10.1038/ni.3313. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

Cancer mediates effector T cell dysfunction by targeting microRNAs and EZH2 via
glycolysis restriction.

Zhao E(1,)(2), Maj T(1), Kryczek I(1), Li W(1,)(2), Wu K(1,)(2), Zhao L(3), Wei
S(1), Crespo J(1), Wan S(1), Vatan L(1), Szeliga W(1), Shao I(1), Wang Y(1), Liu 
Y(1), Varambally S(4,)(5), Chinnaiyan AM(5), Welling TH(1), Marquez V(6),
Kotarski J(7), Wang H(2,)(8), Wang Z(8), Zhang Y(9), Liu R(10), Wang G(2), Zou
W(1,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan, USA. (2)Department of Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (3)Department of
Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of
Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (6)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Center for
Cancer Research, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland, USA. (7)The First Department
of Gynecologic Oncology and Gynecology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan School of Medicine,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
of Michigan School of Medicine, Arbor, Michigan, USA. (11)Graduate Programs in
Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. 
(12)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan,
USA.

Aerobic glycolysis regulates T cell function. However, whether and how primary
cancer alters T cell glycolytic metabolism and affects tumor immunity in cancer
patients remains a question. Here we found that ovarian cancers imposed glucose
restriction on T cells and dampened their function via maintaining high
expression of microRNAs miR-101 and miR-26a, which constrained expression of the 
methyltransferase EZH2. EZH2 activated the Notch pathway by suppressing Notch
repressors Numb and Fbxw7 via trimethylation of histone H3 at Lys27 and,
consequently, stimulated T cell polyfunctional cytokine expression and promoted
their survival via Bcl-2 signaling. Moreover, small hairpin RNA-mediated
knockdown of human EZH2 in T cells elicited poor antitumor immunity.
EZH2(+)CD8(+) T cells were associated with improved survival in patients.
Together, these data unveil a metabolic target and mechanism of cancer immune
evasion.

PMCID: PMC4684796 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26523864  [PubMed - in process]


158. J Clin Invest. 2015 Oct 26;125(12):4375-90. doi: 10.1172/JCI80325.

Phosphorylation-mediated EZH2 inactivation promotes drug resistance in multiple
myeloma.

Kikuchi J, Koyama D, Wada T, Izumi T, Hofgaard PO, Bogen B, Furukawa Y.

Alterations in chromatin modifications, such as histone methylation, have been
suggested as mediating chemotherapy resistance in several cancer types;
therefore, elucidation of the epigenetic mechanisms that underlie drug resistance
may greatly contribute to the advancement of cancer therapies. In the present
study, we identified histone H3-lysine 27 (H3K27) as a critical residue for
epigenetic modification in multiple myeloma. We determined that abrogation of
drug-induced H3K27 hypermethylation is associated with cell adhesion-mediated
drug resistance (CAM-DR), which is the most important form of drug resistance,
using a coculture system to evaluate stroma cell adhesion-dependent alterations
in multiple myeloma cells. Cell adhesion counteracted anticancer drug-induced
hypermethylation of H3K27 via inactivating phosphorylation of the transcription
regulator EZH2 at serine 21, leading to the sustained expression of antiapoptotic
genes, including IGF1, B cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (BCL2), and hypoxia inducible factor
1, a subunit (HIF1A). Pharmacological and genetic inhibition of the
IGF-1R/PI3K/AKT pathway reversed CAM-DR by promoting EZH2 dephosphorylation and
H3K27 hypermethylation both in vitro and in refractory murine myeloma models.
Together, our findings identify and characterize an epigenetic mechanism that
underlies CAM-DR and suggest that kinase inhibitors to counteract EZH2
phosphorylation should be included in combination chemotherapy to increase
therapeutic index.

PMCID: PMC4665777
PMID: 26517694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):42258-75. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5546.

A Polycomb-mir200 loop regulates clinical outcome in bladder cancer.

Martínez-Fernández M(1,)(2), Dueñas M(1,)(2), Feber A(3), Segovia C(1,)(2),
García-Escudero R(1,)(2), Rubio C(1,)(2), López-Calderón FF(1,)(2), Díaz-García
C(1), Villacampa F(2,)(4), Duarte J(2,)(4), Gómez-Rodriguez MJ(2,)(4), Castellano
D(2,)(4), Rodriguez-Peralto JL(5), de la Rosa F(2,)(4), Beck S(3), Paramio
JM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (ed70A), 28040 Madrid, Spain. (2)Universitary 
Hospital 12 de Octubre, Research Institute 12 de Octubre i+12, 28041 Madrid,
Spain. (3)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)Uro-oncology Section, Universitary Hospital 12 de
Octubre, 28041 Madrid, Spain. (5)Anatomic Pathology Service, Universitary
Hospital 12 de Octubre, Research Institute 12 de Octubre i+12, 28041 Madrid,
Spain.

Bladder cancer (BC) is a highly prevalent disease, ranking fifth in the most
common cancers worldwide. Various miRNAs have recently emerged as potential
prognostic biomarkers in cancer. The miR-200 family, which repressed the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), is repressed in multiple advanced
cancers. However, its expression and function in BC is still poorly understood.
Here we show that miR-200 family displays increased expression, probably due to
the activation of specific oncogenic signaling pathways, and reduced promoter
methylation, in BC compared to normal bladder samples. Furthermore, we show that 
the expression of these miRNAs is decreased in high grade and stage tumors, and
the down-regulation is associated with patient's poor clinical outcome. Our data 
indicate that the miR-200 family plays distinct roles in Non-Muscle (NMIBC) and
Muscle-Invasive BC (MIBC). In MIBC, miR-200 expression post transcriptionally
regulates EMT-promoting transcription factors ZEB1 and ZEB2, whereas suppresses
BMI1 expression in NMIBC. Interestingly, we show that increased EZH2 and/or BMI1 
expression repress the expression of miR-200 family members. Collectively, these 
findings support a model of BC progression through a coordinated action between
the Polycomb Repression Complex (PRC) members repressing the miR-200 expression, 
which ultimately favors invasive BC development. Since pharmacological inhibition
of EZH2 in BC cell lines lead to increased miR-200 expression, our findings may
support new therapeutic strategies for BC clinical management.

PMCID: PMC4747223
PMID: 26517683  [PubMed - in process]


160. Pathology. 2015 Dec;47(7):622-8. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0000000000000325.

Cancer stem cell markers in prostate cancer: an immunohistochemical study of
ALDH1, SOX2 and EZH2.

Matsika A(1), Srinivasan B, Day C, Mader SA, Kiernan DM, Broomfield A, Fu J,
Hooper JD, Kench JG, Samaratunga H.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Anatomical Pathology, Mater Health Services, South Brisbane
2Pathology Queensland, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Herston 3Department
of Pathology, University of Queensland, Brisbane 4Department of Urology, Mater
Adult Hospital, South Brisbane 5Mater Research Institute - University of
Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Woolloongabba, Qld 6Department of
Tissue Pathology and Diagnostic Oncology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Camperdown and Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, NSW 7Aquesta
Pathology, Taringa, Qld, Australia.

The aims of this study were to investigate the immunohistochemical expression and
potential prognostic significance of putative cancer stems cell markers ALDH1,
EZH2 and SOX2 in prostate cancer.A total of 142 consecutive radical
prostatectomies submitted to one laboratory with a diagnosis of prostatic
adenocarcinoma between 2008 and 2012 were retrieved and retrospectively studied. 
Immunohistochemistry for the three markers was performed in each case and both
univariate and multivariate analyses were undertaken to evaluate the correlation 
between the staining patterns and known histopathological prognostic
features.ALDH1 showed a statistically significant association with tumour stage
p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001), extraprostatic extension (p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001) and lymphovascular invasion
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001). EZH2 correlated with Gleason score (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.044) and lymph node
metastases (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.023). SOX2 showed a statistically significant correlation with 
lymphovascular invasion only (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.018) in both univariate and multivariate
analyses.Cancer stem cell markers are variably expressed in prostate
adenocarcinoma and immunohistochemical staining for ALDH1 and EZH2 may have a
role in predicting tumour aggressiveness before treatment of prostate cancer.

PMID: 26517640  [PubMed - in process]


161. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 1;6(38):40940-52. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5724.

Mutual regulation between CHD5 and EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xie CR(1), Li Z(1), Sun HG(1), Wang FQ(1), Sun Y(1), Zhao WX(1), Zhang S(1), Zhao
WX(1), Wang XM(1), Yin ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University,
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular
Carcinoma, Fujian, P.R. China.

Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5) acts as a tumor suppressor in 
many cancers. In the present study, we demonstrated that reduced levels of CHD5
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues were significantly associated with
metastasis and poor prognosis. Gain-of-function assays revealed that CHD5
suppressed motility and invasion of HCC cells. Subsequent investigations showed
that CHD5 was epigenetically silenced by polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2)-mediated the trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in HCC
cells. Furthermore, overexpression of CHD5 repressed enhancer of zeste homolog 2 
(EZH2) and activated PRC2 target genes, such as p16 and p21. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase reporter assays also showed that CHD5 and EZH2
bind to each other's promoters and inhibit transcription. These findings
uncovered, for the first time, a mutual suppression regulation between CHD5 and
EZH2, which may provide new insights into their potential therapeutic
significance for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4747380
PMID: 26517514  [PubMed - in process]


162. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 1;6(38):41045-55. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5728.

LncRNA MALAT1 enhances oncogenic activities of EZH2 in castration-resistant
prostate cancer.

Wang D(1,)(2,)(3), Ding L(1), Wang L(4), Zhao Y(1), Sun Z(4), Karnes RJ(2,)(3),
Zhang J(5), Huang H(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (2)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College
of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (3)Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. (4)Department of Medical
Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The Polycomb protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is frequently
overexpressed in advanced human prostate cancer (PCa), especially in lethal
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, the signaling pathways that
regulate EZH2 functions in PCa remain incompletely defined. Using EZH2
antibody-based RNA immunoprecipitation-coupled high throughput sequencing
(RIP-seq), we demonstrated that EZH2 binds to MALAT1, a long non-coding RNA
(lncRNA) that is overexpressed during PCa progression. GST pull-down and RIP
assays demonstrated that the 3' end of MALAT1 interacts with the N-terminal of
EZH2. Knockdown of MALAT1 impaired EZH2 recruitment to its target loci and
upregulated expression of EZH2 repressed genes. Further studies indicated that
MALAT1 plays a vital role in EZH2-enhanced migration and invasion in CRPC cell
lines. Meta-analysis and RT-qPCR of patient specimens demonstrated a positive
correlation between MALAT1 and EZH2 expression in human CRPC tissues. Finally, we
showed that MALAT1 enhances expression of PRC2-independent target genes of EZH2
in CRPC cells in culture and patient-derived xenografts. Together, these data
indicate that MALAT1 may be a crucial RNA cofactor of EZH2 and that the
EZH2-MALAT1 association may provide a new avenue for development new strategies
for treatment of CRPC.

PMCID: PMC4747388
PMID: 26516927  [PubMed - in process]


163. Reproduction. 2016 Jan;151(1):9-16. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0338. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation acts as an epigenetic barrier in porcine
nuclear reprogramming.

Xie B(1), Zhang H(1), Wei R(1), Li Q(1), Weng X(1), Kong Q(1), Liu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Embryo BiotechnologyCollege of Life Science, Northeast
Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai Street, Harbin, 150030 Heilongjiang, China.
(2)Laboratory of Embryo BiotechnologyCollege of Life Science, Northeast
Agricultural University, No. 59 Mucai Street, Harbin, 150030 Heilongjiang, China 
liu086@126.com.

Aberrant epigenetic reprogramming is the main obstacle to the development of
somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) embryos and the generation of induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, which results in the low reprogramming efficiencies
of SCNT and iPS. Histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), as a repressive 
epigenetic mark, plays important roles in mammalian development and iPS
induction. However, the reprogramming of H3K27me3 in pig remains elusive. In this
study, we showed that H3K27me3 levels in porcine early cloned embryos were higher
than that in IVF embryos. Then GSK126 and GSK-J4, two small molecule inhibitors
of H3K27me3 methylase (EZH2) and demethylases (UTX/JMJD3), were used to regulate 
the H3K27me3 level. The results showed that H3K27me3 level was reduced in cloned 
embryos after treatment of PEF with 0.75<U+200A>µM GSK126 for 48<U+200A>h, incubation of
one-cell reconstructed oocytes with 0.1<U+200A>µM GSK126 and injection of antibody for
EZH2 into oocyte. Meanwhile, the development of the cloned embryos was
significantly improved after these treatments. On the contrary, GSK-J4 treatment 
increased the H3K27me3 level in cloned embryos and decreased the cloned embryonic
development. Furthermore, iPS efficiency was both increased after reducing the
H3K27me3 level in donor cells and in early reprogramming phase. In summary, our
results suggest that H3K27me3 acts as an epigenetic barrier in SCNT and iPS
reprogramming, and reduction of H3K27me3 level in donor cells and in early
reprogramming phase can enhance both porcine SCNT and iPS efficiency.

© 2016 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26515777  [PubMed - in process]


164. Genetics. 2015 Dec;201(4):1341-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180125. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

A Gene Regulatory Program in Human Breast Cancer.

Li R(1), Campos J(2), Iida J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963 The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609 renhua.li10@gmail.com. (2)Windber Research
Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963.

Molecular heterogeneity in human breast cancer has challenged diagnosis,
prognosis, and clinical treatment. It is well known that molecular subtypes of
breast tumors are associated with significant differences in prognosis and
survival. Assuming that the differences are attributed to subtype-specific
pathways, we then suspect that there might be gene regulatory mechanisms that
modulate the behavior of the pathways and their interactions. In this study, we
proposed an integrated methodology, including machine learning and information
theory, to explore the mechanisms. Using existing data from three large cohorts
of human breast cancer populations, we have identified an ensemble of 16 master
regulator genes (or MR16) that can discriminate breast tumor samples into four
major subtypes. Evidence from gene expression across the three cohorts has
consistently indicated that the MR16 can be divided into two groups that
demonstrate subtype-specific gene expression patterns. For example, group 1 MRs, 
including ESR1, FOXA1, and GATA3, are overexpressed in luminal A and luminal B
subtypes, but lowly expressed in HER2-enriched and basal-like subtypes. In
contrast, group 2 MRs, including FOXM1, EZH2, MYBL2, and ZNF695, display an
opposite pattern. Furthermore, evidence from mutual information modeling has
congruently indicated that the two groups of MRs either up- or down-regulate
cancer driver-related genes in opposite directions. Furthermore, integration of
somatic mutations with pathway changes leads to identification of canonical
genomic alternations in a subtype-specific fashion. Taken together, these studies
have implicated a gene regulatory program for breast tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4676531 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510790  [PubMed - in process]


165. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic landscape of recurrent ASXL1, U2AF1, SF3B1, SRSF2, and EZH2 mutations in 
304 Chinese patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.

Wu L(1), Song L(1), Xu L(2), Chang C(1), Xu F(1), Wu D(1), He Q(1), Su J(1), Zhou
L(1), Xiao C(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Chen S(2), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, 200233, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medical
Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China. (3)Department of
Hematology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital,
Shanghai, 200233, China. lixiao3326@163.com.

We determined the biological and prognostic significance of five recurrent
genetic aberrations in Chinese patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). A
total of 304 Chinese MDS patients were screened for known mutations in five genes
(ASXL1, U2AF1, SF3B1, SRSF2, and EZH2) using next-generation sequencing. Of
these, 97 patients (31.9 %) harbored at least one mutation in the five genes, and
patients harboring these mutations had distinct clinical features. Incidence
ratios for mutations in ASXL1, U2AF1, SF3B1, SRSF2, and EZH2 were 11.8, 8.6, 8.2,
4.3, and 3.6 %, respectively. Patients with U2AF1, SRSF2, and EZH2 mutations more
commonly had high-risk than low-risk subtypes, while SF3B1 mutations were
frequently confirmed in MDS subtypes with increased ring sideroblasts. Cases with
ASXL1 mutations had a higher percentage of complex karyotypes, while U2AF1
mutations were more common in patients with trisomy 8 or 20q deletions. Notably, 
among 124 patients with a normal karyotype, 48 (38.7 %) had at least one
mutation. Patients with U2AF1 or SRSF2 mutations had significantly shorter
overall survival (OS) times compared with patients without these mutations (U2AF1
mutations: median OS, 18 vs 54 months, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032; SRSF2 mutations: median OS 11
vs 54 months, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005, respectively). Multivariate analysis showed that the
presence of SRSF2 mutations was an independent unfavorable prognostic factor for 
OS (hazard ratio 2.039; 95 % confidence interval 1.040-4.000; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038). These
data suggest that mutations in epigenetic modification and splicesome genes are
common in Chinese patients with MDS, while mutations in U2AF1 and SRSF2 appear to
predict an unfavorable prognosis.

PMID: 26508027  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


166. Toxicol Lett. 2016 Jan 5;240(1):60-7. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2015.10.016. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

Epigenetic silencing of p21 by long non-coding RNA HOTAIR is involved in the cell
cycle disorder induced by cigarette smoke extract.

Liu Y(1), Wang B(1), Liu X(1), Lu L(1), Luo F(1), Lu X(1), Shi L(1), Xu W(1), Liu
Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, PR China; The Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology,
Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, PR China. (2)Institute of Toxicology, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, PR China; The Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology, Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 211166, PR China. Electronic
address: drqzliu@hotmail.com.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), which are epigenetic regulators, are involved in
human malignancies. Little is known, however, about the molecular mechanisms for 
lncRNA regulation of genes induced by cigarette smoke. We recently found that, in
human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, the lncRNA, Hox transcript antisense
intergenic RNA (HOTAIR), is associated with changes in the cell cycle caused by
cigarette smoke extract (CSE). In the present study, we report that increased
expression of HOTAIR and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), and tri-methylation 
of Lys 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3), affect cell cycle progression during
CSE-induced transformation of HBE cells. Inhibition of HOTAIR and EZH2 by siRNAs 
attenuated CSE-induced decreases of p21 levels. Further, ChIP assays verified
that HOTAIR and EZH2 were needed to maintain the interaction of H3K27me3 with the
promoter regions of p21; combined use of a HOTAIR plasmid and EZH2 siRNA
supported this observation. Thus, HOTAIR epigenetic silencing of p21 via
EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation contributes to changes in the cell cycle
induced by CSE. These observations provide further understanding of the
regulation of CSE-induced lung carcinogenesis and identify new therapeutic
targets.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26506537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Genes (Basel). 2015 Oct 21;6(4):1076-112. doi: 10.3390/genes6041076.

Epigenetic Heterogeneity of B-Cell Lymphoma: Chromatin Modifiers.

Hopp L(1), Nersisyan L(2), Löffler-Wirth H(3), Arakelyan A(4,)(5), Binder H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr.
16-18, Leipzig 04107, Germany. hopp@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (2)Group of
Bioinformatics, Institute of Molecular Biology NAS RA, 7 Hasratyan St, Yerevan
0014, Armenia. l_nersisyan@mb.sci.am. (3)Interdisciplinary Centre for
Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, Leipzig 04107, Germany.
wirth@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (4)Group of Bioinformatics, Institute of Molecular
Biology NAS RA, 7 Hasratyan St, Yerevan 0014, Armenia. aarakelyan@sci.am.
(5)College of Science and Engineering, American University of Armenia, 40
Baghramyan Ave, Yerevan 0019, Armenia. aarakelyan@sci.am. (6)Interdisciplinary
Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, Leipzig 04107, 
Germany. binder@izbi.uni-leipzig.de.

We systematically studied the expression of more than fifty histone and DNA
(de)methylating enzymes in lymphoma and healthy controls. As a main result, we
found that the expression levels of nearly all enzymes become markedly disturbed 
in lymphoma, suggesting deregulation of large parts of the epigenetic machinery. 
We discuss the effect of DNA promoter methylation and of transcriptional activity
in the context of mutated epigenetic modifiers such as EZH2 and MLL2. As another 
mechanism, we studied the coupling between the energy metabolism and epigenetics 
via metabolites that act as cofactors of JmjC-type demethylases. Our study
results suggest that Burkitt's lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell Lymphoma differ 
by an imbalance of repressive and poised promoters, which is governed
predominantly by the activity of methyltransferases and the underrepresentation
of demethylases in this regulation. The data further suggest that coupling of
epigenetics with the energy metabolism can also be an important factor in
lymphomagenesis in the absence of direct mutations of genes in metabolic
pathways. Understanding of epigenetic deregulation in lymphoma and possibly in
cancers in general must go beyond simple schemes using only a few modes of
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4690029
PMID: 26506391  [PubMed]


168. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Jan;1862(1):82-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.10.019. 
Epub 2015 Oct 24.

S-adenosylhomocysteine induces inflammation through NFkB: A possible role for
EZH2 in endothelial cell activation.

Barroso M(1), Kao D(2), Blom HJ(3), Tavares de Almeida I(4), Castro R(5),
Loscalzo J(2), Handy DE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Research Institute for Medicines
(iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Laboratory of Clinical
Biochemistry and Metabolism, Department of General Pediatrics, Adolescent
Medicine and Neonatology, University Medical Centre Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. 
(4)Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy,
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. (5)Research Institute for Medicines
(iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal;
Department of Biochemistry and Human Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. (6)Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
Electronic address: dhandy@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) can induce endothelial dysfunction and activation,
contributing to atherogenesis; however, its role in the activation of the
inflammatory mediator NFkB has not been explored. Our aim was to determine the
role of NFkB in SAH-induced activation of endothelial cells. Furthermore, we
examined whether SAH, as a potent inhibitor of S-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methyltransferases, suppresses the function of EZH2 methyltransferase to
contribute to SAH-induced endothelial cell activation. We found that excess SAH
increases the expression of adhesion molecules and cytokines in human coronary
artery endothelial cells. Importantly, this up-regulation was suppressed in cells
expressing a dominant negative form of the NFkB inhibitor, IkB. Moreover, SAH
accumulation triggers the activation of both the canonical and non-canonical NFkB
pathways, decreases EZH2, and reduces histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation. EZH2
knockdown recapitulated the effects of excess SAH on endothelial activation,
i.e., it induced NFkB activation and the subsequent up-regulation of adhesion
molecules and cytokines. Our findings suggest that suppression of the epigenetic 
regulator EZH2 by excess SAH may contribute to NFkB activation and the consequent
vascular inflammatory response. These studies unveil new targets of SAH
regulation, demonstrating that EZH2 suppression and NFkB activation mediated by
SAH accumulation may contribute to its adverse effects in the vasculature.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4674364 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26506125  [PubMed - in process]


169. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):269-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.115. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

3-Deazaneplanocin A suppresses aggressive phenotype-related gene expression in an
oral squamous cell carcinoma cell line.

Hatta M(1), Naganuma K(2), Kato K(3), Yamazaki J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka Dental
College, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: hatta@college.fdcnet.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Fukuoka Dental College, Fukuoka,
Japan. (3)Department of Physiological Science and Molecular Biology, Fukuoka
Dental College, Fukuoka, Japan.

In tumor tissues, alterations of gene expression caused by aberrant epigenetic
modifications confer phenotypic diversity on malignant cells. Although
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) has been shown to reactivate tumor suppressor genes
in several cancer cells, it remains unclear whether DZNep attenuates the
malignant phenotypes of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cells. In this study,
we investigated the effect of DZNep on the expression of genes related to
aggressive phenotypes, such as epithelial-mesenchymal transition, in OSCC cells. 
We found that DZNep reduced the cellular levels of polycomb group proteins (EZH2,
SUZ12, BMI1, and RING1A) and the associated trimethylation of Lys27 on histone H3
and monoubiquitination of Lys119 on histone H2A in the poorly differentiated OSCC
cell line SAS. Immunocytochemical staining demonstrated that DZNep induced the
reorganization of filamentous actin and the membrane localization of E-cadherin
associated with cell-cell adhesions. We also found an inhibitory effect of DZNep 
on cell proliferation using a WST assay. Finally, quantitative RT-PCR analysis
demonstrated that genes involved in the aggressive phenotypes (TWIST2, EGFR,
ACTA2, TGFB1, WNT5B, and APLIN) were down-regulated, whereas epithelial phenotype
genes (CDH1, CLDN4, IVL, and TGM1) were up-regulated in SAS cells treated with
DZNep. Collectively, our findings suggest that DZNep reverses the aggressive
characteristics of OSCC cells through the dynamic regulation of epithelial
plasticity via the reprogramming of gene expression patterns.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26505792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nature. 2015 Nov 12;527(7577):249-53. doi: 10.1038/nature15520. Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Epigenetic silencing of TH1-type chemokines shapes tumour immunity and
immunotherapy.

Peng D(1), Kryczek I(1,)(2), Nagarsheth N(1,)(2), Zhao L(3), Wei S(1), Wang W(1),
Sun Y(4), Zhao E(1), Vatan L(1), Szeliga W(1), Kotarski J(5), Tarkowski R(5), Dou
Y(4), Cho K(4,)(6), Hensley-Alford S(7), Munkarah A(7), Liu R(6,)(8), Zou
W(1,)(2,)(6,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA. (2)Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, 
USA. (5)The First Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Gynecology, Medical
University in Lublin, Lublin 20-081, Poland. (6)The University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109,
USA. (7)Department of Women's Health Services, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, USA. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (9)Graduate Program 
in Tumor Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Dec;15(12):730.

Epigenetic silencing including histone modifications and DNA methylation is an
important tumorigenic mechanism. However, its role in cancer immunopathology and 
immunotherapy is poorly understood. Using human ovarian cancers as our model,
here we show that enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)-mediated histone H3 lysine
27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1)-mediated DNA
methylation repress the tumour production of T helper 1 (TH1)-type chemokines
CXCL9 and CXCL10, and subsequently determine effector T-cell trafficking to the
tumour microenvironment. Treatment with epigenetic modulators removes the
repression and increases effector T-cell tumour infiltration, slows down tumour
progression, and improves the therapeutic efficacy of programmed death-ligand 1
(PD-L1; also known as B7-H1) checkpoint blockade and adoptive T-cell transfusion 
in tumour-bearing mice. Moreover, tumour EZH2 and DNMT1 are negatively associated
with tumour-infiltrating CD8(+) T cells and patient outcome. Thus, epigenetic
silencing of TH1-type chemokines is a novel immune-evasion mechanism of tumours. 
Selective epigenetic reprogramming alters the T-cell landscape in cancer and may 
enhance the clinical efficacy of cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4779053 [Available on 2016-05-12]
PMID: 26503055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Nat Med. 2015 Nov;21(11):1364-71. doi: 10.1038/nm.3973. Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Ductal pancreatic cancer modeling and drug screening using human pluripotent stem
cell- and patient-derived tumor organoids.

Huang L(1), Holtzinger A(1,)(2), Jagan I(1), BeGora M(1), Lohse I(1), Ngai N(1), 
Nostro C(1,)(2), Wang R(3,)(4), Muthuswamy LB(1), Crawford HC(5,)(6), Arrowsmith 
C(1,)(7), Kalloger SE(8,)(9,)(10), Renouf DJ(9,)(10,)(11), Connor AA(12), Cleary 
S(12), Schaeffer DF(8,)(9,)(10), Roehrl M(1), Tsao MS(1,)(13), Gallinger S(12),
Keller G(1,)(2), Muthuswamy SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Center, University Health Network (UHN), University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)McEwen Center for Regenerative Medicine,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Physiology,
Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Pharmacology,
Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. (5)Department of Molecular and
Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
(7)Structural Genomics Consortium, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (8)Division of
Anatomic Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada. (9)Department of Medicine, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (10)Pancreas Centre British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (11)Division of Medical Oncology, British Columbia
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (12)Division of General
Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (13)Department of
Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

There are few in vitro models of exocrine pancreas development and primary human 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PDAC). We establish three-dimensional culture
conditions to induce the differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into
exocrine progenitor organoids that form ductal and acinar structures in culture
and in vivo. Expression of mutant KRAS or TP53 in progenitor organoids induces
mutation-specific phenotypes in culture and in vivo. Expression of TP53(R175H)
induces cytosolic SOX9 localization. In patient tumors bearing TP53 mutations,
SOX9 was cytoplasmic and associated with mortality. We also define culture
conditions for clonal generation of tumor organoids from freshly resected PDAC.
Tumor organoids maintain the differentiation status, histoarchitecture and
phenotypic heterogeneity of the primary tumor and retain patient-specific
physiological changes, including hypoxia, oxygen consumption, epigenetic marks
and differences in sensitivity to inhibition of the histone methyltransferase
EZH2. Thus, pancreatic progenitor organoids and tumor organoids can be used to
model PDAC and for drug screening to identify precision therapy strategies.

PMCID: PMC4753163 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26501191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Med Princ Pract. 2015 Oct 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of BioResponse 3,3'-Diindolylmethane in the Treatment of Human Prostate
Cancer: Clinical Experience.

Li Y(1), Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Mich., USA.

Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression after androgen
deprivation therapy shows upregulated expression of androgen receptor (AR) splice
variants, induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition phenotypes and enhanced
stem cell characteristics, all of which are associated with resistance to
enzalutamide. Since there is no curative treatment for CRPC, innovative
treatments are urgently needed. In our recent study, we found that resistance to 
enzalutamide was partly due to deregulated expression of microRNAs such as
miR-34a, miR-124, miR-27b, miR-320 and let-7, which play important roles in
regulating AR and stem cell marker gene expression that appears to be linked with
resistance to enzalutamide. Importantly, we found that BioResponse
3,3'-diindolylmethane (BR-DIM) treatment in vitro and in vivo caused
downregulation in the expression of wild-type AR. The AR splice variants, Lin28B 
and EZH2, appear to be deregulated through the re-expression of let-7, miR-27b,
miR-320 and miR-34a in human prostate cancer (PCa). BR-DIM administered in
clinical trials was well tolerated, and 93% of patients had detectable prostatic 
DIM levels. The inhibitory effects of BR-DIM on AR and AR target gene such as
prostate-specific antigen were also observed in the clinical trial. Our
preclinical and clinical studies provide the scientific basis for a
'proof-of-concept' clinical trial in CRPC patients treated with enzalutamide in
combination with BR-DIM. This strategy could be expanded in future clinical
trials in patients with PCa to determine whether or not they could achieve a
better treatment outcome which could be partly mediated by delaying or preventing
the development of CRPC.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26501150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


173. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 26;5:15484. doi: 10.1038/srep15484.

Ezh2 is involved in radial neuronal migration through regulating Reelin
expression in cerebral cortex.

Zhao L(1,)(2), Li J(1,)(2), Ma Y(1,)(2), Wang J(3), Pan W(4), Gao K(1,)(2), Zhang
Z(1,)(2), Lu T(1,)(2), Ruan Y(1,)(2), Yue W(1,)(2), Zhao S(3), Wang L(1,)(2),
Zhang D(1,)(2,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Peking University Sixth Hospital/Institute of Mental Health, Beijing 100191,
China. (2)National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders/Key Laboratory
for Mental Health, Ministry of Health (Peking University), Beijing 100191, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100,
China. (4)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (5)Peking-Tsinghua Center for
Life Sciences and PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. (6)Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Neuronal
Structural Biology, Shenzhen Peking University-Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology Medical Center, Shenzhen 518035, China.

Radial migration of pyramidal neurons is an important event during the
development of cerebral cortex. Neurons experience series of morphological and
directional transitions to get to their final laminar positions. Here we report
that the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zest homolog 2 (Ezh2) is involved 
in the regulation of cortical radial migration. We show that Ezh2 knockdown leads
to disturbed neuronal orientation, which results in the impairment of radial
migration. Further results reveal that this migration deficiency may be due to
the derepression of Reelin transcription in the migrating neurons. Our study
provides evidence that epigenetic regulation of Reelin by Ezh2 maintains
appropriate Reelin expression pattern to fulfill proper orientation of migrating 
neurons.

PMCID: PMC4620455
PMID: 26499080  [PubMed - in process]


174. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):2284-96. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6198.

EZH2 in normal hematopoiesis and hematological malignancies.

Herviou L(1), Cavalli G(1), Cartron G(2,)(3), Klein B(4,)(1,)(2), Moreaux
J(4,)(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS UPR1142, Montpellier, France. (2)University 
of Montpellier 1, UFR de Médecine, Montpellier, France. (3)Department of Clinical
Hematology, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. (4)Department of Biological
Hematology, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb
repressive complex 2, inhibits gene expression through methylation on lysine 27
of histone H3. EZH2 regulates normal hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation. EZH2 also controls normal B cell differentiation. EZH2
deregulation has been described in many cancer types including hematological
malignancies. Specific small molecules have been recently developed to exploit
the oncogenic addiction of tumor cells to EZH2. Their therapeutic potential is
currently under evaluation. This review summarizes the roles of EZH2 in normal
and pathologic hematological processes and recent advances in the development of 
EZH2 inhibitors for the personalized treatment of patients with hematological
malignancies.

PMID: 26497210  [PubMed - in process]


175. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37335-48. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6135.

Honokiol inhibits bladder tumor growth by suppressing EZH2/miR-143 axis.

Zhang Q(1), Zhao W(2), Ye C(1), Zhuang J(1), Chang C(2), Li Y(3), Huang X(2),
Shen L(2), Li Y(3), Cui Y(2), Song J(1), Shen B(4), Eliaz I(5), Huang R(6), Ying 
H(3), Guo H(1), Yan J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University; Institute of Urology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and MOE Key Laboratory of
Model Animals for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Food Safety Research,
Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai,
China. (4)Department of Urology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, China. (5)Amitabha Medical Clinic and Healing Center, Santa
Rosa, CA, USA. (6)SIBS (Institute of Health Sciences)-Changhai Hospital Joint
Center for Translational Research, Institutes for Translational Research
(CAS-SMMU), Shanghai, China.

The oncoprotein EZH2, as a histone H3K27 methyltransferase, is frequently
overexpressed in various cancer types. However, the mechanisms underlying its
role in urinary bladder cancer (UBC) cells have not yet fully understood. Herein,
we reported that honokiol, a biologically active biphenolic compound isolated
from the Magnolia officinalis inhibited human UBC cell proliferation, survival,
cancer stemness, migration, and invasion, through downregulation of EZH2
expression level, along with the reductions of MMP9, CD44, Sox2 and the induction
of tumor suppressor miR-143. Either EZH2 overexpression or miR-143 inhibition
could partially reverse honokiol-induced cell growth arrest and impaired
clonogenicity. Importantly, it was first revealed that EZH2 could directly bind
to the transcriptional regulatory region of miR-143 and repress its expression.
Furthermore, honokiol treatment on T24 tumor xenografts confirmed its anticancer 
effects in vivo, including suppression tumor growth and tumor stemness,
accompanied by the dysregulation of EZH2 and miR-143 expressions. Our data
suggest a promising therapeutic option to develop drugs targeting EZH2/miR-143
axis, such as honokiol, for bladder cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4741933
PMID: 26484567  [PubMed - in process]


176. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37257-68. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6133.

Wnt2 complements Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in colorectal cancer.

Jung YS(1), Jun S(1), Lee SH(1), Sharma A(1), Park JI(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Program in Genes and Development,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, The University of Texas Health Science 
Center and MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Wnt2 is implicated in various human cancers. However, it remains unknown how Wnt2
is upregulated in human cancer and contributes to tumorigenesis. Here we found
that Wnt2 is highly expressed in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. In addition to
co-expression of Wnt2 with Wnt/ß-catenin target genes in CRC, knockdown or
knockout of Wnt2 significantly downregulates Wnt/ß-catenin target gene expression
in CRC cells. Importantly, depletion or ablation of endogenous Wnt2 inhibits CRC 
cell proliferation. Similarly, neutralizing secreted Wnt2 reduces Wnt target gene
expression and suppresses CRC cell proliferation. Conversely, Wnt2 increases cell
proliferation of intestinal epithelial cells. Intriguingly, WNT2 expression is
transcriptionally silenced by EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 histone modification in
non-CRC cells, However, WNT2 expression is de-repressed by the loss of PRC2's
promoter occupancy in CRC cells. Our results reveal the unexpected roles of Wnt2 
in complementing Wnt/ß-catenin signaling for CRC cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4741928
PMID: 26484565  [PubMed - in process]


177. Genom Data. 2015 Jul 16;5:346-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.07.006. eCollection
2015.

Transcriptome and H3K27 tri-methylation profiling of Ezh2-deficient lung
epithelium.

Holik AZ(1), Galvis LA(2), Lun AT(3), Ritchie ME(4), Asselin-Labat ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia ; Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (3)Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia ;
Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (4)Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia ; Molecular Medicine
Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
Victoria 3052, Australia ; School of Mathematics and Statistics, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

The adaptation of the lungs to air breathing at birth requires the fine
orchestration of different processes to control lung morphogenesis and progenitor
cell differentiation. However, there is little understanding of the role that
epigenetic modifiers play in the control of lung development. We found that the
histone methyl transferase Ezh2 plays a critical role in lung lineage
specification and survival at birth. We performed a genome-wide transcriptome
study combined with a genome-wide analysis of the distribution of H3K27
tri-methylation marks to interrogate the role of Ezh2 in lung epithelial cells.
Lung cells isolated from Ezh2-deficient and control mice at embryonic day E16.5
were sorted into epithelial and mesenchymal populations based on EpCAM
expression. This enabled us to dissect the transcriptional and epigenetic changes
induced by the loss of Ezh2 specifically in the lung epithelium. Here we provide 
a detailed description of the analysis of the RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data,
including quality control, read mapping, differential expression and differential
binding analyses, as well as visualisation methods used to present the data.
These data can be accessed from the Gene Expression Omnibus database
(super-series accession number GSE57393).

PMCID: PMC4583701
PMID: 26484284  [PubMed]


178. Genom Data. 2015 Apr 9;4:102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.04.002. eCollection
2015.

Gene expression profiling of loss of TET2 and/or JAK2V617F mutant hematopoietic
stem cells from mouse models of myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Kameda T(1), Shide K(1), Yamaji T(1), Kamiunten A(1), Sekine M(1), Hidaka T(1),
Kubuki Y(1), Sashida G(2), Aoyama K(2), Yoshimitsu M(3), Abe H(1), Miike T(1),
Iwakiri H(1), Tahara Y(1), Yamamoto S(1), Hasuike S(1), Nagata K(1), Iwama A(2), 
Kitanaka A(1), Shimoda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan. (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. (3)Division of
Hematology and Immunology, Center for Chronic Viral Diseases, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clinically characterized by the chronic
overproduction of differentiated peripheral blood cells and the gradual expansion
of malignant intramedullary/extramedullary hematopoiesis. In MPNs mutations in
JAK2 MPL or CALR are detected mutually exclusive in more than 90% of cases [1,2].
Mutations in them lead to the abnormal activation of JAK/STAT signaling and the
autonomous growth of differentiated cells therefore they are considered as
"driver" gene mutations. In addition to the above driver gene mutations mutations
in epigenetic regulators such as TET2 DNMT3A ASXL1 EZH2 or IDH1/2 are detected in
about 5%-30% of cases respectively [3]. Mutations in TET2 DNMT3A EZH2 or IDH1/2
commonly confer the increased self-renewal capacity on normal hematopoietic stem 
cells (HSCs) but they do not lead to the autonomous growth of differentiated
cells and only exhibit subtle clinical phenotypes [4,6-8,5]. It was unclear how
mutations in such epigenetic regulators influenced abnormal HSCs with driver gene
mutations how they influenced the disease phenotype or whether a single driver
gene mutation was sufficient for the initiation of human MPNs. Therefore we
focused on JAK2V617F and loss of TET2-the former as a representative of driver
gene mutations and the latter as a representative of mutations in epigenetic
regulators-and examined the influence of single or double mutations on HSCs
(Lineage(-)Sca-1(+)c-Kit(+) cells (LSKs)) by functional analyses and microarray
whole-genome expression analyses [9]. Gene expression profiling showed that the
HSC fingerprint genes [10] was statistically equally enriched in
TET2-knockdown-LSKs but negatively enriched in JAK2V617F-LSKs compared to that in
wild-type-LSKs. Double-mutant-LSKs showed the same tendency as JAK2V617F-LSKs in 
terms of their HSC fingerprint genes but the expression of individual genes
differed between the two groups. Among 245 HSC fingerprint genes 100 were more
highly expressed in double-mutant-LSKs than in JAK2V617F-LSKs. These altered gene
expressions might partly explain the mechanisms of initiation and progression of 
MPNs which was observed in the functional analyses [9]. Here we describe gene
expression profiles deposited at the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under the
accession number GSE62302 including experimental methods and quality control
analyses.

PMCID: PMC4535894
PMID: 26484191  [PubMed]


179. Mol Diagn Ther. 2015 Oct 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Clinical Evaluation of a Novel Nine-Gene Panel for Ion Torrent PGM Sequencing of 
Myeloid Malignancies.

Ivanova M(1), Shivarov V(2), Pavlov I(3), Lilakos K(4), Naumova E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Alexandrovska University Hospital, Medical 
University, 1 Georgi Sofiyski Blvd, 1431, Sofia, Bulgaria. mivanova@intech.bg.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Department of Hematology, Sofiamed
University Hospital, 16, GM Dimitrov Blvd, 1797, Sofia, Bulgaria.
vshivarov@abv.bg. (3)Department of Clinical Immunology, Alexandrovska University 
Hospital, Medical University, 1 Georgi Sofiyski Blvd, 1431, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Department of Hematology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens,
Laikon General Hospital, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: In the last decade, a number of genes have been
reported to be recurrently associated with myeloid malignancies. While some
mutations are easily detectable by conventional molecular genetics methods, other
mutations are more difficult to screen because of lower frequency and being
scattered along large genomic ranges. However, newly developed approaches for
next-generation sequencing provide an affordable solution for targeted multiplex 
resequencing of up to several hundreds of amplicons. Here, we aimed to develop
and validate a novel custom panel for targeted resequencing of myeloid malignancy
samples using the Ion PGM System (Ion Torrent, Paisley, UK).
METHODS: We designed a pool of 424 primers for the amplification of 212 amplicons
covering 99.46 % of the exonic regions of nine human genes as follows: ASXL1,
EZH2, CALR, RUNX1, SETBP1, SF3B1, SRSF2, TET2, and U2AF1. Initial testing of the 
panel performance was performed on an Ion PGM machine using PGM 316 v2 chips on
16 DNA samples from patients with myeloid malignancies. Sequence alignment,
variant calling, and annotation were performed using Ion Reporter software.
RESULTS: We identified a total of 14 nonsynonymous somatic coding variants in
seven samples affecting six of the genes in the panel (ASXL1, CALR, RUNX1, SRSF2,
TET2, and U2AF1). Notably, three of the identified mutations were not present in 
the Cosmic v.67 release.
CONCLUSION: This proof-of-concept study confirms the feasibility of Ion Torrent
systems for resequencing of clinically relevant mutations in myeloid
malignancies. It can be particularly useful in cases without the most frequent
clonal markers.

PMID: 26476543  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


180. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):821-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.059. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Microchidia protein 2, MORC2, downregulates the cytoskeleton adapter protein,
ArgBP2, via histone methylation in gastric cancer cells.

Tong Y(1), Li Y(1), Gu H(2), Wang C(1), Liu F(3), Shao Y(1), Li J(1), Cao L(1),
Li F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Ministry of Public
Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry of Education, China 
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122, China. (2)Department of Key
Laboratory of Health Ministry for Congenital Malformation Shengjing Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110004, China. (3)Department of
Surgical Oncology, The First Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang,
Liaoning 110001, China. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cell
Biology, Ministry of Public Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology,
Ministry of Education, China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110122,
China. Electronic address: fli@mail.cmu.edu.cn.

ArgBP2 is an adapter protein that plays an important role in actin-dependent
processes such as cell adhesion and migration. However, its function and
regulation mechanisms in gastric cancer have not yet been investigated. Here, we 
showed the low expression of ArgBP2 mRNA level in gastric tumor samples and its
repressive function in the proliferation, migration, and invasion of gastric
cancer cells. Then, we cloned and identified ArgBP2 promoter and verified that
MORC2 bound to the promoter. Moreover, we demonstrated that MORC2 enhanced the
recruitment of EZH2, which promoted the tri-methylation of H3K27, leading to the 
transcriptional repression of ArgBP2. Our results might thus contribute to
understanding the molecular mechanisms of ArgBP2 regulation and suggesting ArgBP2
as a potential therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26476214  [PubMed - in process]


181. Blood Cancer J. 2015 Oct 16;5:e361. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2015.89.

Mutation of chromatin modifiers; an emerging hallmark of germinal center B-cell
lymphomas.

Lunning MA(1,)(2), Green MR(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Precision Medicine Laboratory, Dr James O Armitage Center for
Leukemia and Lymphoma Research, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA. (2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, USA.

Subtypes of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas align with different stages of B-cell
development. Germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), follicular lymphoma (FL) and Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) each share
molecular similarities with normal GCB cells. Recent next-generation sequencing
studies have gained insight into the genetic etiology of these malignancies and
revealed a high frequency of mutations within genes encoding proteins that
modifying chromatin. These include activating and inactivating mutations of genes
that perform post-translational modification of histones and organize chromatin
structure. Here, we discuss the function of histone acetyltransferases (CREBBP,
EP300), histone methyltransferases (KDM2C/D, EZH2) and regulators of higher order
chromatin structure (HIST1H1C/D/E, ARID1A and SMARCA4) that have been reported to
be mutated in <U+2A7E>5% of DLBCL, FL or BL. Mutations of these genes are an emerging
hallmark of lymphomas with GCB-cell origins, and likely represent the next
generation of therapeutic targets for these malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4635197
PMID: 26473533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Science. 2015 Oct 16;350(6258):aac4383. doi: 10.1126/science.aac4383. Epub 2015
Oct 15.

Structural basis of histone H3K27 trimethylation by an active polycomb repressive
complex 2.

Jiao L(1), Liu X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences and Division
of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of
Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390,
USA. (2)Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology Sciences and
Division of Basic Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and
Department of Biophysics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. xin.liu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Oct 16;350(6258):278-9.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) catalyzes histone H3K27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3), a hallmark of gene silencing. Here we report the crystal structures
of an active PRC2 complex of 170 kilodaltons from the yeast Chaetomium
thermophilum in both basal and stimulated states, which contain Ezh2, Eed, and
the VEFS domain of Suz12 and are bound to a cancer-associated inhibiting H3K27M
peptide and a S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine cofactor. The stimulated complex also
contains an additional stimulating H3K27me3 peptide. Eed is engulfed by a
belt-like structure of Ezh2, and Suz12(VEFS) contacts both of these two subunits 
to confer an unusual split active SET domain for catalysis. Comparison of PRC2 in
the basal and stimulated states reveals a mobile Ezh2 motif that responds to
stimulation to allosterically regulate the active site.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26472914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cancer Med. 2015 Dec;4(12):1844-52. doi: 10.1002/cam4.554. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

Pretreatment biopsy analysis of DAB2IP identifies subpopulation of high-risk
prostate cancer patients with worse survival following radiation therapy.

Jacobs C(1), Tumati V(1), Kapur P(2), Yan J(3), Xie XJ(3), Hannan R(1), Hsieh
JT(4), Kim DW(1), Saha D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, 75390. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 75390. (3)Simmons Cancer Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, 75390.
(4)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, 75390.

Decreased expression of tumor suppressor DAB2IP is linked to aggressive cancer
and radiation resistance in several malignancies, but clinical survival data is
largely unknown. We hypothesized that pretreatment DAB2IP reduction would predict
worse prostate cancer-specific survival (PCSS). Immunohistochemistry of
pretreatment biopsies was scored by an expert genitourinary pathologist. Other
endpoints analyzed include freedom from biochemical failure (FFBF), castration
resistance-free survival (CRFS), and distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS).
Seventy-nine patients with NCCN-defined high-risk prostate cancer treated with
radiotherapy from 2005 to 2012 at our institution were evaluated. Twenty-eight
percent (22/79) of pretreatment biopsies revealed DAB2IP-reduction. The median
follow up times were 4.8 years and 5.3 years for patients in the DAB2IP-reduced
group and DAB2IP-retained group, respectively. Patients with reduced DAB2IP
demonstrated worse outcome compared to patients retaining DAB2IP, including FFBF 
(4-year: 34 vs. 92%; P < 0.0001), CRFS (4-year: 58 vs. 96%; P = 0.0039), DMFS
(4-year: 58 vs. 100%; P = 0.0006), and PCSS (5-year: 83 vs. 100%; P = 0.0102).
Univariate analysis showed T stage, N stage, and Gleason score were statistically
significant variables. Pretreatment tumor DAB2IP status remained significant in
multivariable analyses. This study suggests that about one-fourth of men with
high-risk prostate cancer have decreased tumor expression of DAB2IP. This
subpopulation with reduced DAB2IP has a suboptimal response and worse
malignancy-specific survival following radiation therapy and androgen
deprivation. DAB2IP loss may be a genetic explanation for the observed
differences in aggressive tumor characteristics and radiation resistance. Further
study into improving treatment response and survival in this subpopulation is
warranted.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26471467  [PubMed - in process]


184. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2015 Oct 13. [Epub ahead of print]

The expression of Cyclin D1, VEGF, EZH2, and H3K27me3 in Atypical
Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumors of the CNS: A Possible Role in Targeted Therapy.

Kakkar A(1), Biswas A, Goyal N, Suri V, Sharma MC, Gupta D, Julka PK, Sarkar C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Radiation Oncology Neurosurgery, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is an uncommon malignancy with a dismal 
outcome, which responds poorly to multimodality therapies. Animal studies have
revealed Cyclin D1 as a possible therapeutic target. The addition of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors to chemotherapeutic regimens has
shown promising results in pediatric central nervous system tumors. Enhancer of
Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) overexpression has been implicated in various cancers,
including medulloblastomas. H3K27me3 is a new marker for pediatric high-grade
gliomas. However, their role in AT/RT has not been evaluated sufficiently. We
retrieved cases of AT/RT, and reviewed their clinical data and histopathologic
features. Immunohistochemistry for Cyclin D1, VEGF, EZH2, and H3K27me3 was
performed. Follow-up was noted when available. Fourteen cases of AT/RT were
identified (mean age, 3.4 y; range, 10 mo to 8 y). Cyclin D1 immunopositivity was
noted in all cases [labeling index (LI): 5% to 98%; mean, 41.3%]. VEGF positivity
was seen in 83.3% of the cases. All cases showed EZH2 overexpression (mean LI,
74.3%; range, 32% to 96%). Reduction of H3K27me3 expression was noted in 63% of
the cases, with no correlation with EZH2 LI. Two patients died of postoperative
complications. Of the rest, follow-up was available for 7 (range, 7 to 120 wk): 1
achieved clinical remission, whereas 6 developed progressive disease, including 3
deaths. Varying degrees of immunoreactivity to Cyclin D1, VEGF, and EZH2 were
noted in the majority of the AT/RTs, and detection of these markers may be of
value in the development of novel therapeutic agents and in determining which
patients can benefit from them. AT/RTs show reduction in H3K27me3 expression,
independent of EZH2 expression, indicating that their interaction requires
further evaluation.

PMID: 26469332  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


185. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Oct;56(10):2015-23. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.2015.

[Epigenetic therapy for hematologic malignancies].

[Article in Japanese]

Kobayashi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, National Cancer Center Hospital.

Cumulative evidence suggests that at least some hematologic malignancies are
derived from alterations of epigenetic machinery. Next generation sequencing has 
revealed recurrent mutations of genes related to DNA methylation and histone
modification in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia,
malignant lymphoma, and multiple myeloma. Both these pathways are targetable and 
specific inhibitors of their related proteins are currently in development. Among
these novel therapies, hypomethylating agents have been approved for MDS, and
recently, histone deacetylase inhibitors became available for T-cell lymphoma and
multiple myeloma. Agents currently undergoing clinical trials include inhibitors 
of IDH2 targeting DNA methylation, and EZH2, Dot1L, and BRD4 inhibitors designed 
to target either writers or readers of post-translational modifications (PTMs) of
histones. In a phase I setting, where the maximum tolerated dose has not been
reached, efficacy was reported with these agents. Furthermore, Dot1bL and IDH2
inhibitors have been shown to induce differentiation of leukemic blasts in
patients with MLL gene rearrangements and IDH2 mutations, respectively, thus
providing functional evidence supporting the use of inhibitors of epigenetic
mechanisms as a means of differentiation therapy for hematologic malignancies.

PMID: 26458440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Oct 8;7:109. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0141-x. eCollection
2015.

Analysis of the Polycomb-related lncRNAs HOTAIR and ANRIL in bladder cancer.

Martínez-Fernández M(1), Feber A(2), Dueñas M(1), Segovia C(1), Rubio C(1),
Fernandez M(1), Villacampa F(3), Duarte J(3), López-Calderón FF(1),
Gómez-Rodriguez MJ(3), Castellano D(3), Rodriguez-Peralto JL(4), de la Rosa F(3),
Beck S(2), Paramio JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (ed70A), Av Complutense 40, 28040 Madrid,
Spain ; Biomedical Research Institute I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", 
Av Córdoba s/n., 28041 Madrid, Spain. (2)Medical Genomics, UCL Cancer Institute, 
University College London, Paul O'Gorman Building, 72 Huntley Street, London,
WC1E 6BT UK. (3)Biomedical Research Institute I+12, University Hospital "12 de
Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n., 28041 Madrid, Spain. (4)Biomedical Research Institute 
I+12, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Av Córdoba s/n., 28041 Madrid, Spain ;
Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Instituto 
de Investigación 12 de Octubre i+12, UCM, Av Cordoba s/n., 28041 Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been claimed as key molecular
players in gene expression regulation, being involved in diverse epigenetic
processes. They are aberrantly expressed in various tumors, but their exact role 
in bladder cancer is still obscure. We have recently found a major role of the
Polycomb repression complex in recurrence of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. 
Here, we report the xpression of Polycomb-related lncRNAs:antisense noncoding RNA
in the INK4 locus (ANRIL) and HOX antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR) in these
tumors.
FINDINGS: We studied a dataset of non-invasive bladder cancer samples by
quantitative reverse transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) and analyzed also invasive
bladder cancer samples using TCGA data. Our results showed that, while ANRIL
seemed not to have a determining role, an increased HOTAIR expression appeared in
recurrent and high-graded tumors associated with poor prognosis. In addition,
through genome-wide transcriptome analyses, we observed that
HOTAIR-EZH2-complex-regulated genes can efficiently discriminate between
non-tumoral, recurrent, and non-recurrent bladder cancer samples. We also
observed a significant correlation between EZH2 and HOTAIR expression levels.
Using overexpression, knockdown, and pharmacological approaches in bladder cancer
cell lines, we also observed that EZH2 regulates HOTAIR expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that HOTAIR expression has prognostic value
for bladder cancer progression, recurrence, and survival and suggest that HOTAIR 
plays active roles in modulating the cancer epigenome, becoming an interesting
candidate as a target for cancer diagnosis and therapy. The observed HOTAIR
regulation by EZH2 and the possibility of modulating EZH2 activity with specific 
inhibitors open new possible paths to be explored in bladder cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4599691
PMID: 26457124  [PubMed]


187. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32586-601. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5309.

MicroRNA-506 suppresses tumor proliferation and metastasis in colon cancer by
directly targeting the oncogene EZH2.

Zhang Y(1,)(2), Lin C(3), Liao G(1), Liu S(1), Ding J(4), Tang F(5), Wang Z(5),
Liang X(5), Li B(5), Wei Y(5), Huang Q(5), Li X(5), Tang B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, 410008, PR China. (2)Department of Oncological Surgery, Affiliated
Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College, 221000, PR China. (3)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
410008, PR China. (4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Guizhou Provincial
People's Hospital, 550000, PR China. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University, 541000, PR China.

Increasing evidence reveals that aberrant expression of microRNA contributes to
the development and progression of colon cancer, but the roles of microRNA-506
(miR-506) in colon cancer remain elusive. Here, we demonstrated that miR-506 was 
down-regulated in colon cancer tissue and cells and that miR-506 expression was
inversely correlated with EZH2 expression, tumor size, lymph node invasion, TNM
stage and metastasis. A high level of miR-506 identified patients with a
favorable prognosis. In vitro and in vivo experiments confirmed that miR-506
inhibits the proliferation and metastasis of colon cancer, and a luciferase
reporter assay confirmed that EZH2 is a direct and functional target of miR-506
via the 3'UTR of EZH2. The restoration of EZH2 expression partially reversed the 
proliferation and invasion of miR-506-overexpressing colon cancer cells.
Moreover, we confirmed that the miR-506-EZH2 axis inhibits proliferation and
metastasis by activating/suppressing specific downstream tumor-associated genes
and the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. Taking together, our study sheds light
on the role of miR-506 as a suppressor for tumor growth and metastasis and raises
the intriguing possibility that miR-506 may serve as a new potential marker for
monitoring and treating colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4741714
PMID: 26452129  [PubMed - in process]


188. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 20;290(47):28489-501. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.658237. Epub
2015 Oct 6.

Tumor Suppressive Function of p21-activated Kinase 6 in Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Liu W(1), Liu Y(1), Liu H(2), Zhang W(3), Fu Q(1), Xu J(4), Gu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and. (2)the
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases,
Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China. 
(3)Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032 and. (4)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and
jjxufdu@fudan.edu.cn. (5)From the Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology and jxgu@shmu.edu.cn.

Our previous studies identified the oncogenic role of p21-activated kinase 1
(PAK1) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
Contrarily, PAK6 was found to predict a favorable prognosis in RCC patients.
Nevertheless, the ambiguous tumor suppressive function of PAK6 in
hepatocarcinogenesis remains obscure. Herein, decreased PAK6 expression was found
to be associated with tumor node metastasis stage progression and unfavorable
overall survival in HCC patients. Additionally, overexpression and silence of
PAK6 experiments showed that PAK6 inhibited xenografted tumor growth in vivo, and
restricted cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, and invasion and
promoted cell apoptosis and anoikis in vitro. Moreover, overexpression of kinase 
dead and nuclear localization signal deletion mutants of PAK6 experiments
indicated the tumor suppressive function of PAK6 was partially dependent on its
kinase activity and nuclear translocation. Furthermore, gain or loss of function 
in polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components, including EZH2, SUZ12, and
EED, elucidated epigenetic control of H3K27me3-arbitrated PAK6 down-regulation in
hepatoma cells. More importantly, negative correlation between PAK6 and EZH2
expression was observed in hepatoma tissues from HCC patients. These data
identified the tumor suppressive role and potential underlying mechanism of PAK6 
in hepatocarcinogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4653705 [Available on 2016-11-20]
PMID: 26442588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nat Med. 2015 Nov;21(11):1344-9. doi: 10.1038/nm.3947. Epub 2015 Oct 5.

Loss of BAP1 function leads to EZH2-dependent transformation.

LaFave LM(1,)(2), Béguelin W(3), Koche R(4,)(5), Teater M(3), Spitzer B(6),
Chramiec A(4), Papalexi E(1), Keller MD(1), Hricik T(1), Konstantinoff K(1),
Micol JB(1), Durham B(1), Knutson SK(7), Campbell JE(7), Blum G(8,)(9), Shi
X(10), Doud EH(11), Krivtsov AV(4), Chung YR(1), Khodos I(12), de Stanchina
E(12), Ouerfelli O(10), Adusumilli PS(13), Thomas PM(11), Kelleher NL(11), Luo
M(8), Keilhack H(7), Abdel-Wahab O(1,)(14), Melnick A(3), Armstrong
SA(4,)(5,)(6), Levine RL(1,)(4,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA. (2)Gerstner Sloan Kettering School of Biomedical
Sciences, New York, New York, USA. (3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA. (4)The Center for Epigenetics
Research, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (7)Epizyme, Inc., Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. (8)Chemical Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York. (9)Tri-Institutional Program in Chemical Biology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (10)Chemical
Synthesis Core, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. 
(11)Proteomics Center of Excellence, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois,
USA. (12)Anti-Tumor Assessment Core, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York, USA. (13)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA. (14)Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.

The tumor suppressors BAP1 and ASXL1 interact to form a polycomb deubiquitinase
complex that removes monoubiquitin from histone H2A lysine 119 (H2AK119Ub).
However, BAP1 and ASXL1 are mutated in distinct cancer types, consistent with
independent roles in regulating epigenetic state and malignant transformation.
Here we demonstrate that Bap1 loss in mice results in increased trimethylated
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3), elevated enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb repressive
complex 2 subunit (Ezh2) expression, and enhanced repression of polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) targets. These findings contrast with the reduction
in H3K27me3 levels seen with Asxl1 loss. Conditional deletion of Bap1 and Ezh2 in
vivo abrogates the myeloid progenitor expansion induced by Bap1 loss alone. Loss 
of BAP1 results in a marked decrease in H4K20 monomethylation (H4K20me1).
Consistent with a role for H4K20me1 in the transcriptional regulation of EZH2,
expression of SETD8-the H4K20me1 methyltransferase-reduces EZH2 expression and
abrogates the proliferation of BAP1-mutant cells. Furthermore, mesothelioma cells
that lack BAP1 are sensitive to EZH2 pharmacologic inhibition, suggesting a novel
therapeutic approach for BAP1-mutant malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4636469 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26437366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 2):189-94. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.080. Epub 2015 
Oct 20.

Functional roles of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in gliomas.

Yin Y(1), Qiu S(1), Peng Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China; Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun
Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
Electronic address: docpengy123@163.com.

Gliomas are the most common and lethal type of primary malignant brain tumor. Due
to the infiltrative nature and high resistance to standard first line treatment
with combinations of radiation and chemotherapy, the prognosis of patient is very
poor. Recently, accumulated evidence suggests that enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) serves as an oncogene and is involved in multiple glioma cell processes,
including cell cycle, invasion, glioma stem cell maintenance, drug and
radiotherapy resistance and so on. In this review, we will focus on updating
current knowledge of EZH2 in gliomas. Moreover, the regulation of EZH2 by
microRNAs and long non-coding RNAs and the therapeutic strategies targeting EZH2 
for gliomas will also be discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26435191  [PubMed - in process]


191. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 24;6(37):39865-76. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5399.

Long non-coding RNA profiling links subgroup classification of endometrioid
endometrial carcinomas with trithorax and polycomb complex aberrations.

Jiang Y(1), Malouf GG(2), Zhang J(3), Zheng X(3), Chen Y(4), Thompson EJ(5),
Weinstein JN(3), Yuan Y(6), Spano JP(2), Broaddus R(7), Tannir NM(4), Khayat
D(2), Lu KH(1), Su X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine, UT MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Groupe
Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, University Pierre and Marie Curie (Paris VI),
Institut Universitaire de Cancérologie, AP-HP, Paris, France. (3)Department of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, USA. (4)Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (6)Department of Biostatistics, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (7)Department of Pathology, UT MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Integrative analysis of endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC)
using multiple platforms has distinguished four molecular subgroups. However, the
landscape of expressed long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) and their role in charting
EEC subgroups and determining clinical aggressiveness remain largely unknown.
RESULTS: Using stringent criteria, we identified 1,931 expressed lncRNAs and
predicted potential drivers through integrative analysis. Unsupervised clustering
of lncRNA expression revealed three robust categories: basal-like, luminal-like
and CTNNB1-enriched subgroups. Basal-like subgroup was enriched for aggressive
tumors with higher pathological grade (p < 0.0001), TNM stage (p = 0.01), and
somatic mutations in trithorax-group genes (MLL, MLL2 and MLL3); and it
overexpressed polycomb genes EZH2 and CBX2. In contrast to the luminal-like
subgroup, progesterone (PGR) and estrogen receptor (ESR1) genes were highly
down-regulated in the EEC basal-like subgroup. Consistent with its enrichment for
CTNNB1 mutations (69%), lncRNA profile of the CTNNB1-enriched EEC subgroup was
highly similar to that of the CTNNB1-enriched liver cancer subgroup.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed integrative analysis of lncRNAs in EEC using 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) molecular RNAseq profiles of 191 primary tumors
for which genomic data were also available. We established lncRNA subgroup
classification, correlated it with chromatin modifying gene expression, and
described correlations between our lncRNA classification and clinico-genomic
tumor features.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal the utility of systematic characterization of
clinically annotated EEC in three clinically relevant subgroups. They also
highlight the convergence of aberrations in polycomb- and trithorax-group genes
in aggressive basal EEC subtypes, providing a rationale for further investigation
of epigenetic therapy in this setting.

PMCID: PMC4741866
PMID: 26431491  [PubMed - in process]


192. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Long noncoding RNA PVT1 modulates thyroid cancer cell proliferation by recruiting
EZH2 and regulating thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR).

Zhou Q(1), Chen J(1), Feng J(1), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, #145 Shandong Road, Huangpu District, Shanghai,
200001, China. (2)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Renji Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, #145 Shandong Road, Huangpu District,
Shanghai, 200001, China. drjiadongw@aliyun.com.

The purposes of this study were to investigate the potential roles of long
noncoding RNA (lncRNA) PVT1 in thyroid cancer cell proliferation and to explore
their possible mechanisms. A total of 84 patients who were diagnosed as having
thyroid cancer (papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), follicular thyroid carcinoma
(FTC), and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC)) in Renji Hospital were enrolled in
this study. Expressions of lncRNA PVT1 in thyroid cancer tissues and cell lines
(IHH-4, FTC-133, and 8505C) were analyzed using RT-polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and western blotting analysis. The effects of lncRNA PVT1 expression on
thyroid cancer cell proliferation and cell cycle were analyzed using flow
cytometry. Furthermore, the effects of lncRNA expression on thyroid-stimulating
hormone receptor (TSHR) expression and polycomb enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) were also analyzed using RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, respectively. Compared to the controls, lncRNA 
PVT1 was significantly up-regulated in thyroid tissues, as well as in three kinds
of tumor cell lines (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Silenced PVT1 significantly inhibited thyroid
cell line IHH-4, FTC-133, and 8505C cell proliferation and arrested cell cycle at
G0/G1 stage and significantly decreased cyclin D1 and TSHR expressions
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Moreover, lncRNA PVT1 could be enriched by EZH2, and silencing PVT1
resulted in the decreased recruitment of EZH2. This study suggested that lncRNA
PVT1 may contribute to tumorigenesis of thyroid cancer through recruiting EZH2
and regulating TSHR expression.

PMID: 26427660  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


193. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;854:635-41. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_84.

Regulation of Retinal Development via the Epigenetic Modification of Histone H3.

Watanabe S(1), Murakami A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, 108-8639, Tokyo, Japan.
sumiko@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.

We are interested in the roles of epigenetic mechanisms in retinal development.
By ChIP-qPCR using whole retinal extracts at various developmental stages, we
found that the levels of methylation of histones H3K27 and H3K4 and acetylation
of histone H3 at specific loci in various genes, which play critical roles in
retinal proliferation and differentiation, changed dramatically during retinal
development. We next focused on the roles of H3K27 trimethylation in retinal
development. Ezh1 and Ezh2 are methyltransferases that act on H3K27, while Jmjd3 
and Utx are demethylases. We found that Ezh2 and Jmjd3 were mainly expressed
during retinal development, and a loss-of-function of these genes revealed a role
for H3K27me3 in the maturation of subsets of bipolar cells. Furthermore, Ezh2 and
Jmjd3 regulate H3K27 trimethylation at specific loci within Bhlhb4 and Vsx1,
which play critical roles in the differentiation of subsets of bipolar cells. Utx
is expressed weakly in retina, and the down-regulation of Utx by sh-RNA in
retinal explants suggested that Utx also participates in the maturation of
bipolar cells. Ezh1 is expressed weakly in postnatal retina, and the phenotype of
Ezh2-knockout retina suggested that Ezh1 plays a role in the methylation of H3K27
in the late phase of retinal differentiation. Taken together, we found that these
four genes, which exhibit temporally and spatially unique expression patterns
during retinal development, play critical roles in the differentiation of retinal
subsets through the regulation of histone H3K27 methylation at critical genetic
loci.

PMID: 26427469  [PubMed - in process]


194. Cancers (Basel). 2015 Sep 25;7(4):1959-82. doi: 10.3390/cancers7040870.

Histone Modifications, Modifiers and Readers in Melanoma Resistance to Targeted
and Immune Therapy.

Gallagher SJ(1,)(2), Tiffen JC(3,)(4), Hersey P(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology Group, Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, Camperdown 2050, Australia. s.gallagher@centenary.org.au. (2)Melanoma
Institute Australia, Crow's Nest 2065, Sydney, Australia.
s.gallagher@centenary.org.au. (3)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology Group,
Centenary Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown 2050, Australia.
j.tiffen@centenary.org.au. (4)Melanoma Institute Australia, Crow's Nest 2065,
Sydney, Australia. j.tiffen@centenary.org.au. (5)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology
Group, Centenary Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown 2050, Australia.
peter.hersey@sydney.edu.au. (6)Melanoma Institute Australia, Crow's Nest 2065,
Sydney, Australia. peter.hersey@sydney.edu.au.

The treatment of melanoma has been revolutionized by new therapies targeting MAPK
signaling or the immune system. Unfortunately these therapies are hindered by
either primary resistance or the development of acquired resistance. Resistance
mechanisms involving somatic mutations in genes associated with resistance have
been identified in some cases of melanoma, however, the cause of resistance
remains largely unexplained in other cases. The importance of epigenetic factors 
targeting histones and histone modifiers in driving the behavior of melanoma is
only starting to be unraveled and provides significant opportunity to combat the 
problems of therapy resistance. There is also an increasing ability to target
these epigenetic changes with new drugs that inhibit these modifications to
either prevent or overcome resistance to both MAPK inhibitors and immunotherapy. 
This review focuses on changes in histones, histone reader proteins and histone
positioning, which can mediate resistance to new therapeutics and that can be
targeted for future therapies.

PMCID: PMC4695870
PMID: 26426052  [PubMed]


195. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 13;290(46):27604-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.672345. Epub
2015 Sep 30.

Epigenetic Control of Skeletal Development by the Histone Methyltransferase Ezh2.

Dudakovic A(1), Camilleri ET(1), Xu F(1), Riester SM(1), McGee-Lawrence ME(2),
Bradley EW(1), Paradise CR(1), Lewallen EA(1), Thaler R(1), Deyle DR(3), Larson
AN(1), Lewallen DG(1), Dietz AB(4), Stein GS(5), Montecino MA(6), Westendorf
JJ(7), van Wijnen AJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Orthopedic Surgery. (2)the Department of Cellular
Biology and Anatomy, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia 30912.
(3)Medical Genetics and. (4)the Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (5)the Department of Biochemistry, University of
Vermont Medical School, Burlington, Vermont 05405, and. (6)the Centro de
Investigaciones Biomedicas and Fondo de Financiamiento de Centros de
Investigación en Áreas Prioritarias Center for Genome Regulation, Universidad
Andres Bello, Santiago 837-0146, Chile. (7)From the Departments of Orthopedic
Surgery, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology. (8)From the Departments of Orthopedic 
Surgery, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, vanwijnen.andre@mayo.edu.

Epigenetic control of gene expression is critical for normal fetal development.
However, chromatin-related mechanisms that activate bone-specific programs during
osteogenesis have remained underexplored. Therefore, we investigated the
expression profiles of a large cohort of epigenetic regulators (>300) during
osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal cells derived from the stromal
vascular fraction of adipose tissue (AMSCs). Molecular analyses establish that
the polycomb group protein EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) is down-regulated
during osteoblastic differentiation of AMSCs. Chemical inhibitor and siRNA
knockdown studies show that EZH2, a histone methyltransferase that catalyzes
trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3), suppresses osteogenic
differentiation. Blocking EZH2 activity promotes osteoblast differentiation and
suppresses adipogenic differentiation of AMSCs. High throughput RNA sequence
(mRNASeq) analysis reveals that EZH2 inhibition stimulates cell cycle inhibitory 
proteins and enhances the production of extracellular matrix proteins.
Conditional genetic loss of Ezh2 in uncommitted mesenchymal cells (Prrx1-Cre)
results in multiple defects in skeletal patterning and bone formation, including 
shortened forelimbs, craniosynostosis, and clinodactyly. Histological analysis
and mRNASeq profiling suggest that these effects are attributable to growth plate
abnormalities and premature cranial suture closure because of precocious
maturation of osteoblasts. We conclude that the epigenetic activity of EZH2 is
required for skeletal patterning and development, but EZH2 expression declines
during terminal osteoblast differentiation and matrix production.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646012 [Available on 2016-11-13]
PMID: 26424790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2015 Sep 28;8:39. doi: 10.1186/s13072-015-0031-7.
eCollection 2015.

Dose-dependent alcohol-induced alterations in chromatin structure persist beyond 
the window of exposure and correlate with fetal alcohol syndrome birth defects.

Veazey KJ(1), Parnell SE(2), Miranda RC(3), Golding MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Room 338 VMA, 4466 TAMU, Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of
Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-4466 USA. (2)Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies and Department
of Cell Biology and Physiology, School of Medicine, CB# 7178, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA. (3)Texas A&M Health Sciences Center, Texas
A&M University, 8441 State Highway 47, Clinical Building 1, Suite 3100, Bryan, TX
77807 USA.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, we have come to recognize that a multitude of in
utero exposures have the capacity to induce the development of congenital and
metabolic defects. As most of these encounters manifest their effects beyond the 
window of exposure, deciphering the mechanisms of teratogenesis is incredibly
difficult. For many agents, altered epigenetic programming has become suspect in 
transmitting the lasting signature of exposure leading to dysgenesis. However,
while several chemicals can perturb chromatin structure acutely, for many agents 
(particularly alcohol) it remains unclear if these modifications represent
transient responses to exposure or heritable lesions leading to pathology.
RESULTS: Here, we report that mice encountering an acute exposure to alcohol on
gestational Day-7 exhibit significant alterations in chromatin structure (histone
3 lysine 9 dimethylation, lysine 9 acetylation, and lysine 27 trimethylation) at 
Day-17, and that these changes strongly correlate with the development of
craniofacial and central nervous system defects. Using a neural cortical stem
cell model, we find that the epigenetic changes arising as a consequence of
alcohol exposure are heavily dependent on the gene under investigation, the dose 
of alcohol encountered, and that the signatures arising acutely differ
significantly from those observed after a 4-day recovery period. Importantly, the
changes observed post-recovery are consistent with those modeled in vivo, and
associate with alterations in transcripts encoding multiple homeobox genes
directing neurogenesis. Unexpectedly, we do not observe a correlation between
alcohol-induced changes in chromatin structure and alterations in transcription. 
Interestingly, the majority of epigenetic changes observed occur in marks
associated with repressive chromatin structure, and we identify correlative
disruptions in transcripts encoding Dnmt1, Eed, Ehmt2 (G9a), EzH2, Kdm1a, Kdm4c, 
Setdb1, Sod3, Tet1 and Uhrf1.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that the immediate and long-term impacts 
of alcohol exposure on chromatin structure are distinct, and hint at the
existence of a possible coordinated epigenetic response to ethanol during
development. Collectively, our results indicate that alcohol-induced
modifications to chromatin structure persist beyond the window of exposure, and
likely contribute to the development of fetal alcohol syndrome-associated
congenital abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC4587584
PMID: 26421061  [PubMed]


197. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 6;290(45):27067-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.684753. Epub 2015
Sep 29.

Histone Deacetylase 3 Coordinates Deacetylase-independent Epigenetic Silencing of
Transforming Growth Factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) to Orchestrate Second Heart Field
Development.

Lewandowski SL(1), Janardhan HP(1), Trivedi CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605.
(2)From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605
chinmay.trivedi@umassmed.edu.

About two-thirds of human congenital heart disease involves second heart
field-derived structures. Histone-modifying enzymes, histone deacetylases
(HDACs), regulate the epigenome; however, their functions within the second heart
field remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3)
orchestrates epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1, a causative factor in congenital
heart disease pathogenesis, in a deacetylase-independent manner to regulate
development of second heart field-derived structures. In murine embryos lacking
HDAC3 in the second heart field, increased TGF-ß1 bioavailability is associated
with ascending aortic dilatation, outflow tract malrotation, overriding aorta,
double outlet right ventricle, aberrant semilunar valve development, bicuspid
aortic valve, ventricular septal defects, and embryonic lethality. Activation of 
TGF-ß signaling causes aberrant endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and altered
extracellular matrix homeostasis in HDAC3-null outflow tracts and semilunar
valves, and pharmacological inhibition of TGF-ß rescues these defects. HDAC3
recruits components of the PRC2 complex, methyltransferase EZH2, EED, and SUZ12, 
to the NCOR complex to enrich trimethylation of Lys-27 on histone H3 at the
Tgf-ß1 regulatory region and thereby maintains epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1
specifically within the second heart field-derived mesenchyme. Wild-type HDAC3 or
catalytically inactive HDAC3 expression rescues aberrant
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition and epigenetic silencing of Tgf-ß1 in
HDAC3-null outflow tracts and semilunar valves. These findings reveal that
epigenetic dysregulation within the second heart field is a predisposing factor
for congenital heart disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646383 [Available on 2016-11-06]
PMID: 26420484  [PubMed - in process]


198. Angiogenesis. 2016 Jan;19(1):9-24. doi: 10.1007/s10456-015-9485-2. Epub 2015 Sep 
28.

The decrease in histone methyltransferase EZH2 in response to fluid shear stress 
alters endothelial gene expression and promotes quiescence.

Maleszewska M(1,)(2), Vanchin B(3), Harmsen MC(3), Krenning G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine Research Group, Department of Pathology
and Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ, Groningen, The Netherlands.
m.maleszewska@gmail.com. (2)Max Planck Research Group Chromatin and Ageing, Max
Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 9b, 50931, Cologne,
Germany. m.maleszewska@gmail.com. (3)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine
Research Group, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ,
Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Cardiovascular Regenerative Medicine Research
Group, Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. g.krenning@umcg.nl.

High uniform fluid shear stress (FSS) is atheroprotective and preserves the
endothelial phenotype and function through activation of downstream mediators
such as MAPK7 (Erk5). Endothelial cells respond to FSS thanks to
mechanotransduction. However, how the resulting signaling is integrated and
resolved at the epigenetic level remains elusive. We hypothesized that Polycomb
methyltransferase EZH2 is involved in the effects of FSS in human endothelial
cells. We showed that FSS decreases the expression of the Polycomb
methyltransferase EZH2. Despite simultaneous activation of MAPK7, MAPK7 pathway
does not directly influence the transcription of EZH2. Interestingly though, the 
knockdown of EZH2 activates the protective MAPK7 signaling in endothelial cells, 
even in the absence of FSS. To understand the influence of the FSS-decreased
expression of EZH2 on endothelial transcriptome, we performed RNA-seq and
differential gene expression analysis. We identified candidate groups of genes
dependent on both EZH2 and FSS. Among those, Gene Ontology overrepresentation
analysis revealed highly significant enrichment of the cell cycle-related genes, 
suggesting changes in proliferation. Indeed, the depletion of EZH2 strongly
inhibited endothelial proliferation, indicating cell cycle arrest. The
concomitant decrease in CCNA expression suggests the transition of endothelial
cells into a quiescent phenotype. Further bioinformatical analysis suggested
TXNIP as a possible mediator between EZH2 and cell cycle-related gene network.
Our data show that EZH2 is a FSS-responsive gene. Decreased EZH2 levels enhance
the activation of the atheroprotective MAPK7 signaling. Decrease in EZH2 under
FSS mediates the decrease in the expression of the network of cell cycle-related 
genes, which allows the cells to enter quiescence. EZH2 is therefore important
for the protective effects of FSS in endothelium.

PMCID: PMC4700080
PMID: 26416763  [PubMed - in process]


199. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 Dec 1;289(2):276-85. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.09.016. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Posttranscriptional silencing of the lncRNA MALAT1 by miR-217 inhibits the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition via enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in the
malignant transformation of HBE cells induced by cigarette smoke extract.

Lu L(1), Luo F(1), Liu Y(1), Liu X(1), Shi L(1), Lu X(1), Liu Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China; The Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology, Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. (2)Institute of 
Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, 
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China; The Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology,
Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
drqzliu@hotmail.com.

Lung cancer is regarded as the leading cause of cancer-related deaths, and
cigarette smoking is one of the strongest risk factors for the development of
lung cancer. However, the mechanisms for cigarette smoke-induced lung
carcinogenesis remain unclear. The present study investigated the effects of an
miRNA (miR-217) on levels of an lncRNA (MALAT1) and examined the role of these
factors in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) induced by cigarette smoke
extract (CSE) in human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. In these cells, CSE
caused decreases of miR-217 levels and increases in lncRNA MALAT1 levels.
Over-expression of miR-217 with a mimic attenuated the CSE-induced increase of
MALAT1 levels, and reduction of miR-217 levels by an inhibitor enhanced
expression of MALAT1. Moreover, the CSE-induced increase of MALAT1 expression was
blocked by an miR-217 mimic, indicating that miR-217 negatively regulates MALAT1 
expression. Knockdown of MALAT1 reversed CSE-induced increases of EZH2 (enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2) and H3K27me3 levels. In addition to the alteration from
epithelial to spindle-like mesenchymal morphology, chronic exposure of HBE cells 
to CSE increased the levels of EZH2, H3K27me3, vimentin, and N-cadherin and
decreased E-cadherin levels, effects that were reversed by MALAT1 siRNA or EZH2
siRNA. The results indicate that miR-217 regulation of EZH2/H3K27me3 via MALAT1
is involved in CSE-induced EMT and malignant transformation of HBE cells. The
posttranscriptional silencing of MALAT1 by miR-217 provides a link, through EZH2,
between ncRNAs and the EMT and establishes a mechanism for CSE-induced lung
carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26415832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Pathol. 2016 Mar;238(4):519-30. doi: 10.1002/path.4649. Epub 2016 Jan 9.

In vitro and in vivo correlates of physiological and neoplastic human Fallopian
tube stem cells.

Yamamoto Y(1), Ning G(1), Howitt BE(2), Mehra K(2), Wu L(3), Wang X(1), Hong
Y(1), Kern F(3), Wei TS(3), Zhang T(3), Nagarajan N(3), Basuli D(4), Torti S(4), 
Brewer M(5), Choolani M(6), McKeon F(1,)(3,)(7,)(8,)(9), Crum CP(2), Xian
W(1,)(2,)(7,)(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Genome Institute of Singapore, A-STAR, Singapore. (4)Departments of Molecular,
Microbial and Structural Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT, USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA. (6)Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. (7)MultiClonal
Therapeutics, Inc, Farmington, CT, USA. (8)Department of Microbiology, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. (9)Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Houston, TX, USA. (10)Department of Genetics and Developmental
Biology, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA. (11)Center
for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, TX, USA.

High-grade serous cancer (HGSC) progresses to advanced stages without symptoms
and the 5-year survival rate is a dismal 30%. Recent studies of ovaries and
Fallopian tubes in patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations have documented a
pre-metastatic intramucosal neoplasm that is found almost exclusively in the
Fallopian tube, termed 'serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma' or STIC.
Moreover, other proliferations, termed p53 signatures, secretory cell outgrowths 
(SCOUTs), and lower-grade serous tubal intraepithelial neoplasms (STINs) fall
short of STIC but share similar alterations in expression, in keeping with an
underpinning of genomic disturbances involved in, or occurring in parallel with, 
serous carcinogenesis. To gain insight into the cellular origins of this unique
tubal pathway to high-grade serous cancer, we cloned and both immortalized and
transformed Fallopian tube stem cells (FTSCs). We demonstrated that pedigrees of 
FTSCs were capable of multipotent differentiation and that the tumours derived
from transformed FTSCs shared the histological and molecular features of HGSC. We
also demonstrated that altered expression of some biomarkers seen in transformed 
FTSCs and HGSCs (stathmin, EZH2, CXCR4, CXCL12, and FOXM1) could be seen as well 
in immortalized cells and their in vivo counterparts SCOUTs and STINs. Thus, a
whole-genome transcriptome analysis comparing FTSCs, immortalized FTSCs, and
transformed FTSCs showed a clear molecular progression sequence that is
recapitulated by the spectrum of accumulated perturbations characterizing the
range of proliferations seen in vivo. Biomarkers unique to STIC relative to
normal tubal epithelium provide a basis for novel detection approaches to early
HGSC, but must be viewed critically given their potential expression in lesser
proliferations. Perturbations shared by both immortalized and transformed FTSCs
may provide unique early targets for prevention strategies. Central to these
efforts has been the ability to clone and perpetuate multipotent FTSCs. Copyright
© 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26415052  [PubMed - in process]


201. Mol Cell. 2015 Oct 1;60(1):118-30. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.08.014. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

DDX6 Orchestrates Mammalian Progenitor Function through the mRNA Degradation and 
Translation Pathways.

Wang Y(1), Arribas-Layton M(2), Chen Y(1), Lykke-Andersen J(2), Sen GL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0869, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; UCSD Stem Cell Program,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA. (2)Division of
Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0869, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, USA; UCSD
Stem Cell Program, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0869, 
USA. Electronic address: gsen@ucsd.edu.

In adult tissues, stem and progenitor cells must balance proliferation and
differentiation to maintain homeostasis. How this is done is unclear. Here, we
show that the DEAD box RNA helicase, DDX6 is necessary for maintaining adult
progenitor cell function. DDX6 loss results in premature differentiation and
decreased proliferation of epidermal progenitor cells. To maintain self-renewal, 
DDX6 associates with YBX1 to bind the stem loops found in the 3' UTRs of
regulators of proliferation/self-renewal (CDK1, EZH2) and recruit them to EIF4E
to facilitate their translation. To prevent premature differentiation of
progenitor cells, DDX6 regulates the 5' UTR of differentiation inducing
transcription factor, KLF4 and degrades its transcripts through association with 
mRNA degradation proteins. Our results demonstrate that progenitor function is
maintained by DDX6 complexes through two distinct pathways that include the
degradation of differentiation-inducing transcripts and by promoting the
translation of self-renewal and proliferation mRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592480 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26412305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Epigenomics. 2016 Feb;8(2):285-305. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.89. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Mutation spectra of histone methyltransferases with canonical SET domains and
EZH2-targeted therapy.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Omics Network, National Cancer Center, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ward,
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Germline mutations in canonical SET-methyltransferases have been identified in
autism and intellectual disability syndromes and gain-of-function somatic
alterations in EZH2, MLL3, NSD1, WHSC1 (NSD2) and WHSC1L1 (NSD3) in cancer. EZH2 
interacts with AR, ERa, ß-catenin, FOXP3, NF-<U+03BA>B, PRC2, REST and SNAI2, resulting 
in context-dependent transcriptional activation and repression. Pharmacological
EZH2 inhibitors are currently in clinical trials for the treatment of B-cell
lymphomas and solid tumors. EZH2 inhibitors might also be applicable in the
treatment of SWI/SNF-mutant cancers, reflecting the reciprocal expression of and 
functional overlap between EZH2 and SMARCA4. Because of the risks for autoimmune 
diseases, cognitive impairment, cardiomyopathy and myelodysplastic syndrome, EZH2
inhibitors should be utilized for cancer treatment in patients receiving
long-term surveillance but not for cancer chemoprevention.

PMID: 26411517  [PubMed - in process]


203. Anticancer Res. 2015 Oct;35(10):5443-51.

Signatures of Adverse Pathological Features, Androgen Insensitivity and
Metastatic Potential in Prostate Cancer.

Tolkach Y(1), Merseburger A(1), Herrmann T(1), Kuczyk M(1), Serth J(1), Imkamp
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Clinic for Urology and Urologic Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany imkamp.florian@mh-hannover.de.

BACKGROUND/AIM: The genetic characterization of prostate tumors is important for 
personalized therapy. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of
previously described prostate cancer-related genes in the genetic
characterization of prostate tumors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-two genes were selected for expression analysis
(real time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction). One normal prostatic
epithelial cell line and three standardized prostate cancer cell lines were used.
Twenty-eight patients treated with radical prostatectomy were included in the
study.
RESULTS: The following genes appeared to be possibly related to the metastatic
potential of the tumor: ELOVL fatty acid elongase 7 (ELOVL7), enhancer of zeste 2
polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit (EZH2), gastrulation brain homeobox 2
(GBX2), golgi membrane protein 1 (GOLM1), homeobox C6 (HOXC6), minichromosome
maintenance complex component 6 (MCM6), marker of proliferation Ki-67 (MKI67),
mucin 1, cell surface associated (MUC1), MYC binding protein 2, E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase (MYCBP2), somatostatin receptor 1 (SSTR1), topoisomerase (DNA) II 
alpha 170 kDa (TOP2A) and exportin 6 (XPO6). Six genes were differentially
expressed in patients with localized and locally advanced cancer (GOLM1, GBX2,
XPO6, SSTR1, TOP2A and cell division cycle associated 5, CDCA5) and three genes
(HOXC6, Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) and MYC binding protein 2, 
E3 ubiquitin protein ligase, MYCBP2) in patients with a low vs. high Gleason
grade/sum.
CONCLUSION: Some of the investigated genes show promising prognostic and
classification features, which might be useful in a clinical setting, warranting 
for further validation.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26408707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):214-21. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.016. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Restoration of IGF2 imprinting by polycomb repressive complex 2 docking factor
SUZ12 in colon cancer cells.

Wang H(1), Ge S(2), Qian G(2), Li W(3), Cui J(3), Wang G(3), Hoffman AR(4), Hu
JF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, PR China; Stanford University
Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.
(2)Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, PR China. (3)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated
Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China. (4)Stanford
University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304, 
USA. Electronic address: arhoffman@stanford.edu. (5)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, 
First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130061, PR China;
Stanford University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
CA 94304, USA. Electronic address: jifan@stanford.edu.

The insulin-like growth factor II (IGF2) gene is aberrantly expressed in tumors
as a result of loss of imprinting (LOI). Reactivation of the normally-suppressed 
maternal allele may lead to IGF2 upregulation and increased tumor growth,
particularly in colon cancer. However, the mechanisms underlying IGF2 LOI in
tumors are poorly defined. In this report, we identified polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) docking factor SUZ12 as a critical factor in regulating IGF2
imprinting in tumors. Human colon cancer cell lines (HRT18 and HT29) show loss of
IGF2 imprinting. Ectopic expression of SUZ12 restored normal monoallelic
expression of IGF2 in these two colon cancer cell lines. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chromatin conformation capture (3C), we found that
the virally-expressed SUZ12 bound to IGF2 promoters, coordinating with endogenous
CTCF to orchestrate a long range intrachromosomal loop between the imprinting
control region (ICR) and the IGF2 promoters. The histone methyltransferase EZH2
was recruited to the IGF2 promoters, where it induced H3K27 hypermethylation,
suppressing one allele, leading to the restoration of IGF2 imprinting. These data
demonstrate that SUZ12 is a key molecule in the regulation of monoallelic
expression of IGF2, suggesting a novel epigenetic therapeutic strategy for
modulating IGF2 production in human tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26407907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Dec;24(12):1864-72. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0496. Epub 2015 Sep 24.

A Novel Quantitative Multiplex Tissue Immunoblotting for Biomarkers Predicts a
Prostate Cancer Aggressive Phenotype.

Zhu G(1), Liu Z(1), Epstein JI(2), Davis C(1), Christudass CS(1), Carter HB(1),
Landis P(1), Zhang H(2), Chung JY(3), Hewitt SM(3), Miller MC(4), Veltri RW(5).

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Pathology, The Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Experimental Pathology Laboratory,
Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (4)Statistical Consultant, Lindale, Texas. (5)The James 
Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. rveltri1@jhmi.edu.

BACKGROUND: Early prediction of disease progression in men with very low-risk
(VLR) prostate cancer who selected active surveillance (AS) rather than immediate
treatment could reduce morbidity associated with overtreatment.
METHODS: We evaluated the association of six biomarkers [Periostin, (-5, -7)
proPSA, CACNA1D, HER2/neu, EZH2, and Ki-67] with different Gleason scores and
biochemical recurrence (BCR) on prostate cancer TMAs of 80 radical prostatectomy 
(RP) cases. Multiplex tissue immunoblotting (MTI) was used to assess these
biomarkers in cancer and adjacent benign areas of 5 µm sections. Multivariate
logistic regression (MLR) was applied to model our results.
RESULTS: In the RP cases, CACNA1D, HER2/neu, and Periostin expression were
significantly correlated with aggressive phenotype in cancer areas. An MLR model 
in the cancer area yielded a ROC-AUC = 0.98, whereas in cancer-adjacent benign
areas, yielded a ROC-AUC = 0.94. CACNA1D and HER2/neu expression combined with
Gleason score in a MLR model yielded a ROC-AUC = 0.79 for BCR prediction. In the 
small biopsies from an AS cohort of 61 VLR cases, an MLR model for prediction of 
progressors at diagnosis retained (-5, -7) proPSA and CACNA1D, yielding a ROC-AUC
of 0.78, which was improved to 0.82 after adding tPSA into the model.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular profile of biomarkers is capable of accurately
predicting aggressive prostate cancer on retrospective RP cases and identifying
potential aggressive prostate cancer requiring immediate treatment on the AS
diagnostic biopsy but limited in BCR prediction.
IMPACT: Comprehensive profiling of biomarkers using MTI predicts prostate cancer 
aggressive phenotype in RP and AS biopsies.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4755280 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26404961  [PubMed - in process]


206. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 25;6:8494. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9494.

EZH2-mediated loss of miR-622 determines CXCR4 activation in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Liu H(1), Liu Y(2), Liu W(2), Zhang W(3), Xu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases,
Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China. 
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (3)Department of Immunology, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

The CXC chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) exerts a variety of functions at different
steps of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression. The molecular mechanisms and
therapeutic value of CXCR4 in the development of HCC remain undefined. Here we
show that aberrant CXCR4 overexpression is associated with poor prognosis and
aggressive characteristics of HCC. Suppression of CXCR4 activity via CXCR4
knockdown, AMD3100 or neutralizing antibody administration inhibits hepatoma cell
tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo. CXCR4 overexpression displays the opposite
effects. Using Mir library screening we identify miR-622 as a regulator of CXCR4.
Further studies show that miR-622 directly target the 3' untranslated region of
CXCR4 and is transcriptionally repressed by EZH2-induced H3K27 trimethylation and
promoter methylation. EZH2/miR-622 promotes tumorigenesis through CXCR4.
EZH2-mediated loss of miR-622 is found to correlate with CXCR4 overexpression and
unfavourable prognosis in HCC patients. This study establishes EZH2/miR-622/CXCR4
as a potential adverse prognostic factor and therapeutic target for HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4598861
PMID: 26404566  [PubMed - in process]


207. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2015 Sep 24. doi: 10.1002/bab.1446. [Epub ahead of
print]

Garcinol downregulates Notch1 signaling via modulating miR-200c and suppresses
oncogenic properties of PANC-1 cancer stem-like cells.

Huang CC(1,)(2,)(3), Lin CM(4), Huang YJ(5,)(6), Wei L(6,)(7), Ting LL(8), Kuo
CC(8), Hsu C(8), Jf C(8), Wu AT(6), Lee WH(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Cathay General Hospital SiJhih, New Taipei City,
Taiwan. (2)School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City,
Taiwan. (3)School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei Medical University-Shuang Ho Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Surgery, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)The Ph.D. program for translational medicine, Taipei Medical
University and Academia Sinica, Taiwan. (7)Department of Neurosurgery, Taipei
Medical University-Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Cancer Center and
Department of Radiation, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Department of Pathology, Taipei Medical
University-Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Pancreatic cancer represents one of the most aggressive types of malignancy due
to its high resistance towards most clinically available treatments. The presence
of pancreatic cancer stem-like cells (CSCs) have been attributed to the
intrinsically high resistance and highly metastatic potential of this disease.
Here, we identified and isolated pancreatic cancer stem-like cells using
side-population (SP) method from human pancreatic cancer cell line, PANC-1. We
then compared the SP and non-SP PANC-1 cells genetically. PANC-1 SP cells
exhibited cancer stem-like cell properties including enhanced self-renewal
ability, increased metastatic potential and resistance towards gemcitabine
treatment. These cancer stem-like phenotypes were supported by their enhanced
expression of ABCG2, Oct4 and CD44. A traditional plant-derived anti-oxidant,
garcinol, have been implicated for its anti-cancer properties. Here, we found
that garcinol treatment to PANC-1 SP cells significantly suppressed the stem-like
properties of PANC-1 SP cells and metastatic potential by down-regulating the
expression of Mcl-1, EZH2, ABCG2, Gli-1 and Notch1. More importantly, garcinol
treatment led to the up-regulation of several tumor suppressor miRNAs and
miR-200c increased by garcinol treatment was found to target and down-regulate
Notch1. Thus, PANC-1 SP cells may serve as a model for studying drug-resistant
pancreatic cancer stem-like cells and garcinol has the potential as an antagonist
against pancreatic CSCs. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26400206  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


208. Mol Cancer Res. 2016 Jan;14(1):35-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0295. Epub
2015 Sep 22.

HDAC Inhibition for the Treatment of Epithelioid Sarcoma: Novel Cross Talk
Between Epigenetic Components.

Lopez G(1), Song Y(2), Lam R(3), Ruder D(4), Creighton CJ(5), Bid HK(1), Bill
KL(1), Bolshakov S(6), Zhang X(7), Lev D(8), Pollock RE(9).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Guiyang 300 Hospital, Zunyi Medical College,
Guizhou, China. (3)GRU-UGA Medical Partnership, Georgia Regents University,
Athens, Georgia. (4)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Medicine and Dan L. Duncan
Division of Biostatistics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. Department
of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
Texas. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. (7)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(8)Surgery B, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(9)Department of Surgery, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
raphael.pollock@osumc.edu.

Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare neoplasm uniquely comprised of cells exhibiting
both mesenchymal and epithelial features. Having propensity for local and distant
recurrence, it poses a diagnostic dilemma secondary to pathologic complexity.
Patients have dismal prognosis due to lack of effective therapy. HDAC inhibitors 
(HDACi) exhibit marked antitumor effects in various malignancies. The studies
here demonstrate that pan-HDAC inhibitors constitute novel therapeutics versus
epithelioid sarcoma. Human ES cells (VAESBJ, HS-ES, Epi-544) were studied in
preclinical models to evaluate HDACi effects. Immunoblot and RT-PCR were used to 
evaluate expression of acetylated tubulin, histones H3/H4, EZH2 upon HDACi. MTS
and clonogenic assays were used to assess the impact of HDACi on cell growth.
Cell culture assays were used to evaluate the impact of HDACi and EZH2-specific
siRNA inhibition on cell-cycle progression and survival. Unbiased gene array
analysis was used to identify the impact of HDACi on epithelioid sarcoma gene
expression. Xenografts were used to evaluate epithelioid sarcoma tumor growth in 
response to HDACi. HDAC inhibition increased target protein acetylation and
abrogated cell growth and colony formation in epithelioid sarcoma cells. HDACi
induced G2 cell-cycle arrest and marked apoptosis, and reduced tumor growth in
xenograft models. HDACi induced widespread gene expression changes, and EZH2 was 
significantly downregulated. EZH2 knockdown resulted in abrogated cell growth in 
vitro.IMPLICATIONS: The current study suggests a clinical role for HDACi in human
epithelioid sarcoma, which, when combined with EZH2 inhibitors, could serve as a 
novel therapeutic strategy for epithelioid sarcoma patients. Future
investigations targeting specific HDAC isoforms along with EZH2 may potentially
maximizing treatment efficacy. Mol Cancer Res; 14(1); 35-43. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4715931 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26396249  [PubMed - in process]


209. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Nov;36(11):1333-40. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv137. Epub 2015
Sep 21.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) characterizes an aggressive 
subset of prostate cancers and predicts patient prognosis independently from pre-
and postoperatively assessed clinicopathological parameters.

Melling N(1), Thomsen E(2), Tsourlakis MC(2), Kluth M(2), Hube-Magg C(2), Minner 
S(2), Koop C(2), Graefen M(3), Heinzer H(3), Wittmer C(2), Sauter G(2), Wilczak
W(2), Huland H(3), Simon R(4), Schlomm T(5), Steurer S(2), Krech T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery Department and 
Clinic. (2)Institute of Pathology. (3)Martini-Clinic, Prostate Cancer Center and.
(4)Institute of Pathology, r.simon@uke.de. (5)Martini-Clinic, Prostate Cancer
Center and Department of Urology, Section for translational Prostate Cancer
Research, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf 20246, Hamburg, Germany.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays an important role in tumor development
and progression by interacting with histone and nonhistone proteins. In the
current study, we analyzed prevalence and prognostic impact of EZH2 in prostate
cancer. EZH2 expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry on a tissue
microarray containing more than 12400 prostate cancer specimens. Results were
compared to tumor phenotype, biochemical recurrence and molecular subtypes
defined by ERG status as well as genomic deletions of 3p, 5q, 6q and PTEN. EZH2
immunostaining was detectable in 56.6% of 10168 interpretable cancers and
considered strong in 1.1%, moderate in 12.2% and weak in 43.3% of cases. High
EZH2 expression was strongly associated with high Gleason grade (P < 0.0001),
advanced pathological tumor stage (P < 0.0001), positive nodal status (P <
0.0001), elevated preoperative PSA level (P = 0.0066), early PSA recurrence (P < 
0.0001) and increased cell proliferation P < 0.0001). High-level EZH2 staining
was also associated with TMPRSS2:ERG rearrangement and ERG expression in prostate
cancers (P < 0.0001) and was linked to deletions of PTEN, 6q15, 5q21 and 3p13 (P 
< 0.0001 each) particularly in ERG-negative cancers. The prognostic impact of
EZH2 was independent of established pre- and postoperatively assessed
clinicopathological parameters. EZH2 has strong prognostic impact in prostate
cancer and might contribute to the development of a fraction of genetically
instable and particularly aggressive prostate cancers. EZH2 analysis might
therefore be of clinical value for risk stratification of prostate cancer.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26392259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Med Chem. 2015 Oct 22;58(20):8166-81. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01154. Epub
2015 Sep 30.

Discovery and Optimization of Novel, Selective Histone Methyltransferase SET7
Inhibitors by Pharmacophore- and Docking-Based Virtual Screening.

Meng F(1,)(2), Cheng S(3), Ding H(2), Liu S(2), Liu Y(2), Zhu K(2), Chen S(2), Lu
J(2), Xie Y(2), Li L(2,)(4), Liu R(5), Shi Z(5), Zhou Y(3), Liu YC(5), Zheng
M(2), Jiang H(2,)(4), Lu W(1), Liu H(3), Luo C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Shanghai University , Shanghai
200444, China. (2)Drug Discovery and Design Center, State Key Laboratory of Drug 
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 201203, China. (3)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Receptor
Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 201203, China. (4)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech
University , Shanghai 200031, China. (5)Shanghai ChemPartner Co., Ltd.,
Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park, Shanghai 201203, China.

Histone methyltransferases are involved in various biological functions, and
these methylation regulating enzymes' abnormal expression or activity has been
noted in several human cancers. Within this context, SET domain-containing
(lysine methyltransferase) 7 (SET7, also called KMT7, SETD7, SET9) is of
increasing significance due to its diverse roles in biological functions and
diseases, such as diabetes, cancers, alopecia areata, atherosclerotic vascular
disease, HIV, and HCV. In this study, DC-S100, which was discovered by
pharmacophore- and docking-based virtual screening, was identified as the hit
compound of SET7 inhibitor. Structure-activity relationship (SAR) analysis was
performed on analogs of DC-S100 and according to the putative binding mode of
DC-S100, structure modifications were made to improve its activity. Of note,
compounds DC-S238 and DC-S239, with IC50 values of 4.88 and 4.59 µM,
respectively, displayed selectivity for DNMT1, DOT1L, EZH2, NSD1, SETD8, and G9a.
Taken together, DC-S238 and DC-S239 can serve as leads for further investigation 
as SET7 inhibitors and the chemical toolkits for functional biology studies of
SET7.

PMID: 26390175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Chin J Physiol. 2015 Oct 31;58(5):275-84. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2015.BAD322.

Histone 3 Trimethylation of IGFBP-7 Gene Promoter by Expression of D5 Stat5a in
Breast Epithelial Cells.

Tan D(1), Zhang J(1), Nie X(1), Yu C(1), Li Z(1), Mamat Z(1), Jiang H(1), Yang
X(1), Zhang J(1), Yao S(1), Tang P(2), Huang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Jishou University School of Medicine, Hunan,
People's Republic of China. (2)Jishou University First Affiliated Hospital,
Department of Breast Surgery, Jishou 416000, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

As a very important transcription factor, signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5a (Stat5a) has been reported to be involved in human reproductive 
cancers such as breast, prostate and ovarian cancer. However, up to date, the
exact role of Stat5a in breast cancer is still not clear. The data reported are
conflicting. D5 Stat5a is a variant of Stat5a we cloned recently. This newly
cloned variant behave like its full length counterpart in terms of dimerization, 
being activated by prolactin and nuclear translocation, however it also behave
differently in terms of effect on cell proliferation and interaction with other
transcription factors. In the present study, we examined its effect on cell
proliferation of cultured breast cancer cells (MCF-10A and MCF-7) by using
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer and MTS technology. Also, quantitative real
time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
(ChIP) and Western blot were used to probe the possible changes of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-7 (IGFBP-7) expression including mRNA and protein, 
and the epigenetic changes with overexpression of this newly cloned variant. The 
results clarified that D5 Stat5a (1) behaves as a promoting factor to the cell
proliferation of MCF-10A and MCF-7, (2) induces enhancer of zeste homology 2
(EZH2) expression in breast epithelial cells, as well as histone 3 trimethylation
of IGFBP-7 promoter region, and (3) lower IGFBP-7 expression was detected in
breast cancer tissue. Taking together, we concluded that the mitogenic effect of 
D5 Stat5a on breast cells is, at least partly, through up-regulation of histone
methyltransferase, EZH2, and therefore inhibiting IGFBP-7 expression by
increasing H3K27Me3 of IGFBP-7 promoter region.

PMID: 26387651  [PubMed - in process]


212. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33587-601. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5599.

Long noncoding RNA HOXA-AS2 promotes gastric cancer proliferation by
epigenetically silencing P21/PLK3/DDIT3 expression.

Xie M(1), Sun M(1), Zhu YN(1), Xia R(1), Liu YW(1), Ding J(2), Ma HW(3), He
XZ(1), Zhang ZH(3), Liu ZJ(1), Liu XH(1), De W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Current evidence suggests that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) may be an important 
class of functional regulators involved in human cancers development, including
gastric cancer (GC). Here, we reported that HOXA cluster antisense RNA2
(HOXA-AS2), a 1048bp RNA, was upregulated in GC. Increased HOXA-AS2 expression in
GC was associated with larger tumor size and higher clinical stage; patients with
higher levels of HOXA-AS2 expression had a relatively poor prognosis. Further
experiments revealed that HOXA-AS2 knockdown significantly inhibited GC cells
proliferation by causing G1 arrest and promoting apoptosis, whereas HOXA-AS2
overexpression promoted cell growth. Furthermore, HOXA-AS2 could epigenetically
repress the expression of P21, PLK3, and DDIT3 via binding with EZH2 (enhaner of 
zeste homolog 2), a key component of PRC2; ChIP assays demonstrated that EZH2
could directly bind to the promoter of P21, PLK3 and DDIT3, inducing H3K27
trimethylated. In conclusion, these data suggest that HOXA-AS2 could be an
oncogene for GC partly through suppressing P21, PLK3, and DDIT3 expression;
HOXA-AS2 may be served as a candidate prognostic biomarker and target for new
therapies in human GC.

PMCID: PMC4741787
PMID: 26384350  [PubMed - in process]


213. Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 15;75(22):4803-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3786. Epub 
2015 Sep 17.

Histone Deacetylase HDAC8 Promotes Insulin Resistance and ß-Catenin Activation in
NAFLD-Associated Hepatocellular Carcinoma.

Tian Y(1), Wong VW(1), Wong GL(1), Yang W(1), Sun H(1), Shen J(1), Tong JH(2), Go
MY(3), Cheung YS(4), Lai PB(4), Zhou M(3), Xu G(3), Huang TH(5), Yu J(1), To
KF(6), Cheng AS(7), Chan HL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics and Institute of Digestive Disease,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, PR China. (2)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (3)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics and Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (4)Department of Surgery, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (5)Department of Molecular Medicine, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. (7)State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, PR China. School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk hlychan@cuhk.edu.hk.
(8)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics and Institute of Digestive Disease,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, PR China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk hlychan@cuhk.edu.hk.

The growing epidemic of obesity, which causes nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD) and the more severe phenotype nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), has
paralleled the increasing incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Accumulating evidence demonstrates that overnutrition and metabolic pathways can 
trigger modifications of DNA and histones via deregulation of chromatin
modifiers, resulting in aberrant transcriptional activity. However, the
epigenetic regulation of HCC development in NAFLD remains obscure. Here, we
uncover key epigenetic regulators using both dietary and genetic obesity-promoted
HCC models through quantitative expression profiling and characterize the
oncogenic activities of histone deacetylase HDAC8 in NAFLD-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis. HDAC8 is directly upregulated by the lipogenic
transcription factor SREBP-1 where they are coexpressed in dietary obesity models
of NASH and HCC. Lentiviral-mediated HDAC8 attenuation in vivo reversed insulin
resistance and reduced NAFLD-associated tumorigenicity. HDAC8 modulation by
genetic and pharmacologic approaches inhibited p53/p21-mediated apoptosis and
G2-M phase cell-cycle arrest and stimulated ß-catenin-dependent cell
proliferation. Mechanistically, HDAC8 physically interacted with the chromatin
modifier EZH2 to concordantly repress Wnt antagonists via histone H4
deacetylation and H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. In human NAFLD-associated HCC,
levels of SREBP-1, HDAC8, EZH2, H4 deacetylation, H3K27me3, and active ß-catenin 
were all correlated positively in tumors compared with nontumor tissues. Overall,
our findings show how HDAC8 drives NAFLD-associated hepatocarcinogenesis,
offering a novel epigenetic target to prevent or treat HCC in obese patients.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26383163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32410-25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5609.

NBAT1 suppresses breast cancer metastasis by regulating DKK1 via PRC2.

Hu P(1,)(2,)(3), Chu J(1,)(3), Wu Y(1,)(3), Sun L(1,)(3), Lv X(1,)(3), Zhu
Y(1,)(3), Li J(1,)(3), Guo Q(1,)(3), Gong C(1,)(3), Liu B(1,)(2,)(3), Su
S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene
Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of Ministry of Education, State Key 
Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (3)Breast Tumor Center, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Long noncoding RNA NBAT1 (neuroblastoma associated transcript 1) regulates cell
proliferation and invasion by interacting with PRC2 (polycomb repressive complex 
2) member EZH2 (enhancer of zeste 2). Decreased expression of NBAT1 is associated
with poor clinical outcome in neuroblastomas. However, the roles of NBAT1 in
other cancers remain unknown. Here, we report that NBAT1 is down-regulated in
various types of cancer. Particularly, reduced NBAT1 in breast cancer is
associated with tumor metastasis and poor patient prognosis. In vitro, ectopic
NBAT1 inhibits migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. Mechanistic study
shows that NBAT1 is associated with PRC2 member EZH2 and regulates global gene
expression profile. Among them, DKK1 (dickkopf WNT signaling pathway inhibitor 1)
is found to be regulated by NBAT1 in a PRC2 dependent manner, and is responsible 
for NBAT1's effects in inhibiting migration and invasion of breast cancer cells. 
Taken together, our study demonstrates that long noncoding RNA NBAT1 is a
potential breast cancer prognostic marker, as well as a potential therapeutic
target to inhibit breast cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4741702
PMID: 26378045  [PubMed - in process]


215. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):33720-32. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5606.

Targeting EZH2 regulates tumor growth and apoptosis through modulating
mitochondria dependent cell-death pathway in HNSCC.

Zhou X(1), Ren Y(2), Kong L(1), Cai G(3), Sun S(1), Song W(3), Wang Y(1), Jin
R(1), Qi L(3), Mei M(2), Wang X(1), Kang C(4), Li M(1,)(5), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial and Otorhinolaryngology Oncology, Tianjin Medical 
University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and
Therapy, Tianjin Cancer Institute, National Clinical Research Center of Cancer,
Tianjin, China. (2)Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Science, Tianjin
Medical University, Tianjin, China. (3)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of
Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology,
Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin, China. (5)Department of Surgery, College
of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City,
OK, USA.

EZH2 is a negative prognostic factor and is overexpressed or activated in most
human cancers including head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). Analysis
of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) HNSCC data indicated that EZH2 over-expression 
was associated with high tumor grade and conferred poor prognosis. EZH2
inhibition triggered cell apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and decreased cell growth 
in vitro. MICU1 (mitochondrial calcium uptake1) was shown to be down regulated
when EZH2 expression was inhibited in HNSCC. When the EZH2 and MICU1 were
inhibited, HNSCC cells became susceptible to cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
Mitochondrial membrane potential and cytosolic Ca2+ concentration analysis
suggested that EZH2 and MICU1 were required to maintain mitochondrial membrane
potential stability. A xenograft tumor model was used to confirm that EZH2
depletion inhibited HNSCC cell growth and induced tumor cell apoptosis. In
summary, EZH2 is a potential anti-tumor target in HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC4741797
PMID: 26378043  [PubMed - in process]


216. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Sep 17;10:163. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0392-z.

EZH2 is a sensitive marker of malignancy in salivary gland tumors.

Hajósi-Kalcakosz S(1,)(2), Vincze E(3), Dezso K(1), Paku S(1,)(4), Rókusz A(1),
Sápi Z(1), Tóth E(3), Nagy P(5).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis
University, Ülloi út 26, Budapest, H-1085, Hungary. (2)Heim Pál Children's
Hospital, Budapest, Hungary. (3)Pathology Department, National Institute of
Oncology, Budapest, Hungary. (4)Tumor Progression Research Group, Joint Research 
Organization of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences and Semmelweis University,
Budapest, Hungary. (5)First Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer
Research, Semmelweis University, Ülloi út 26, Budapest, H-1085, Hungary.
pdrnagy@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The immunohistochemical detection of Enhancer of zeste homologue 2
(EZH2) proved to be a useful tool to recognize the malignant nature of tumors in 
a wide variety of neoplasms. The histological diagnostics of salivary gland
tumors is a challenging task, and a reliable marker of malignancy would be
extremely helpful.
METHODS: EZH2 expression was investigated in 54 malignant and 40 benign salivary 
gland tumors of various histological types by standard immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The majority (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>52) of the malignant tumors stained positively, while 
all the investigated benign tumors were negative for EZH2.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 expression in salivary gland tumors, similarly to the tumors of
other organs is not characteristic for any tumor type, but is a solid marker of
the malignant nature of the tumors.

PMCID: PMC4574143
PMID: 26377323  [PubMed - in process]


217. Genes (Basel). 2015 Sep 7;6(3):812-40. doi: 10.3390/genes6030812.

Epigenetic Heterogeneity of B-Cell Lymphoma: DNA Methylation, Gene Expression and
Chromatin States.

Hopp L(1), Löffler-Wirth H(2), Binder H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr.
16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany. hopp@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (2)Interdisciplinary
Centre for Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, 
Germany. wirth@izbi.uni-leipzig.de. (3)Interdisciplinary Centre for
Bioinformatics, Universität Leipzig, Härtelstr. 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany.
binder@izbi.uni-leipzig.de.

Mature B-cell lymphoma is a clinically and biologically highly diverse disease.
Its diagnosis and prognosis is a challenge due to its molecular heterogeneity and
diverse regimes of biological dysfunctions, which are partly driven by epigenetic
mechanisms. We here present an integrative analysis of DNA methylation and gene
expression data of several lymphoma subtypes. Our study confirms previous results
about the role of stemness genes during development and maturation of B-cells and
their dysfunction in lymphoma locking in more proliferative or immune-reactive
states referring to B-cell functionalities in the dark and light zone of the
germinal center and also in plasma cells. These dysfunctions are governed by
widespread epigenetic effects altering the promoter methylation of the involved
genes, their activity status as moderated by histone modifications and also by
chromatin remodeling. We identified four groups of genes showing characteristic
expression and methylation signatures among Burkitt's lymphoma, diffuse large B
cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma and multiple myeloma. These signatures are
associated with epigenetic effects such as remodeling from transcriptionally
inactive into active chromatin states, differential promoter methylation and the 
enrichment of targets of transcription factors such as EZH2 and SUZ12.

PMCID: PMC4584331
PMID: 26371046  [PubMed]


218. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;35(23):3934-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00635-15. Epub 2015 Sep 
14.

Global Transcriptome Analysis Reveals That Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase 1
Regulates Gene Expression through EZH2.

Martin KA(1), Cesaroni M(1), Denny MF(2), Lupey LN(1), Tempera I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer and Molecular Biology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Section of Rheumatology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Fels Institute for Cancer and
Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA tempera@temple.edu.

Posttranslational modifications, such as poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation),
regulate chromatin-modifying enzymes, ultimately affecting gene expression. This 
study explores the role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) on global gene
expression in a lymphoblastoid B cell line. We found that inhibition of PARP
catalytic activity with olaparib resulted in global gene deregulation, affecting 
approximately 11% of the genes expressed. Gene ontology analysis revealed that
PARP could exert these effects through transcription factors and
chromatin-remodeling enzymes, including the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
member EZH2. EZH2 mediates the trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27
(H3K27me3), a modification associated with chromatin compaction and gene
silencing. Both pharmacological inhibition of PARP and knockdown of PARP1 induced
the expression of EZH2, which resulted in increased global H3K27me3. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed that PARP1 inhibition led to H3K27me3 deposition at
EZH2 target genes, which resulted in gene silencing. Moreover, increased EZH2
expression is attributed to the loss of the occupancy of the transcription
repressor E2F4 at the EZH2 promoter following PARP inhibition. Together, these
data show that PARP plays an important role in global gene regulation and
identifies for the first time a direct role of PARP1 in regulating the expression
and function of EZH2.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4628063 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26370511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.331. [Epub ahead of print]

NF-kB2 induces senescence bypass in melanoma via a direct transcriptional
activation of EZH2.

De Donatis GM(1), Pape EL(1), Pierron A(1), Cheli Y(2), Hofman V(3,)(4), Hofman
P(3,)(4), Allegra M(2), Zahaf K(3,)(4), Bahadoran P(2,)(5), Rocchi S(2),
Bertolotto C(2), Ballotti R(2,)(5), Passeron T(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire (C3M), Team 12,
Nice, France. (2)INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire
(C3M), Team 1, Nice, France. (3)Human Biobank, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
de Nice, Nice, France. (4)Institute of Research on Cancer and Aging, IRCAN CNRS, 
Nice, France. (5)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Nice, Nice,
France.

Enhancer of Zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) belongs to the polycomb repressive complex 2
and catalyzes the methylation of histone H3 lysine 27. These pivotal epigenetic
marks are altered in many cancers, including melanoma, as a result of EZH2
overexpression. Here, we show that the non-canonical-NF-kB pathway accounts for
most of the NF-kB activity in melanoma cells, in contrast to non-cancer cells. We
identify the non-canonical-NF-kB pathway as a key regulator of EZH2 expression in
melanoma. We show a striking correlation between NF-kB2 and EZH2 expression in
human melanoma metastases. We demonstrate that inhibition of the non-canonical
NF-kB pathway by targeting NF-kB2/p52 or the upstream kinase NIK restores the
senescence program in melanoma cells through the decrease of EZH2. On the
contrary, the overexpression of NF-kB2/p52 in normal human melanocytes prevents
stress- and oncogene-induced senescence. Finally, we show in mouse models that
the inhibition of the non-canonical NF-kB pathway restores senescence and induces
a dramatic reduction in tumor growth compared with controls, thus providing
potential drug targets for the re-induction of senescence in melanoma and other
cancers where EZH2 is overexpressed.Oncogene advance online publication, 14
September 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.331.

PMID: 26364600  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


220. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 11;34:99. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0215-9.

Activation of SAPK/JNK mediated the inhibition and reciprocal interaction of DNA 
methyltransferase 1 and EZH2 by ursolic acid in human lung cancer cells.

Wu J(1), Zhao S(1), Tang Q(1), Zheng F(1), Chen Y(1), Yang L(1), Yang X(2), Li
L(2), Wu W(2), Hann SS(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Targeted Therapies, Guangdong
Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, The Second Clinical Medical Collage,
University of Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, 510120,
Guangdong Province, P. R. China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Guangdong
Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, The Second Clinical Medical Collage,
University of Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong
Province, 510120, P. R. China. (3)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and
Targeted Therapies, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, The Second
Clinical Medical Collage, University of Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Guangzhou, 510120, Guangdong Province, P. R. China. swhan2010@live.com. (4), No. 
55, Neihuan West Road, Higher Education Mega Center, Panyu District, Guangzhou,
Guangdong Province, 510006, P. R. China. swhan2010@live.com.

BACKGROUND: Ursolic acid (UA), a pentacyclic triterpenoid, is known to have
anti-tumor activity in various cancers including human non small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the action of UA remain
largely unknown.
METHODS: Cell viability was measured by MTT assays. Apoptosis was analyzed with
Annexin V-FITC/PI Apoptosis Detection Kit by Flow cytometry. Western blot
analysis was performed to measure the phosphorylation and protein expression of
stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK), DNMT1 [DNA
(cytosine-5)-methyltransferase 1], enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb repressive
complex 2 subunit (EZH2) and SP1. Exogenous expression of SP1 and DNMT1 was
carried out by transient transfection assays.
RESULTS: We showed that UA inhibited the growth and induced apoptosis of NSCLC
cells in the dose- and time-dependent fashion. Furthermore, we found that UA
induced phosphorylation of SAPK/JNK and suppressed the protein expression of
DNMT1 and EZH2. The inhibitor of SAPK/JNK (SP600125) blocked the UA-reduced
expression of DNMT1 and EZH2. In addition, UA suppressed the expression of SP1
protein. Conversely, overexpression of SP1 reversed the effect of UA on DNMT1 and
EZH2 expression, and feedback attenuated UA-induced phosphorylation of SAPK/JNK. 
Moreover, exogenous expression of DNMT1 antagonized the effect of UA on SAPK/JNK 
signaling, EZH2 protein expression, and NSCLC cell growth.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that UA inhibits growth of NSCLC cells through
SAPK/JNK-mediated inhibition of SP1; this in turn results in inhibition the
expression of DNMT1 and EZH2. Overexpression of DNMT1 diminishes UA-reduced EZH2 
protein expression. The negative feedback regulation of SAPK/JNK signaling by SP1
and DNMT1, and the reciprocal interaction of EZH2 and DNMT1 contribute to the
overall effects of UA. This study leads to important new insights into the
mechanisms by which UA controls growth of NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4567809
PMID: 26362062  [PubMed - in process]


221. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32646-55. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5066.

Acquisition of a single EZH2 D1 domain mutation confers acquired resistance to
EZH2-targeted inhibitors.

Baker T(1), Nerle S(1), Pritchard J(1), Zhao B(1), Rivera VM(1), Garner A(1),
Gonzalvez F(1).

Author information: 
(1)ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Although targeted therapies have revolutionized cancer treatment, overcoming
acquired resistance remains a major clinical challenge. EZH2 inhibitors (EZH2i), 
EPZ-6438 and GSK126, are currently in the early stages of clinical evaluation and
the first encouraging signs of efficacy have recently emerged in the clinic. To
anticipate mechanisms of resistance to EZH2i, we used a forward genetic platform 
combining a mutagenesis screen with next generation sequencing technology and
identified a hotspot of secondary mutations in the EZH2 D1 domain (Y111 and
I109). Y111D mutation within the WT or A677G EZH2 allele conferred robust
resistance to both EPZ-6438 and GSK126, but it only drove a partial resistance
within the Y641F allele. EZH2 mutants required histone methyltransferase (HMT)
catalytic activity and the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components, SUZ12
and EED, to drive drug resistance. Furthermore, D1 domain mutations not only
blocked the ability of EZH2i to bind to WT and A677G mutant, but also abrogated
drug binding to the Y641F mutant. These data provide the first cellular
validation of the mechanistic model underpinning the oncogenic function of WT and
mutant EZH2. Importantly, our findings suggest that acquired-resistance to EZH2i 
may arise in WT and mutant EZH2 patients through a single mutation that remains
targetable by second generation EZH2i.

PMCID: PMC4741719
PMID: 26360609  [PubMed - in process]


222. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Dec;26(12):1622-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.08.007. Epub
2015 Aug 15.

Maternal gestational betaine supplementation-mediated suppression of hepatic
cyclin D2 and presenilin1 gene in newborn piglets is associated with epigenetic
regulation of the STAT3-dependent pathway.

Cai D(1), Yuan M(1), Jia Y(1), Liu H(2), Hu Y(1), Zhao R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Physiology & Biochemistry, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, P. R. China. (2)Department of Medical cell biology,
University of Uppsala, Uppsala SE-75123, Sweden. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal
Physiology & Biochemistry, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, P. R.
China. Electronic address: zhao.ruqian@gmail.com.

Betaine, which donates methyl groups through methionine metabolism for DNA and
protein methylation, is critical for epigenetic gene regulation, especially
during fetal development. Here we fed gestational sows with control or betaine
supplemented diets (3 g/kg) throughout the pregnancy to explore the effects of
maternal betaine on hepatic cell proliferation in neonatal piglets. Neonatal
piglets born to betaine-supplemented sows demonstrated a reduction of cell number
and DNA content in the liver, which was associated with significantly
down-regulated hepatic expression of cell cycle regulatory genes, cyclin D2
(CCND2) and presenilin1 (PSEN1). Moreover, STAT3 binding to the promoter of CCND2
and PSEN1 was also lower in betaine-exposed piglets, accompanied by strong
reduction of STAT3 mRNA and protein expression, along with its phosphorylation at
Tyr705 and Ser727 residues. Also, prenatal betaine exposure significantly
attenuated upstream kinases of STAT3 signaling pathway (phospho-ERK1/2,
phospho-SRC and phospho-JAK2) in the livers of neonates. Furthermore, the
repressed STAT3 expression in the liver of betaine-exposed piglets was associated
with DNA hypermethylation and more enriched repression histone mark H3K27me3 on
its promoter, together with significantly up-regulated expression of H3K27me3 and
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) proteins, as well as miR-124a, which targets
STAT3. Taken together, our results suggest that maternal dietary betaine
supplementation during gestation inhibits hepatic cell proliferation in neonatal 
piglets, at least partly, through epigenetic regulation of hepatic CCND2 and
PSEN1 genes via a STAT3-dependent pathway. These neonatal changes in cell cycle
and proliferation regulation may lead to lower liver weight and hepatic DNA
content at weaning.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26359029  [PubMed - in process]


223. BMC Cancer. 2015 Sep 9;15:628. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1635-9.

DKK1 is a potential novel mediator of cisplatin-refractoriness in non-small cell 
lung cancer cell lines.

Salim H(1), Zong D(2), Hååg P(3), Novak M(4), Mörk B(5), Lewensohn R(6), Lundholm
L(7), Viktorsson K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska
Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden. Hogir.Salim@ki.se. (2)Karolinska
Biomics Center, Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171
76, Stockholm, Sweden. Dali.Zong@nih.gov. (3)Karolinska Biomics Center,
Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm,
Sweden. Petra.Haag@ki.se. (4)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Metka.Novak@ki.se. (5)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Birgitta.Mork@ki.se. (6)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Rolf.Lewensohn@ki.se. (7)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Lovisa.Lundholm@su.se. (8)Karolinska Biomics Center, Department of
Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76, Stockholm, Sweden.
Kristina.Viktorsson@ki.se.

BACKGROUND: Platinum compounds are the mainstay of chemotherapy for lung cancer. 
Unfortunately treatment failure remains a critical issue since about 60% of all
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients display intrinsic platinum
resistance.
METHODS: We analyzed global gene expression profiles of NSCLC clones surviving a 
pulse treatment with cisplatin and mapped deregulated signaling networks in
silico by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Further validation was done using
siRNA.
RESULTS: The pooled cisplatin-surviving NSCLC clones from each of the biological 
replicates demonstrated heterogeneous gene expression patterns both in terms of
the number and the identity of the altered genes. Genes involved in Wnt signaling
pathway (Dickkopf-1, DKK1), DNA repair machinery (XRCC2) and
cell-cell/cell-matrix interaction (FMN1, LGALS9) were among the top deregulated
genes by microarray in these replicates and were validated by q-RT-PCR. We
focused on DKK1 which previously was reported to be overexpressed in NSCLC
patients. IPA network analysis revealed coordinate up-regulation of several DKK1 
transcriptional regulators (TCF4, EZH2, DNAJB6 and HDAC2) in cisplatin-surviving 
clones from that biological replicate. Knockdown of DKK1 by siRNA sensitized for 
cisplatin in two different NSCLC cell lines and in ovarian A2780 cells, but not
in the A2780 cis subline made resistant to cisplatin by chronic exposure,
suggesting a role of DKK1 in intrinsic but not acquired platinum refractoriness.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified DKK1 as a possible marker of a cisplatin-refractory
phenotype and as a potential novel therapeutic target to improve platinum
response of NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC4565013
PMID: 26353782  [PubMed - in process]


224. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6642-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4294. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Retinoic acid-incorporated glycol chitosan nanoparticles inhibit the expression
of Ezh2 in U118 and U138 human glioma cells.

Lu HC(1), Ma J(2), Zhuang Z(1), Zhang Y(2), Cheng HL(1), Shi JX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Jingling Hospital, Clinical Medicine School of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Neurosurgery, Nanjing Brain Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

At present, one of the most life threatening types of adult brain tumor is
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). The molecular mechanism underlying the progression
of GBM remains to be fully elucidated. The modern method of clinical treatment
has only improved the average survival rates of a newly diagnosed patients with
GBM by ~15 months. Therefore, the discovery of novel molecules, which are
involved in glioma inhibition is required. In the present study, U118 and U138
human glioma cells were transfected with all-trans retinoic acid
(RA)-incorporated glycol chitosan (GC) nanoparticles.An MTT assay was used for
the analysis of cell proliferation and flow cytometric analysis and ssDNA
detection assays were performed for the determination of induction of cell
apoptosis. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry. Exposure of
the U118 and U138 human glioma cells to the RA-incorporated GC nanoparticles for 
24 h resulted in a concentration-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation.
Among the range of experimental RA concentrations, the minimum effective
treatment concentration was 10 µM, with a half maximal inhibitory concentration
of 25 µM. The results also demonstrated that RA transfection resulted in the
inhibition of cell proliferation, inhibition of the expression of Ezh2, and
apoptosis through the mitochondrial signaling pathway by a decrease in membrane
potential, the release of cytochrome c, and cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase.

PMCID: PMC4626140
PMID: 26351866  [PubMed - in process]


225. Protein Cell. 2016 Feb;7(2):89-99. doi: 10.1007/s13238-015-0199-4. Epub 2015 Sep 
8.

The roles of ncRNAs and histone-modifiers in regulating breast cancer stem cells.

Zhao Z(1), Li S(2), Song E(3), Liu S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Innovation Center for Cell Signalling and the CAS Key Laboratory of Innate
Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and Medical Center,
University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, 230027, China.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology, Wannan Medical College, Wuhu, 241002, China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, 510120, China. (4)Innovation Center for Cell Signalling
and the CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life
Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science & Technology of China, Hefei, 
230027, China. suling@ustc.edu.cn.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs), a subpopulation of cancer cells with ability of
initiating tumorigenesis, exist in many kinds of tumors including breast cancer. 
Cancer stem cells contribute to treatment resistance and relapse. Conventional
treatments only kill differentiated cancer cells, but spare CSCs. Combining
conventional treatments with therapeutic drugs targeting to CSCs will eradicate
cancer cells more efficiently. Studying the molecular mechanisms of CSCs
regulation is essential for developing new therapeutic strategies. Growing
evidences showed CSCs are regulated by non-coding RNA (ncRNA) including microRNAs
and long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), and histone-modifiers, such as let-7, miR-93,
miR-100, HOTAIR, Bmi-1 and EZH2. Herein we review the roles of microRNAs, lncRNAs
and histone-modifiers especially Polycomb family proteins in regulating breast
cancer stem cells (BCSCs).

PMCID: PMC4742390
PMID: 26349457  [PubMed - in process]


226. Epigenomics. 2016 Jan;8(1):119-33. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.84. Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Epigenome-based personalized medicine in human cancer.

Yan W(1), Herman JG(2), Guo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, #28
Fuxing Road, Beijing 100853, China. (2)The Hillman Cancer Center, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, 5117 Centre Avenue, Suite 2.18/Research, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213, USA.

Cancer genome sequencing has created an opportunity for precision medicine. Thus 
far, genetic alterations can only be used to guide treatment for small subsets of
certain cancer types with these key alterations. Similar to mutations, epigenetic
events are equally suitable for personalized medicine. DNA methylation
alterations have been used to identify tumor-specific drug responsive markers.
Methylation of MGMT sensitizes gliomas to alkylating agents is an example of
epigenetic personalized medicine. Recent studies have revealed that 5-azacytidine
and decitabine show activity in myelodysplasia, lung and other cancers. There are
currently at least 20 kinds of histone deacetylase inhibitors in clinical
testing. Inhibitors targeting other epigenetic regulators are being clinically
tested, such as EZH2 inhibitor EPZ-6438.

PMID: 26344672  [PubMed - in process]


227. J Hepatol. 2016 Jan;64(1):87-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.08.031. Epub 2015 Sep
5.

Morphophenotypic changes in human multistep hepatocarcinogenesis with
translational implications.

Sciarra A(1), Di Tommaso L(1), Nakano M(2), Destro A(3), Torzilli G(4), Donadon
M(5), Maggioni M(6), Bosari S(6), Bulfamante G(7), Matsuda M(8), Fujii H(8),
Ichikawa T(9), Morisaka H(9), Sano K(9), Ichikawa S(9), Roncalli M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy;
Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine (BIOMETRA),
University of Milan, School of Medicine, Milan, Italy. (2)Pathology Department,
Shonan Fujisawa Tokushukai Hospital, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan. (3)Pathology
Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine (BIOMETRA),
University of Milan, School of Medicine, Milan, Italy; Department of
Hepatobiliary and General Surgery, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center,
Rozzano, Milan, Italy. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary and General Surgery,
Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Milan, Italy. (6)Pathology,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Policlinico and University of Milan, School 
of Medicine, Milan, Italy. (7)Department of Health Sciences, San Paolo Hospital
Medical School, Milan, Italy. (8)First Department of Surgery, University of
Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan. (9)Department of Radiology, University of Yamanashi,
Yamanashi, Japan. (10)Pathology Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center,
Rozzano, Milan, Italy; Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational
Medicine (BIOMETRA), University of Milan, School of Medicine, Milan, Italy.
Electronic address: massimo.roncalli@hunimed.eu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Human hepatocarcinogenesis in cirrhosis is thought to be
multistep and characterized by a spectrum of nodular lesions, ranging from low to
high grade dysplastic nodules (LGDN and HGDN) to early and progressed
hepatocellular carcinoma (eHCC and pHCC). The aim of this study was to
investigate the morphophenotypical changes of this sequence and their potential
translational significance.
METHODS: We scored the vascular profile, ductular reaction/stromal invasion and
overexpression of five biomarkers (GPC3, HSP70, GS, CHC, and EZH2), in a series
of 100 resected nodules (13 LGDN, 16 HGDN, 42 eHCC and 29 small pHCC).
RESULTS: The score separated the four groups of nodules as individual entities
(p<0.01). In the sequence, biomarker's overexpression progressively increased
with parallel decrease of ductular reaction; the vascular remodeling started very
early (LGDN) but did not further develop in a proportion of HCC. eHCC was the
most heterogeneous entity, with marginal overlap with HGDN and pHCC. Liver
environment (fibrosis, etiology) did not impact on the phenotype of the different
nodules. A subclass of eHCC (16/42) without evidence of stromal invasion was
identified, suggesting a "preinvasive stage" (p<0.05). For diagnosis, the
application of four and five biomarkers (rather than the usual three) improved
the sensitivity of the assay for the detection of eHCC (76% and 93% vs. 52%);
biomarkers in alternative combinations, and also increased the sensitivity of the
assay (GS+CHC+EZH2: 76%; GS+CHC+EZH2+HSP70: 90%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports the multistep nature of human
hepatocarcinogenesis, and suggests that eHCC is more heterogeneous than
previously thought. This provides further information of the potential
translational significance into clinical practice.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26343958  [PubMed - in process]


228. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(22):11396-405. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02151-15. Epub 2015 Sep 2.

Downregulation of Toll-Like Receptor 9 Expression by Beta Human Papillomavirus 38
and Implications for Cell Cycle Control.

Pacini L(1), Savini C(1), Ghittoni R(1), Saidj D(1), Lamartine J(2), Hasan UA(3),
Accardi R(1), Tommasino M(4).

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. (2)Centre de
Génétique et de Physiologie Moléculaire et Cellulaires, CNRS UMR5534 et
Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France. (3)Oncoviruses and Innate
Immunity, INSERM U851, INSERM-I2V, UMS34444/US8, Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France.
(4)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France tommasino@iarc.fr.

Innate immunity is the first line of host defense against infections. Many
oncogenic viruses can deregulate several immune-related pathways to guarantee the
persistence of the infection. Here, we show that the cutaneous human
papillomavirus 38 (HPV38) E6 and E7 oncoproteins suppress the expression of the
double-stranded DNA sensor Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) in human foreskin
keratinocytes (HFK), a key mediator of the antiviral innate immune host response.
In particular, HPV38 E7 induces TLR9 mRNA downregulation by promoting
accumulation of <U+0394>Np73a, an antagonist of p53 and p73. Inhibition of <U+0394>Np73a
expression by antisense oligonucleotide in HPV38 E6/E7 HFK strongly rescues mRNA 
levels of TLR9, highlighting a key role of <U+0394>Np73a in this event. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that <U+0394>Np73a is part of a negative
transcriptional regulatory complex with I<U+03BA>B kinase beta (IKKß) that binds to a
NF-<U+03BA>B responsive element within the TLR9 promoter. In addition, the Polycomb
protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), responsible for gene expression
silencing, is also recruited into the complex, leading to histone 3
trimethylation at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in the same region of the TLR9 promoter.
Ectopic expression of TLR9 in HPV38 E6/E7 cells resulted in an accumulation of
the cell cycle inhibitors p21(WAF1) and p27(Kip1), decreased CDK2-associated
kinase activity, and inhibition of cellular proliferation. In summary, our data
show that HPV38, similarly to other viruses with well-known oncogenic activity,
can downregulate TLR9 expression. In addition, they highlight a new role for TLR9
in cell cycle regulation.IMPORTANCE: The mucosal high-risk HPV types have been
clearly associated with human carcinogenesis. Emerging lines of evidence suggest 
the involvement of certain cutaneous HPV types in development of skin squamous
cell carcinoma, although this association is still under debate. Oncogenic
viruses have evolved different strategies to hijack the host immune system in
order to guarantee the persistence of the infection. Their capability to evade
the immune system is as important as their ability to promote cellular
transformation. Therefore, understanding the viral mechanisms involved in viral
persistence is a valid tool to evaluate their potential role in human
carcinogenesis. Here, we show that E6 and E7 oncoproteins from the cutaneous
HPV38 downregulate the expression of the double-stranded DNA sensor TLR9 of
innate immunity. We also present evidence that the HPV38-mediated downregulation 
of TLR9 expression, in addition to its potential impact on the innate immune
response, is linked to cell cycle deregulation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645680
PMID: 26339055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep 4. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of the polycomb repressive complex pathway in T and NK cell lymphoma:
biological and prognostic implications.

Kim SH(1), Yang WI, Min YH, Ko YH, Yoon SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50-1,
Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, 120-752, South Korea.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2; formed by EZH2, SUZ12, and EED protein
subunits) and PRC1 (BMI1 protein) induce gene silencing through histone
modification, primarily H3K27me3, and deregulation of PRC pathways leads to
tumorigenesis. In the present study, activation of PRC2, H3K27me3, and BMI1 was
investigated by immunohistochemistry in 175 cases of T and natural killer (NK)
cell lymphoma. Activation of PRC proteins was analyzed according to c-MYC
activation, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, CD30 activation, and survival.
Among all T and NK cell lymphomas, high expression rates of 54.7 % for EZH2,
33.3 % for SUZ12, 85.7 % for EED, 40.5 % for H3K27me3, and 30.9 % for BMI1 were
discovered. Activation of PRC2, H3K27me3, and BMI1 showed positive correlations
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Activation of c-MYC was associated with activation of SUZ12 and
triple coactivation of all PRC2 protein subunits
(EZH2(high)/SUZ12(high)/EED(high)) (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In EBV-positive tumors, activation
of EZH2 and H3K27me3 showed greater association (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). H3K27me3 and BMI1
showed a negative association in tumors expressing CD30 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). With respect 
to survival, BMI1 activation was independently associated with poor prognosis in 
T and NK cell lymphomas (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). In conclusion, T and NK cell lymphomas were 
associated with activation of PRC pathway markers, for which c-MYC activation and
EBV infection could be suggested as possible causes. PRC pathway markers may be
potential therapeutic targets and prognostic markers in T and NK cell lymphoma.

PMID: 26337274  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


230. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27427-39. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4861.

The positive feedback between Snail and DAB2IP regulates EMT, invasion and
metastasis in colorectal cancer.

Wang J(1,)(2), Zhu X(1,)(3), Hu J(1,)(3), He G(1,)(3), Li X(1,)(3), Wu P(1,)(3), 
Ren X(1,)(3), Wang F(1,)(3), Liao W(1,)(3), Liang L(1,)(3), Ding Y(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department
of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou 646000,
Luzhou, China. (3)Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Molecular Tumor Pathology,
Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

DAB2IP has been identified as a tumor suppressor in several cancers but its
oncogenic role and transcriptionally regulatory mechanisms in the progression of 
colorectal carcinoma (CRC) remain unknown. In this study, DAB2IP was
down-regulated in CRC tissues and a valuable prognostic marker for survival of
CRC patients, especially in the late stage. Moreover, DAB2IP was sufficient to
suppress proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion and
metastasis in CRC. Mechanically, the linear complex of EZH2/HDAC1/Snail
contributed to DAB2IP silencing in CRC cells. The study further proved that the
positive feedback loop between Snail and DAB2IP existed in CRC cells and DAB2IP
was required for Snail-induced aggressive cell behaviors. Finally, DAB2IP
correlated negatively with Snail and EZH2 expressions in CRC tissues. Our
findings reveal the suppressive role and a novel regulatory mechanism of DAB2IP
expression in the progression of CRC. DAB2IP may be a potential, novel
therapeutic and prognostic target for clinical CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC4695000
PMID: 26336990  [PubMed - in process]


231. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Nov;35(22):3841-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00677-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
31.

Spatial Interplay between Polycomb and Trithorax Complexes Controls
Transcriptional Activity in T Lymphocytes.

Onodera A(1), Tumes DJ(1), Watanabe Y(1), Hirahara K(2), Kaneda A(3), Sugiyama
F(4), Suzuki Y(5), Nakayama T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Advanced Allergology of the
Airway, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba,
Japan. (3)Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan. (4)Laboratory Animal Resource Center,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Functional
Genomics, Department of Medical Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier
Sciences, University of Tokyo, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan. (6)Department 
of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Inohana, Chuo-ku,
Chiba, Japan AMED-CREST, AMED, Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan
tnakayama@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

Trithorax group (TrxG) and Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are two mutually
antagonistic chromatin modifying complexes, however, how they together mediate
transcriptional counter-regulation remains unknown. Genome-wide analysis revealed
that binding of Ezh2 and menin, central members of the PcG and TrxG complexes,
respectively, were reciprocally correlated. Moreover, we identified a
developmental change in the positioning of Ezh2 and menin in differentiated T
lymphocytes compared to embryonic stem cells. Ezh2-binding upstream and
menin-binding downstream of the transcription start site was frequently found at 
genes with higher transcriptional levels, and Ezh2-binding downstream and
menin-binding upstream was found at genes with lower expression in T lymphocytes.
Interestingly, of the Ezh2 and menin cooccupied genes, those exhibiting occupancy
at the same position displayed greatly enhanced sensitivity to loss of Ezh2.
Finally, we also found that different combinations of Ezh2 and menin occupancy
were associated with expression of specific functional gene groups important for 
T cell development. Therefore, spatial cooperative gene regulation by the PcG and
TrxG complexes may represent a novel mechanism regulating the transcriptional
identity of differentiated cells.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4609743 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26324324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug 12. doi: 10.4143/crt.2015.118. [Epub ahead of print]

BRAF-activated Long Non-coding RNA Modulates Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma Cell
Proliferation through Regulating Thyroid Stimulating Hormone Receptor.

Zheng H, Wang M, Jiang L, Chu H, Hu J, Ning J, Li B, Wang D, Xu J.

Purpose: The importance of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in tumorigenesis has
recently been demonstrated. However, the role of lncRNAs in development of
thyroid cancer remains largely unknown.
Materials and Methods: Using quantitative RT-PCR, expression of three lncRNAs,
including BRAF-activated long noncoding RNA (BANCR), papillary thyroid cancer
susceptibility candidate 3 (PTCSC3), and noncoding RNA associated with MAP kinase
pathway and growth arrest (NAMA), was investigated in the current study.
Results: Of the three lncRNAs (BANCR, PTCSC3, and NAMA), expression of BANCR was 
significantly up-regulated while PTCSC3 and NAMA were significantly
down-regulated in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) compared to that in normal
tissue. BANCR-knockdown in a PTC-derived cell line (IHH-4) resulted in
significant suppression of thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR).
BANCR-knockdown also led to inhibition of cell growth and cell cycle arrest at
G0/G1 phase through down-regulation of cyclin D1. In addition, BANCR was enriched
by polycomb enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), and silencing BANCR led to
decreased chromatin recruitment of EZH2, which resulted significantly reduced
expression of TSHR.
Conclusion: These findings indicate that BANCR may contribute to the
tumorigenesis of papillary thyroid carcinoma through regulation of cyclin D1 and 
TSHR.

PMID: 26323637  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


233. Epigenomics. 2015 Aug;7(5):687-90. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.27. Epub 2015 Aug 28.

Epigenetic reprogramming in solid tumors: therapeutic implications of EZH2
gain-of-function mutations.

Barsotti AM(1,)(2), Ryskin M(1), Rollins RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Worldwide Research & Development, Pearl River, 
NY 10965, USA. (2)Kadmon Pharmaceuticals, New York, NY 10016, USA.

PMID: 26317265  [PubMed - in process]


234. Tumour Biol. 2015 Aug 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Predicting the molecular role of MEIS1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Rad A(1), Farshchian M, Forghanifard MM, Matin MM, Bahrami AR, Geerts D, A'rabi
A, Memar B, Abbaszadegan MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Cellular and Molecular Research
Center, Sabzevar University of Medical Sciences, Sabzevar, Iran.

The three amino acid loop extension (TALE) class myeloid ecotropic viral
integration site 1 (MEIS1) homeobox gene is known to play a crucial role in
normal and tumor development. In contrast with its well-described cancer stemness
properties in hematopoietic cancers, little is known about its role in solid
tumors like esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). Here, we analyzed MEIS1
expression and its clinical relevance in ESCC patients and also investigated its 
correlation with the SOX2 self-renewal master transcription factor in the ESCC
samples and in the KYSE-30 ESCC cell line. MEIS1 mRNA and protein expression were
significantly decreased in ESCC disease (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The inverse correlation
between MEIS1 mRNA expression and tumor cell metastasis to the lymph nodes
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004) was significant. Also, MEIS1 protein levels inversely correlated to
lymph node involvement (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.048) and high tumor stage (stages III/IV,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030). The low levels of DNA methylation in the MEIS1 promoter showed that
this suppression does not depend on methylation. We showed that downregulation of
EZH2 restored MEIS1 expression significantly. Also, we investigated that MEIS1
downregulation is concomitant with increased SOX2 expression. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first report on the MEIS1 gene in ESCC. The inverse
correlation of MEIS1 with metastasis, tumor staging, and the role of EZH2 in
methylation, together with its correlation with stemness factor SOX2 expression, 
led us to predict cancer stemness properties for MEIS1 in ESCC.

PMID: 26314854  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


235. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Aug;23(4):1184-9. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2015.04.054.

[Advances of Researches on the Role of Histone Modification in Hematological
Neoplasms].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun F(1), Pan Y(2), Li Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Basic Medicine, DaLi University, Dali
671000, Yunnan Province, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital
of Dali University, Dali 671000, Yunnan Province, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, College of Basic Medicine, DaLi University, Dali 671000, Yunnan
Province, China. E-mail: bigbigsmile04@gmail.com.

As a crucial part of epigenetic regulation, the histone modification catalyzed by
histone modification enzymes can alter the chromatin structure and modulate the
gene expression. The role of histone modification in disease pathogenesis,
especially in tumorigenesis, has become a research hotspot. The deregulation of
histone modification, such as the overexpression and gain-of-function mutations
of histone methyltransferase EZH2, the inactive mutations of histone
methyltransferase MLL2, histone acetyltransferase CREBBP and EP300 are crucial
for the development of hematological neoplasms. Some of Epi-drugs such as HDAC
inhibitors, EZH2 inhibitors, are already clinically used, some are still in basic
research stage, which are important field of new drug development for
hematological neoplasms. In this review, the researches advances of basic medical
sciences and clinical applications of aberrant histone modifications in
hematological neoplasms are summarized.

PMID: 26314470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Transl Oncol. 2015 Aug;8(4):279-87. doi: 10.1016/j.tranon.2015.05.003.

Detection of a Distinctive Genomic Signature in Rhabdoid Glioblastoma, A Rare
Disease Entity Identified by Whole Exome Sequencing and Whole Transcriptome
Sequencing.

Koh Y(1), Park I(2), Sun CH(2), Lee S(2), Yun H(3), Park CK(4), Park SH(5), Park 
JK(6), Lee SH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799,
Korea. (2)Bioinformatics Group, Platform Development Center, CSP R&D, Samsung
SDS, East Campus, Samsung SDS Tower, 123 Olympic Ro 35 Gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul
138-240, Korea. (3)Bioinformatics Group, Platform Development Center, CSP R&D,
Samsung SDS, East Campus, Samsung SDS Tower, 123 Olympic Ro 35 Gil, Songpa-gu,
Seoul 138-240, Korea. Electronic address: hongseok.yun@samsung.com. (4)Department
of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu,
Seoul 110-744, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea. (5)Cancer
Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 101 Daehak-ro,
Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea; Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea. (7)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-744,
Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 
101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 110-799, Korea. Electronic address:
shlee119@snu.ac.kr.

We analyzed the genome of a rhabdoid glioblastoma (R-GBM) tumor, a very rare
variant of GBM. A surgical specimen of R-GBM from a 20-year-old woman was
analyzed using whole exome sequencing (WES), whole transcriptome sequencing
(WTS), single nucleotide polymorphism array, and array comparative genomic
hybridization. The status of gene expression in R-GBM tissue was compared with
that of normal brain tissue and conventional GBM tumor tissue. We identified 23
somatic non-synonymous small nucleotide variants with WES. We identified the BRAF
V600E mutation and possible functional changes in the mutated genes, ISL1 and
NDRG2. Copy number alteration analysis revealed gains of chromosomes 3, 7, and 9.
We found loss of heterozygosity and focal homozygous deletion on 9q21, which
includes CDKN2A and CDKN2B. In addition, WTS revealed that CDK6, MET, EZH2, EGFR,
and NOTCH1, which are located on chromosomes 7 and 9, were over-expressed,
whereas CDKN2A/2B were minimally expressed. Fusion gene analysis showed 14
candidate genes that may be functionally involved in R-GBM, including TWIST2, and
UPK3BL. The BRAF V600E mutation, CDKN2A/2B deletion, and EGFR/MET copy number
gain were observed. These simultaneous alterations are very rarely found in GBM. 
Moreover, the NDRG2 mutation was first identified in this study as it has never
been reported in GBM. We observed a unique genomic signature in R-GBM compared to
conventional GBM, which may provide insight regarding R-GBM as a distinct disease
entity among the larger group of GBMs.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4562980
PMID: 26310374  [PubMed]


237. Mol Ther. 2016 Feb;24(2):217-29. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.152. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Suppression of EZH2 Prevents the Shift of Osteoporotic MSC Fate to Adipocyte and 
Enhances Bone Formation During Osteoporosis.

Jing H(1,)(2,)(3), Liao L(1,)(2,)(3), An Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Su X(5), Liu
S(1,)(2,)(3), Shuai Y(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang X(6), Jin Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Military Stomatology, Center for Tissue Engineering,
School of Stomatology, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi,
China. (2)Research and Development Center for Tissue Engineering, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Military
Stomatology, Department of Oral Histology and Pathology, School of Stomatology,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, China. (4)Zhenjiang
Entry-Exit Inspection And Quarantine Bureau, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department of
Orthodontics, Stomatology Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University College of
Medicine, Shaanxi, China. (6)Department of Prothodontics, Stomatological Hospital
of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.

During osteoporosis, the shift of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) lineage commitment 
to adipocyte leads to the imbalance between bone mass and fat, which increases
the risk of fracture. The Enhancer of Zeste homology 2 (EZH2), which methylates
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3), controls MSC cell lineage commitment.
However, whether EZH2 is related to osteoporosis remains elusive. In our study,
we found EZH2 expression was significantly increased in osteoporotic MSCs. EZH2
directly increased H3K27me3 levels on promoters of Wnt1, Wnt6, and Wnt10a to
silence Wnt gene transcription. The inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling shifted
MSC cell lineage commitment to adipocyte. Knockdown of EZH2 by
lentivirus-expressing shRNA rescued the abnormal fate of osteoporotic MSC. By
employing the H3K27me3 inhibitor DZNep, we effectively derepressed Wnt signaling 
and improved osteogenic differentiation of osteoporotic MSCs in vitro.
Furthermore, in vivo administration of DZNep successfully increased bone
formation and repressed excessive bone marrow fat formation in osteoporotic mice.
Noteworthy, DZNep treatment persistently enhanced osteogenic differentiation of
endogenous MSCs. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that redundant EZH2
shifted MSC cell lineage commitment to adipocyte, which contributed to the
development of osteoporosis. We also provided EZH2 as a novel therapeutic target 
for improving bone formation during osteoporosis.

PMID: 26307668  [PubMed - in process]


238. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 9;290(41):25151-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.662650. Epub 2015
Aug 25.

The Histone Demethylase UTX Promotes Brown Adipocyte Thermogenic Program Via
Coordinated Regulation of H3K27 Demethylation and Acetylation.

Zha L(1), Li F(2), Wu R(2), Artinian L(2), Rehder V(2), Yu L(3), Liang H(4), Xue 
B(5), Shi H(6).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest
Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China,
Department of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal, Georgia State University, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and. (2)Department of Biology and Center for Obesity
Reversal, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and. (3)Department of
Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742. 
(4)From the Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest
Hospital, The Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China,
lianghoujie@sina.com. (5)Department of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal,
Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, and bxue@gsu.edu. (6)Department
of Biology and Center for Obesity Reversal, Georgia State University, Atlanta,
Georgia 30303, and hshi3@gsu.edu.

Brown adipocytes function to dissipate energy as heat through adaptive
thermogenesis. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying the brown fat
thermogenic program may provide insights for the development of therapeutic
approaches in the treatment of obesity. Most studies investigating the mechanisms
underlying brown fat development focus on genetic mechanisms; little is known
about the epigenetic mechanisms in this process. We have discovered that
ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat on chromosome X (UTX), a
histone demethylase for di- or tri-methylated histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27me2/3),
plays a potential role in regulating brown adipocyte thermogenic program. We
found that UTX is up-regulated during brown adipocyte differentiation and by cold
exposure in both brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) of
mice, suggesting a potential role in thermogenesis. Inactivation of UTX
down-regulates brown fat specific gene expression, while overexpression of UTX
does the opposite. Notably, activation of ß adrenergic signaling recruits UTX to 
the UCP1 and PGC1a promoters, leading to decreased H3K27me3, a histone
transcriptional repressive mark. UTX demethylates H3K27me3 and subsequently
interacts with the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) protein CBP, resulting in
increased H3K27 acetylation (H3K27ac), a histone transcriptional active mark. UTX
positively regulate brown adipocyte thermogenic program through coordinated
control of demethylating H3K27me3 and acetylating H3K27, switching the
transcriptional repressive state to the transcriptional active state at the
promoters of UCP1 and PGC1a. We conclude that UTX may play a potential role in
regulation of brown adipocyte gene expression and may mediate ß adrenergic
activation of brown fat function.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4599018 [Available on 2016-10-09]
PMID: 26306033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Dec;54(12):776-87. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22289. Epub
2015 Aug 25.

Methyltransferase expression and tumor suppressor gene methylation in sporadic
and familial colorectal cancer.

Joensuu EI(1), Nieminen TT(1), Lotsari JE(1), Pavicic W(1,)(2), Abdel-Rahman
WM(1,)(3), Peltomäki P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Biomedicum Helsinki, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Cytogenetics and Mutagenesis Unit,
IMBICE-CONICET-CICPBA, La Plata, Argentina. (3)Department of Medical Laboratory
Sciences, College of Health Sciences and Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.

Molecular mechanisms underlying coordinated hypermethylation of multiple CpG
islands in cancer remain unclear and studies of methyltransferase enzymes have
arrived at conflicting results. We focused on DNMT1 and DNMT3B, DNA
methyltransferases responsible for (de novo) methylation, and EZH2, histone
(H3K27) methyltransferase, and examined their roles in tumor suppressor gene
(TSG) methylation patterns we have previously established in sporadic and
familial cancers. Our investigation comprised 165 tumors, stratified by tissue of
origin (117 colorectal and 48 endometrial carcinomas) and sporadic vs. familial
disease (57 sporadic vs. 60 familial, mainly Lynch syndrome, colorectal
carcinomas). By immunohistochemical evaluation, EZH2 protein expression was
associated with a TSG methylator phenotype. DNMT1, DNMT3B, and EZH2 were
expressed at significantly higher levels in tumor vs. normal tissues. DNMT1 and
EZH2 expression were positively correlated and higher in microsatellite-unstable 
vs. microsatellite-stable tumors, whether sporadic or hereditary. Ki-67
expression mirrored the same pattern. Promoter methylation of the
methyltransferase genes themselves was addressed as a possible cause behind their
altered expression. While DNMT1 or EZH2 did not show differential methylation
between normal and tumor tissues, DNMT3B analysis corroborated the regulatory
role of a distal promoter region. Our study shows that methyltransferase
expression in cancer depends on the tissue of origin, microsatellite-instability 
status, cellular proliferation, and--in the case of DNMT3B--promoter methylation 
of the respective gene. Translation of methyltransferase expression into DNA
methylation appears complex as suggested by the fact that except for EZH2, no
clear association between methyltransferase protein expression and TSG
methylation was observed.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26305882  [PubMed - in process]


240. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 29;6(29):27023-36. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4809.

Targeting activating mutations of EZH2 leads to potent cell growth inhibition in 
human melanoma by derepression of tumor suppressor genes.

Tiffen JC(1,)(2,)(3), Gunatilake D(1,)(2,)(3), Gallagher SJ(1,)(2,)(3),
Gowrishankar K(1,)(2,)(3), Heinemann A(1,)(2,)(3), Cullinane C(4),
Dutton-Regester K(5), Pupo GM(6), Strbenac D(7), Yang JY(7), Madore J(8,)(3),
Mann GJ(6,)(7,)(3), Hayward NK(5), McArthur GA(4,)(9), Filipp FV(10), Hersey
P(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Immunology and Oncology Group, Centenary Institute, University of
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (2)Melanoma Research Group, Kolling Institute of Medical 
Research, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. (3)Melanoma Institute Australia, 
Crows Nest, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (4)Translational Research Laboratory, Peter
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (5)Oncogenomics Laboratory,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (6)Center
for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead Millennium Institute,
Westmead, NSW, Australia. (7)School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (8)Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, NSW,
Australia. (9)Oncogenic Signalling and Growth Control Program, Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, Melbourne, VIC, Australia. (10)Systems Biology and Cancer
Metabolism, Program for Quantitative Systems Biology, University of California
Merced, Merced, CA, USA.

The epigenetic modifier EZH2 is part of the polycomb repressive complex that
suppresses gene expression via histone methylation. Activating mutations in EZH2 
are found in a subset of melanoma that contributes to disease progression by
inactivating tumor suppressor genes. In this study we have targeted EZH2 with a
specific inhibitor (GSK126) or depleted EZH2 protein by stable shRNA knockdown.
We show that inhibition of EZH2 has potent effects on the growth of both
wild-type and EZH2 mutant human melanoma in vitro particularly in cell lines
harboring the EZH2Y646 activating mutation. This was associated with cell cycle
arrest, reduced proliferative capacity in both 2D and 3D culture systems, and
induction of apoptosis. The latter was caspase independent and mediated by the
release of apoptosis inducing factor (AIFM1) from mitochondria. Gene expression
arrays showed that several well characterized tumor suppressor genes were
reactivated by EZH2 inhibition. This included activating transcription factor 3
(ATF3) that was validated as an EZH2 target gene by ChIP-qPCR. These results
emphasize a critical role for EZH2 in the proliferation and viability of melanoma
and highlight the potential for targeted therapy against EZH2 in treatment of
patients with melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4694971
PMID: 26304929  [PubMed - in process]


241. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Aug 21;7(1):84. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0118-9.
eCollection 2015.

Dual EZH2 and EHMT2 histone methyltransferase inhibition increases biological
efficacy in breast cancer cells.

Curry E(1), Green I(2), Chapman-Rothe N(1), Shamsaei E(1), Kandil S(1), Cherblanc
FL(3), Payne L(2), Bell E(2), Ganesh T(4), Srimongkolpithak N(3), Caron J(3), Li 
F(5), Uren AG(6), Snyder JP(7), Vedadi M(5), Fuchter MJ(3), Brown R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, W12 ONN UK.
(2)Division of Cancer, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, W12 ONN UK. (3)Department of Chemistry,
Imperial College London, South Kensington Campus, London, SW7 2AZ UK.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA.
(5)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1L7
Canada. (6)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, W12
0NN UK. (7)Department of Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA.
(8)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Ovarian Cancer Action Research Centre,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, W12 ONN UK ;
Section of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, SM2 5NG UK.

BACKGROUND: Many cancers show aberrant silencing of gene expression and
overexpression of histone methyltransferases. The histone methyltransferases
(HKMT) EZH2 and EHMT2 maintain the repressive chromatin histone methylation marks
H3K27me and H3K9me, respectively, which are associated with transcriptional
silencing. Although selective HKMT inhibitors reduce levels of individual
repressive marks, removal of H3K27me3 by specific EZH2 inhibitors, for instance, 
may not be sufficient for inducing the expression of genes with multiple
repressive marks.
RESULTS: We report that gene expression and inhibition of triple negative breast 
cancer cell growth (MDA-MB-231) are markedly increased when targeting both EZH2
and EHMT2, either by siRNA knockdown or pharmacological inhibition, rather than
either enzyme independently. Indeed, expression of certain genes is only induced 
upon dual inhibition. We sought to identify compounds which showed evidence of
dual EZH2 and EHMT2 inhibition. Using a cell-based assay, based on the substrate 
competitive EHMT2 inhibitor BIX01294, we have identified proof-of-concept
compounds that induce re-expression of a subset of genes consistent with dual
HKMT inhibition. Chromatin immunoprecipitation verified a decrease in silencing
marks and an increase in permissive marks at the promoter and transcription start
site of re-expressed genes, while Western analysis showed reduction in global
levels of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3. The compounds inhibit growth in a panel of breast
cancer and lymphoma cell lines with low to sub-micromolar IC50s. Biochemically,
the compounds are substrate competitive inhibitors against both EZH2 and EHMT1/2.
CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated that dual inhibition of EZH2 and EHMT2 is more 
effective at eliciting biological responses of gene transcription and cancer cell
growth inhibition compared to inhibition of single HKMTs, and we report the first
dual EZH2-EHMT1/2 substrate competitive inhibitors that are functional in cells.

PMCID: PMC4545913
PMID: 26300989  [PubMed]


242. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 Nov;100(5):1839-48; discussion 1848. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2015.05.089. Epub 2015 Aug 20.

Pulmonary Metastases Exhibit Epigenetic Clonality: Implications for Precision
Cancer Therapy.

Reardon ES(1), Hong JA(1), Straughan DM(1), Azoury SC(1), Zhang M(1), Schrump
DS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Epigenetics Laboratory, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Thoracic
Epigenetics Laboratory, Thoracic and GI Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland. Electronic address:
david.schrump@nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: Development of effective cancer therapies may be limited by
intratumoral heterogeneity, which facilitates outgrowth and organ-specific
dissemination of treatment resistant clones. At present, limited information is
available regarding epigenetic landscapes of pulmonary metastases. This study was
undertaken to characterize epigenetic signatures of pulmonary metastases and to
identify potential therapeutic targets.
METHODS: RNA and DNA were extracted from 65 pulmonary metastases resected from 12
patients (5 with sarcoma, 7 with adrenocortical carcinoma). Quantitative reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction techniques were used to evaluate
expression levels of cancer-testis (CT) genes (NY-ESO-1, MAGE-A3, MAGE-A9,
MAGE-A12, GAGE1, CT-45, SSX-1, and SSX-2), tumor suppressor (TS) genes (p16 and
RASSF1A), and genes encoding epigenetic modifiers (DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, EZH2,
EED, and SUZ12), aberrantly expressed in human malignant diseases. Pyrosequencing
techniques were used to quantitate DNA methylation levels in LINE1, NBL2, and
D4Z4 repetitive sequences and promoter methylation status of differentially
regulated genes. Results of these analyses were compared with a standardized
panel of normal lung tissues.
RESULTS: Pulmonary metastases exhibited histologically related and
patient-specific global DNA demethylation. Significant interpatient heterogeneity
of gene expression was observed even among patients with similar tumor histologic
features. Epigenetic signatures appeared consistent among metastases from the
same patient, irrespective of the time of resection (synchronous/metachronous) or
the anatomic location. EZH2, EED, and SUZ12 (core components of Polycomb
repressive complex-2 [PRC-2]) were upregulated in the majority of metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: Pulmonary metastases exhibit patient-specific epigenetic clonality, 
which may be exploited for precision therapies targeting aberrant CT or TS gene
expression. PRC-2 may be a shared target for epigenetic therapy of pulmonary
metastases.

Copyright © 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26298164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2015 Jun;15 Suppl:S120-8. doi:
10.1016/j.clml.2015.02.035.

Mutations in the BCR-ABL1 Kinase Domain and Elsewhere in Chronic Myeloid
Leukemia.

Soverini S(1), de Benedittis C(2), Mancini M(2), Martinelli G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Hematology "L. 
e A. Seràgnoli," University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Electronic address:
simona.soverini@unibo.it. (2)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty
Medicine, Hematology "L. e A. Seràgnoli," University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has been the first human malignancy to be
associated, more than 50 years ago, with a consistent chromosomal
abnormality--the t(9;22)(q34;q11) chromosomal translocation. The resulting
BCR-ABL1 fusion gene, encoding a tyrosine kinase with deregulated activity, has a
central role in the pathogenesis of CML. Ancestral or additional genetic events
necessary for CML to develop have long been hypothesized but never really
demonstrated. CML can successfully be treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs). Mutations in the BCR-ABL1 kinase domain might arise, however, that confer
resistance to 1 or more of the currently available TKIs. Hence, the critical role
of BCR-ABL1 mutation screening for optimal therapeutic management, with the
current gold standard technique, conventional sequencing, likely to be replaced
soon by ultra-deep sequencing. Mutations in genes other than BCR-ABL1 include
ASXL1, TET2, RUNX1, DNMT3A, EZH2, and TP53 in chronic phase patients and RUNX1,
ASXL1, IKZF1, WT1, TET2, NPM1, IDH1, IDH2, NRAS, KRAS, CBL, TP53, CDKN2A, RB1,
and GATA-2 mutations in advanced phase patients. The latter also display
additional cytogenetic abnormalities, including submicroscopic regions of gain or
loss that only single nucleotide polymorphism arrays or array comparative genomic
hybridization can detect. Whether whole genome/exome sequencing studies will
uncover novel mutations relevant for pathogenesis, progression, and risk-adapted 
therapy is still unclear.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297264  [PubMed - in process]


244. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 22;6(28):26192-215. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4613.

Combined expressional analysis, bioinformatics and targeted proteomics identify
new potential therapeutic targets in glioblastoma stem cells.

Stangeland B(1,)(2), Mughal AA(1), Grieg Z(1,)(3), Sandberg CJ(1), Joel
M(1,)(3,)(4), Nygård S(5), Meling T(1), Murrell W(1), Vik Mo EO(1), Langmoen
IA(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vilhelm Magnus Laboratory for Neurosurgical Research, Institute for Surgical
Research and Department of Neurosurgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. 
(2)SFI-CAST Biomedical Innovation Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Norwegian Center for Stem Cell Research, Department of Immunology and
Transfusion Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Laboratory of
Neural Development and Optical Recording (NDEVOR), Department of Physiology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Institute for Medical Informatics, Oslo
University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is both the most common and the most lethal primary brain
tumor. It is thought that GBM stem cells (GSCs) are critically important in
resistance to therapy. Therefore, there is a strong rationale to target these
cells in order to develop new molecular therapies.To identify molecular targets
in GSCs, we compared gene expression in GSCs to that in neural stem cells (NSCs) 
from the adult human brain, using microarrays. Bioinformatic filtering identified
20 genes (PBK/TOPK, CENPA, KIF15, DEPDC1, CDC6, DLG7/DLGAP5/HURP, KIF18A, EZH2,
HMMR/RHAMM/CD168, NOL4, MPP6, MDM1, RAPGEF4, RHBDD1, FNDC3B, FILIP1L, MCC,
ATXN7L4/ATXN7L1, P2RY5/LPAR6 and FAM118A) that were consistently expressed in GSC
cultures and consistently not expressed in NSC cultures. The expression of these 
genes was confirmed in clinical samples (TCGA and REMBRANDT). The first nine
genes were highly co-expressed in all GBM subtypes and were part of the same
protein-protein interaction network. Furthermore, their combined up-regulation
correlated negatively with patient survival in the mesenchymal GBM subtype. Using
targeted proteomics and the COGNOSCENTE database we linked these genes to GBM
signalling pathways.Nine genes: PBK, CENPA, KIF15, DEPDC1, CDC6, DLG7, KIF18A,
EZH2 and HMMR should be further explored as targets for treatment of GBM.

PMCID: PMC4694895
PMID: 26295306  [PubMed - in process]


245. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Feb;69(2):155-63. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203177. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

Megakaryocytic hyperplasia in myeloproliferative neoplasms is driven by
disordered proliferative, apoptotic and epigenetic mechanisms.

Malherbe JA(1), Fuller KA(1), Arshad A(1), Nangalia J(2), Romeo G(3), Hall SL(3),
Meehan KS(1), Guo B(1), Howman R(3), Erber WN(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Western Australia, 
Crawley, Western Australia, Australia. (2)Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research and Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK. (3)School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia PathWest Laboratory
Medicine, Western Australia, Australia.

AIMS: Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are a heterogeneous group of clonal
proliferative bone marrow diseases characterised by extensive megakaryocytic
hyperplasia and morphological atypia. Despite knowledge of genomic defects, the
pathobiological processes driving these megakaryocytic abnormalities in MPN
remain poorly explained. We have explored the proliferative, apoptotic and
epigenetic profiles of megakaryocytes in human MPN.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was performed on bone marrow trephine
biopsies of 81 MPN (with and without JAK2(V617F) and CALR mutations) and 15
normal controls to assess the megakaryocytic expression of biomarkers associated 
with proliferation (Ki67), apoptosis (Bcl-XL, BNIP-3) and epigenetic regulation
(EZH2, SUZ12).
RESULTS: Myeloproliferative megakaryocytes showed significantly greater
expression of proliferative Ki67 and anti-apoptotic Bcl-XL, reduced pro-apoptotic
BNIP-3 and increased SUZ12 compared with controls. In essential thrombocythaemia,
large-giant megakaryocytes with hyperlobated nuclei showed a trend towards a
proliferative signature. In contrast, myelofibrotic megakaryocytes with condensed
nuclear chromatin, and cases with CALR mutations, had significant reductions in
pro-apoptotic BNIP-3.
CONCLUSIONS: Uncontrolled megakaryocytic expansion in MPN results from a
combination of increased proliferation, attenuated apoptosis and defective
epigenetic regulation with CALR mutations favouring apoptotic failure. The higher
platelet counts reported to be seen in MPN with CALR mutations may be due to
greater dysregulation of megakaryocyte apoptosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26290261  [PubMed - in process]


246. Mol Immunol. 2015 Oct;67(2 Pt B):482-91. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.08.003. Epub 
2015 Aug 15.

Polycomb recruitment at the Class II transactivator gene.

Boyd NH(1), Morgan JE(2), Greer SF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Department of Biology, Georgia
State University, Atlanta, GA 30302, United States. Electronic address:
nboyd3@gsu.edu. (2)Division of Cellular Biology and Immunology, Department of
Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302, United States. Electronic
address: jmorgan30@gsu.edu. (3)Department of Biology, Georgia State University,
Petit Science Center, 100 Piedmont Avenue, Suite 632, Atlanta, GA 30302-4010,
United States. Electronic address: sgreer@gsu.edu.

The Class II Transactivator (CIITA) is the master regulator of Major
Histocompatibility Class II (MHC II) genes. Transcription of CIITA through the
IFN-<U+03B3> inducible CIITA promoter IV (CIITA pIV) during activation is characterized 
by a decrease in trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3), catalyzed by 
the histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2). While EZH2 is
the known catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and is
present at the inactive CIITA pIV, the mechanism of PRC2 recruitment to mammalian
promoters remains unknown. Here we identify two DNA-binding proteins, which
interact with and regulate PRC2 recruitment to CIITA pIV. We demonstrate Yin Yang
1 (YY1) and Jumonji domain containing protein 2 (JARID2) are binding partners
along with EZH2 in mammalian cells. Upon IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation, YY1 dissociates from 
CIITA pIV while JARID2 binding to CIITA pIV increases, suggesting novel roles for
these proteins in regulating expression of CIITA pIV. Knockdown of YY1 and JARID2
yields decreased binding of EZH2 and H3K27me3 at CIITA pIV, suggesting important 
roles for YY1 and JARID2 at CIITA pIV. JARID2 knockdown also results in
significantly elevated levels of CIITA mRNA upon IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation. This study is
the first to identify novel roles of YY1 and JARID2 in the epigenetic regulation 
of the CIITA pIV by recruitment of PRC2. Our observations indicate the importance
of JARID2 in CIITA pIV silencing, and also provide a novel YY1-JARID2-PRC2
regulatory complex as a possible explanation of differential PRC2 recruitment at 
inducible versus permanently silenced genes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26283540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Lab Invest. 2015 Nov;95(11):1278-90. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.104. Epub 2015
Aug 17.

Characterization and pharmacologic targeting of EZH2, a fetal retinal protein and
epigenetic regulator, in human retinoblastoma.

Khan M(1), Walters LL(2), Li Q(1), Thomas DG(2,)(3), Miller JM(1), Zhang Q(1),
Sciallis AP(2), Liu Y(1,)(4), Dlouhy BJ(5), Fort PE(1), Archer SM(1), Demirci
H(1,)(3), Dou Y(2,)(3,)(6), Rao RC(1,)(2,)(3,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, W.K. Kellogg Eye Center,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA. (4)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, China. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of
Iowa Hospitals & Clinics, Iowa City, IA, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (7)Section of
Ophthalmology, Surgical Service, Veterans Administration Ann Arbor Healthcare
System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular cancer in children,
and the third most common cancer overall in infants. No molecular-targeted
therapy for this lethal tumor exists. Since the tumor suppressor RB1, whose
genetic inactivation underlies RB, is upstream of the epigenetic regulator EZH2, 
a pharmacologic target for many solid tumors, we reasoned that EZH2 might
regulate human RB tumorigenesis. Histologic and immunohistochemical analyses were
performed using an EZH2 antibody in sections from 43 samples of primary,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded human RB tissue, cryopreserved mouse retina,
and in whole cell lysates from human RB cell lines (Y79 and WERI-Rb1), primary
human fetal retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and fetal and adult retina, mouse
retina and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Although enriched during fetal human
retinal development, EZH2 protein was not present in the normal postnatal retina.
However, EZH2 was detected in all 43 analyzed human RB specimens, indicating that
EZH2 is a fetal protein expressed in postnatal human RB. EZH2 expression marked
single RB cell invasion into the optic nerve, a site of invasion whose
involvement may influence the decision for systemic chemotherapy. To assess the
role of EZH2 in RB cell survival, human RB and primary RPE cells were treated
with two EZH2 inhibitors (EZH2i), GSK126 and SAH-EZH2 (SAH). EZH2i impaired
intracellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production, an indicator of cell
viability, in a time and dose-dependent manner, but did not affect primary human 
fetal RPE. Thus, aberrant expression of a histone methyltransferase protein is a 
feature of human RB. This is the first time this mechanism has been implicated
for an eye, adnexal, or orbital tumor. The specificity of EZH2i toward human RB
cells, but not RPE, warrants further in vivo testing in animal models of RB,
especially those EZH2i currently in clinical trials for solid tumors and
lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC4626270 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26280220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Jun 15;7(6):1009-20. eCollection 2015.

Phosphorylation of EZH2 at T416 by CDK2 contributes to the malignancy of triple
negative breast cancers.

Yang CC(1), LaBaff A(1), Wei Y(2), Nie L(2), Xia W(2), Huo L(2), Yamaguchi H(2), 
Hsu YH(2), Hsu JL(3), Liu D(2), Lang J(2), Du Y(2), Lien HC(4), Li LY(5), Deng
R(2), Chan LC(1), Yao J(2), Kleer CG(6), Hortobagyi GN(7), Hung MC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas 77030 ; Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Houston, Texas
77030. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas 
MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas 77030. (3)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston,
Texas 77030 ; Center for Molecular Medicine, and Graduate Institute of Cancer
Biology, China Medical University Taichung 404, Taiwan ; Department of
Biotechnology, Asia University Taichung 413, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology, 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University Taipei 106, Taiwan. (5)Center for
Molecular Medicine, and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical
University Taichung 404, Taiwan ; Department of Biotechnology, Asia University
Taichung 413, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical 
School Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109. (7)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center Houston, Texas 77030. (8)Department
of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center Houston, Texas 77030 ; Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston Houston, Texas 77030 ;
Center for Molecular Medicine, and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China
Medical University Taichung 404, Taiwan ; Department of Biotechnology, Asia
University Taichung 413, Taiwan.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), which is closely related to basal-like
breast cancer, is a highly aggressive subtype of breast cancer that initially
responds to chemotherapy but eventually develops resistance. This presents a
major clinical challenge as there are currently no effective targeted therapies
available due to its lack of HER2 and estrogen receptor expression. Here, we show
that cyclin E and the enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) are closely co-expressed in TNBC
patients, and cyclin E/CDK2 phosphorylates EZH2 at T416 (pT416-EZH2) in vivo.
Phosphorylation of EZH2 at T416 enhances the ability of EZH2 to promote TNBC cell
migration/invasion, tumorsphere formation, and in vivo tumor growth. In addition,
high pT416-EZH2 correlates with poorer survival in TNBC patients. These findings 
suggest that pT416 has the potential to serve as a therapeutic biomarker for the 
aggressive forms of breast cancer and provide a rationale for the use of CDK2
inhibitors to treat TNBC.

PMCID: PMC4532735
PMID: 26279746  [PubMed]


249. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 Oct;75:218-25. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.07.038. Epub 
2015 Aug 10.

Clinical and prognostic relevance of EZH2 in breast cancer: A meta-analysis.

Wang X(1), Hu B(2), Shen H(3), Zhou H(1), Xue X(1), Chen Y(1), Chen S(1), Han
Y(1), Yuan B(1), Zhao H(1), Zhi Q(4), Kuang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Tengzhou
Central People's Hospital, Tengzhou 277500, China. (3)Department of General
Surgery, Kunshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Kunshan 215000, China.
(4)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China. Electronic address: strexboy@163.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou 215006, China. Electronic address: sdyt_kuang@163.com.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is regarded as a
tightly linking oncogene in many types of cancer. However, the prognostic role of
EZH2 in breast cancer (BC) still remains controversial. Our study aimed to
evaluate the clinical and prognostic relevance of EZH2 in BC patients based on
published studies. 11 studies totally containing 2330 patients (1052
EZH2-positive and 1278 EZH2-negative) were included in our meta-analysis. Our
data showed that EZH2 over-expression was significantly associated with estrogen 
receptor (ER) negativity [OR=0.227, 95% CI=0.174-0.297, P=0.000], progesterone
receptor (PR) negativity [OR=0.454, 95% CI=0.300-0.687, P=0.000], human epidermal
growth factor receptor type 2 (HER-2) positivity [OR=1.846, 95% CI=1.366-2.496,
P=0.000], invasive ductal cancer (IDC) [OR=2.237, 95% CI=1.489-3.361, P=0.000],
race (Caucasian) [OR=0.707, 95% CI=0.522-0.957, P=0.025], high histological grade
[OR=3.177, 95% CI=2.012-5.014, P=0.000] and triple-negative status (TNBCs)
[OR=5.380, 95% CI=1.065-27.187, P=0.042], which led to a poor OS rate in BC
[RR=2.193, 95% CI=1.495-3.217, P=0.000]. In conclusion, EZH2 participated in the 
progression of BC as a putative factor, and over-expression of EZH2 was
distinctly correlated with a poor patient survival. EZH2 may serve as a
prognostic biomarker and target in BC patients.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 26271144  [PubMed - in process]


250. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 14;34:83. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0191-0.

EZH2 is increased in paediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and is a
suitable molecular target in combination treatment approaches.

D'Angelo V(1), Iannotta A(2), Ramaglia M(3), Lombardi A(4), Zarone MR(5),
Desiderio V(6), Affinita MC(7), Pecoraro G(8), Di Martino M(9), Indolfi P(10),
Casale F(11), Caraglia M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. velia.dangelo@unina2.it. (2)Department of Woman, Child and General
and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples,
Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. adriana.iannotta@unina2.it.
(3)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. maria.ramaglia@unina2.it. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, Via S.M.
Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy. angela.lombardi@unina2.it.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and General Pathology, Second
University of Naples, Via S.M. Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy.
mayra.zarone@alice.it. (6)Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of
Biotechnology and Medical Histology and Embryology, Second University of Naples, 
Naples, Italy. vincenzo.desiderio@unina2.it. (7)Department of Woman, Child and
General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of
Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. draffinita@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. drgiuliapecoraro@gmail.com. (9)Department of Woman, Child and
General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of
Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy.
martinadimartino@libero.it. (10)Department of Woman, Child and General and
Specialized Surgery, Pediatric Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via
Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138, Naples, Italy. paolo.indolfi@unina2.it.
(11)Department of Woman, Child and General and Specialized Surgery, Pediatric
Oncology Unit - Second University of Naples, Via Luigi De Crecchio 4, 80138,
Naples, Italy. fiorina.casale@unina2.it. (12)Department of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and General Pathology, Second University of Naples, Via S.M.
Costantinopoli, 16, 80138, Naples, Italy. michele.caraglia@unina2.it.

BACKGROUND: T-cell Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) represents about 10-15 % of
pediatric ALL cases. EZH2, one of the components of Polycomb group proteins
(PRC2) complex, catalyzes the trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 that is
associated with transcriptional repression and tumor development.
METHODS: We examined the expression levels of PRC2 complex in primary samples of 
T cells ALL at diagnosis by western blotting and real time PCR. We evaluated the 
effect of 3-deazaneplanocin-A (DZNep), an EZH2 inhibitor, alone and in
combination with Daunoblastine on cell viability, apoptotic death and cell cycle 
distribution of T cell established Jurkat cell line.
RESULTS: EZH2 was expressed in 75 % samples at different extents mainly with high
expression level. SUZ12 was expressed in 60 % samples and EED in all samples,
respectively. The Kaplan-Meier analysis shows that T-ALL expressing EZH2 had a
lower probability of disease-free survival (DFS) compared to T-ALL negative for
EZH2 (23 % vs 100 %) (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). The EZH2 inhibitor DZNep used in combination
with Daunoblastine was synergistic in inducing growth inhibition and increasing
the apoptosis in T-ALL Jurkat cells at 48 and 72 h paralleled by EZH2 decreased
expression. Moreover, the combination decreased the activity of Erk-1/2
proliferation enzymes with no effects on Akt survival pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: The evaluation of EZH2 expression in pediatric T-ALL can be useful
in predict the clinical outcome of the patients and EZH2 can be a useful target
to improve the efficacy of conventional chemotherapy in this subset of patients
with bad prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4535295
PMID: 26268310  [PubMed - in process]


251. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Dec 1;21(23):5391-403. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2680. 
Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Activation of EZH2 and SUZ12 Regulated by E2F1 Predicts the Disease Progression
and Aggressive Characteristics of Bladder Cancer.

Lee SR(1), Roh YG(1), Kim SK(2), Lee JS(3), Seol SY(1), Lee HH(1), Kim WT(1), Kim
WJ(4), Heo J(5), Cha HJ(6), Kang TH(1), Chung JW(1), Chu IS(7), Leem SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Dong-A University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Systems Biology,
Division of Cancer Medicine, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National 
University, Cheongju, Republic of Korea. (5)Departments of Molecular Biology and 
Immunology, College of Medicine, Kosin University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(6)Departments of Parasitology and Genetics, Kosin University College of
Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea. (7)Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
shleem@dau.ac.kr chu@kribb.re.kr. (8)Department of Biological Science, Dong-A
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. shleem@dau.ac.kr chu@kribb.re.kr.

PURPOSE: Previous study identified E2F1 as a key mediator of non-muscle-invasive 
bladder cancer (NMIBC) progression. The aim of this study was to identify the
E2F1-related genes associated with poor prognosis and aggressive characteristics 
of bladder cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray analysis was performed to find E2F1-related genes
associated with tumor progression and aggressiveness in the gene expression data 
from 165 primary patients with bladder cancer. The biologic activity of
E2F1-related genes in tumor progression and aggressiveness was confirmed with
experimental assays using bladder cancer cells and tumor xenograft assay.
RESULTS: The expression of E2F1 was significantly associated with EZH2 and SUZ12.
The overexpression of E2F1, EZH2, and SUZ12 enhanced cancer progression including
cell colony formation, migration, and invasiveness. Knockdown of these genes
reduced motility, blocked invasion, and decreased tumor size in vivo. E2F1 bound 
the proximal EZH2 and SUZ12 promoter to activate transcription, suggesting that
E2F1 and its downstream effectors, EZH2 and SUZ12, could be important mediators
for the cancer progression. In addition, we confirmed an association between
these genes and aggressive characteristics. Interestingly, the treatment of
anticancer drugs to the cells overexpressing E2F1, EZH2, and SUZ12 induced the
expression of CD44, KLF4, OCT4, and ABCG2 known as cancer stem cell (CSC)-related
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The link between E2F1, EZH2, and/or SUZ12 revealed that E2f1
directly regulates transcription of the EZH2 and SUZ12 genes. The signature of
E2F1-EZH2-SUZ12 shows a predictive value for prognosis in bladder tumors and the 
E2F1-EZH2-SUZ12-driven transcriptional events may regulate the cancer
aggressiveness and chemo-resistance, which may provide opportunity for
development of new treatment modalities.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26268246  [PubMed - in process]


252. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2015
Jul;40(7):701-9.DOI:10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2015.07.001.

[Screening and functional analysis of microRNA expression in HPV16-positive
squamous carcinoma of the cervix <U+2028>in the Uygur of southern Xinjiang].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yuan M(1), Cheng J(2), Liu Y(1), Su W(1), Zhang Y(3), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Ulumuqi 830011, China. (2)Department of Gynecology, Affiliated Tumor 
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Ulumuqi 830011;Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008,
China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential expression of microRNA (miRNA) in
HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix in the Uygur of southern Xinjiang
and to predict the target genes of the miRNAs.<U+2029>
METHODS: Samples of HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix from 5 Uygurs
were collected for miRNA microarray assay. The differentially expressed miRNAs
were selected for further verification by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The
software, including targetscan, miRwalk, miRanda and pictar, were used to predict
the target genes of the verified miRNAs.<U+2029>
RESULTS: Eighteen differentially expressed miRNAs were identified by miRNA
microarray assay. The significantly differentially expressed miRNA-138 and
miRNA-720 were verified by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. According to the
prediction, the target genes for miRNA-138 were EZH2, LYPLA1, ARHGEF3, CLNS1A,
EIF4EBP1, GNAI2, LIMK1, RHOC, ROCK2, SLC20A1, TERT, and H2AFX, while for
miRNA-720 were EZH2, AGAP2, SPOCK2, FGF14, HNRNPA2B1, QKI, FOXG1, ACVR1B, DNMT3A,
EPHB2, LATS2, KRAS, CCND2, NBN, ENAM, AMELX, PRNP, and CALB1.<U+2029>
CONCLUSION: miR-138 and miR-720 are the down-regulated target miRNAs in
HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix in the Uygur of southern
Xinjiang. The common target gene for miR-138 and miR-720 is EZH2, which might be 
related to cervical squamous carcinoma invasion and metastasis.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26267680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 12;5:12999. doi: 10.1038/srep12999.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 silencing inhibits tumor growth and lung metastasis
in osteosarcoma.

Lv YF(1), Yan GN(1), Meng G(1), Zhang X(1), Guo QN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing 400037, People's Republic of China.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase is the catalytic subunit
of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which acts as a transcription repressor 
via the trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3). EZH2 has been
recognised as an oncogene in several types of tumors; however, its role in
osteosarcoma has not been fully elucidated. Herein, we show that EZH2 silencing
inhibits tumor growth and lung metastasis in osteosarcoma by facilitating
re-expression of the imprinting gene tumor-suppressing STF cDNA 3 (TSSC3). Our
previous study showed that TSSC3 acts as a tumor suppressor in osteosarcoma. In
this study, we found that EZH2 was abnormally elevated in osteosarcoma, and its
overexpression was associated with poor prognosis in osteosarcoma. Silencing of
EZH2 resulted in tumor growth inhibition, apoptosis and chemosensitivity
enhancement. Moreover, suppression of EZH2 markedly inhibited tumor growth and
lung metastasis in vivo. Furthermore, EZH2 knockdown facilitated the
re-expression of TSSC3 by reducing H3K27me3 in the promoter region.
Cotransfection with siEZH2 and siTSSC3 could partially reverse the ability of
siEZH2 alone. We have demonstrated that EZH2 plays a crucial role in tumor growth
and distant metastasis in osteosarcoma; its oncogenic role is related to its
regulation of the expression of TSSC3.

PMCID: PMC4533017
PMID: 26265454  [PubMed - in process]


254. Lancet Oncol. 2015 Sep;16(9):1111-22. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00169-2. Epub
2015 Aug 6.

Integration of gene mutations in risk prognostication for patients receiving
first-line immunochemotherapy for follicular lymphoma: a retrospective analysis
of a prospective clinical trial and validation in a population-based registry.

Pastore A(1), Jurinovic V(2), Kridel R(3), Hoster E(2), Staiger AM(4),
Szczepanowski M(5), Pott C(6), Kopp N(7), Murakami M(7), Horn H(4), Leich E(8),
Moccia AA(3), Mottok A(3), Sunkavalli A(9), Van Hummelen P(9), Ducar M(9),
Ennishi D(3), Shulha HP(3), Hother C(3), Connors JM(3), Sehn LH(3), Dreyling
M(1), Neuberg D(7), Möller P(10), Feller AC(11), Hansmann ML(12), Stein H(13),
Rosenwald A(8), Ott G(14), Klapper W(5), Unterhalt M(1), Hiddemann W(15),
Gascoyne RD(3), Weinstock DM(7), Weigert O(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Internal 
Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany; Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Lymphoid 
Cancer Research and the Centre for Lymphoid Cancer, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (4)Department of Clinical Pathology,
Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany; Dr Margarete
Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany; University 
of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (5)Haematopathology Section, University Hospital 
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (6)Second Medical Department,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (8)Institute of Pathology,
University of Würzburg, and Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken, Würzburg,
Germany. (9)Center for Cancer Genome Discovery, Boston, MA, USA; Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (10)Institute of Pathology, University of Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. (11)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of
Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany. (12)Senckenberg Institute of Pathology,
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (13)Berlin Reference Center for
Lymphoma and Haematopathology, Berlin, Germany. (14)Department of Clinical
Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, Stuttgart, Germany. (15)Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia, Helmholtz-Center
Munich, Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (16)Department of
Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany; Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia, Helmholtz-Center
Munich, Munich, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address:
oliver.weigert@med.uni-muenchen.de.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2015 Sep;16(9):1011-2.

BACKGROUND: Follicular lymphoma is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
disease, but the prognostic value of somatic mutations has not been
systematically assessed. We aimed to improve risk stratification of patients
receiving first-line immunochemotherapy by integrating gene mutations into a
prognostic model.
METHODS: We did DNA deep sequencing to retrospectively analyse the mutation
status of 74 genes in 151 follicular lymphoma biopsy specimens that were obtained
from patients within 1 year before beginning immunochemotherapy consisting of
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP).
These patients were recruited between May 4, 2000, and Oct 20, 2010, as part of a
phase 3 trial (GLSG2000). Eligible patients had symptomatic, advanced stage
follicular lymphoma and were previously untreated. The primary endpoints were
failure-free survival (defined as less than a partial remission at the end of
induction, relapse, progression, or death) and overall survival calculated from
date of treatment initiation. Median follow-up was 7·7 years (IQR 5·5-9·3).
Mutations and clinical factors were incorporated into a risk model for
failure-free survival using multivariable L1-penalised Cox regression. We
validated the risk model in an independent population-based cohort of 107
patients with symptomatic follicular lymphoma considered ineligible for curative 
irradiation. Pretreatment biopsies were taken between Feb 24, 2004, and Nov 24,
2009, within 1 year before beginning first-line immunochemotherapy consisting of 
rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CVP). Median
follow-up was 6·7 years (IQR 5·7-7·6).
FINDINGS: We established a clinicogenetic risk model (termed m7-FLIPI) that
included the mutation status of seven genes (EZH2, ARID1A, MEF2B, EP300, FOXO1,
CREBBP, and CARD11), the Follicular Lymphoma International Prognostic Index
(FLIPI), and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status. In the
training cohort, m7-FLIPI defined a high-risk group (28%, 43/151) with 5-year
failure-free survival of 38·29% (95% CI 25·31-57·95) versus 77·21% (95% CI
69·21-86·14) for the low-risk group (hazard ratio [HR] 4·14, 95% CI 2·47-6·93;
p<0·0001; bootstrap-corrected HR 2·02), and outperformed a prognostic model of
only gene mutations (HR 3·76, 95% CI 2·10-6·74; p<0·0001; bootstrap-corrected HR 
1·57). The positive predictive value and negative predictive value for 5-year
failure-free survival were 64% and 78%, respectively, with a C-index of 0·80 (95%
CI 0·71-0·89). In the validation cohort, m7-FLIPI again defined a high-risk group
(22%, 24/107) with 5-year failure-free survival of 25·00% (95% CI 12·50-49·99)
versus 68·24% (58·84-79·15) in the low-risk group (HR 3·58, 95% CI 2·00-6·42;
p<0.0001). The positive predictive value for 5-year failure-free survival was 72%
and 68% for negative predictive value, with a C-index of 0·79 (95% CI 0·69-0·89).
In the validation cohort, risk stratification by m7-FLIPI outperformed FLIPI
alone (HR 2·18, 95% CI 1·21-3·92), and FLIPI combined with ECOG performance
status (HR 2·03, 95% CI 1·12-3·67).
INTERPRETATION: Integration of the mutational status of seven genes with clinical
risk factors improves prognostication for patients with follicular lymphoma
receiving first-line immunochemotherapy and is a promising approach to identify
the subset at highest risk of treatment failure.
FUNDING: Deutsche Krebshilfe, Terry Fox Research Institute.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26256760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Anticancer Res. 2015 Sep;35(9):4697-705.

3-Deazaneplanocin A May Directly Target Putative Cancer Stem Cells in Biliary
Tract Cancer.

Mayr C(1), Wagner A(2), Stoecklinger A(3), Jakab M(4), Illig R(5), Berr F(6),
Pichler M(7), Di Fazio P(8), Ocker M(9), Neureiter D(5), Kiesslich T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg,
Austria Laboratory for Tumour Biology and Experimental Therapies, Institute of
Physiology and Pathophysiology, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg,
Austria. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg,
Austria. (4)Laboratory for Functional and Molecular Membrane Physiology,
Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria. (5)Institute of Pathology, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria. (6)Laboratory for Tumour Biology and Experimental Therapies,
Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria. (7)Division of Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. (8)Department of Visceral, Thoracic
and Vascular Surgery, Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
(9)Institute for Surgical Research, Philipps University of Marburg, Marburg,
Germany. (10)Department of Internal Medicine I, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria Laboratory for Tumour Biology and Experimental Therapies,
Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria t.kiesslich@salk.at.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), an epigenetic master
regulator, contributes to progression and development of biliary tract cancer
(BTC). The present study investigated the effects of the PRC2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) on BTC cell lines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In vitro effects of DZNep treatment were analyzed for cell
viability, gene expression and functional characteristics of cancer stem cell
(CSC).
RESULTS: DZNep treatment caused a cell line- and dose-dependent decrease in
viability. In the EGI-1 cell line, a direct cytotoxic effect was accompanied by
mRNA down-regulation of the PRC2 core components, cyclins as well as of
CSC-related genes. Furthermore, DZNep affected putative CSCs by reduction of
sphere formation and aldehyde dehydrogenase-1-positive cells. The stem cell
characteristics of these subpopulations were verified by real-time polymerase
chain reaction analysis.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results show that DZNep might be a promising
pharmacological agent for future therapies regarding BTC.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 26254359  [PubMed - in process]


256. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Aug 6;7(1):82. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0107-z. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-101 is repressed by EZH2 and its restoration inhibits tumorigenic
features in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.

Vella S(1), Pomella S(2), Leoncini PP(1), Colletti M(1), Conti B(1), Marquez
VE(3), Strillacci A(4), Roma J(5), Gallego S(5), Milano GM(6), Capogrossi MC(2), 
Bertaina A(6), Ciarapica R(2), Rota R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncohematology, Laboratory of Angiogenesis, Ospedale Pediatrico 
Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy. (2)Laboratorio di
Patologia Vascolare, Istituto Dermopatico dell'Immacolata, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(3)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, CCR, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Frederick, MD USA. (4)Department
of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, Biology Unit, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Translational Research in Paediatric
Cancer, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute and Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Department of Oncohematology,
Clinical Unit, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4,
00165 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a pediatric soft tissue sarcoma arising
from myogenic precursors that have lost their capability to differentiate into
skeletal muscle. The polycomb-group protein EZH2 is a Lys27 histone H3
methyltransferase that regulates the balance between cell proliferation and
differentiation by epigenetically silencing muscle-specific genes. EZH2 is often 
over-expressed in several human cancers acting as an oncogene. We previously
reported that EZH2 inhibition induces cell cycle arrest followed by myogenic
differentiation of RMS cells of the embryonal subtype (eRMS). MiR-101 is a
microRNA involved in a negative feedback circuit with EZH2 in different normal
and tumor tissues. To that, miR-101 can behave as a tumor suppressor in several
cancers by repressing EZH2 expression. We, therefore, evaluated whether miR-101
is de-regulated in eRMS and investigated its interplaying with EZH2 as well as
its role in the in vitro tumorigenic potential of these tumor cells.
RESULTS: Herein, we report that miR-101 is down-regulated in eRMS patients and in
tumor cell lines compared to their controls showing an inverse pattern of
expression with EZH2. We also show that miR-101 is up-regulated in eRMS cells
following both genetic and pharmacological inhibition of EZH2. In turn, miR-101
forced expression reduces EZH2 levels as well as restrains the migratory
potential of eRMS cells and impairs their clonogenic and anchorage-independent
growth capabilities. Finally, EZH2 recruitment to regulatory region of miR-101-2 
gene decreases in EZH2-silenced eRMS cells. This phenomenon is associated to
reduced H3K27me3 levels at the same regulatory locus, indicating that EZH2
directly targets miR-101 for repression in eRMS cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our data show that, in human eRMS, miR-101 is involved
in a negative feedback loop with EZH2, whose targeting has been previously shown 
to halt eRMS tumorigenicity. They also demonstrate that the re-induction of
miR-101 hampers the tumor features of eRMS cells. In this scenario, epigenetic
dysregulations confirm their crucial role in the pathogenesis of this soft tissue
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4527101
PMID: 26251675  [PubMed]


257. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Oct 15;43(18):8774-89. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv776. Epub 2015
Aug 6.

Loss of EZH2 results in precocious mammary gland development and activation of
STAT5-dependent genes.

Yoo KH(1), Oh S(2), Kang K(3), Hensel T(1), Robinson GW(1), Hennighausen L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Diabetes,
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA Department of Nanobiomedical Science and BK21 PLUS NBM Global Research Center
for Regenerative Medicine, Dankook University, Cheonan, Chungnam 330-714,
Republic of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes 
of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA Department of Microbiology, Dankook University, Cheonan, 
Chungnam 330-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology,
National Institutes of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA lotharh@mail.nih.gov.

Establishment and differentiation of mammary alveoli during pregnancy are
controlled by prolactin through the transcription factors STAT5A and STAT5B
(STAT5), which also regulate temporal activation of mammary signature genes. This
study addressed the question whether the methyltransferase and transcriptional
co-activator EZH2 controls the differentiation clock of mammary epithelium.
Ablation of Ezh2 from mammary stem cells resulted in precocious differentiation
of alveolar epithelium during pregnancy and the activation of mammary-specific
STAT5 target genes. This coincided with enhanced occupancy of these loci by
STAT5, EZH1 and RNA Pol II. Limited activation of differentiation-specific genes 
was observed in mammary epithelium lacking both EZH2 and STAT5, suggesting a
modulating but not mandatory role for STAT5. Loss of EZH2 did not result in overt
changes in genome-wide and gene-specific H3K27me3 profiles, suggesting
compensation through enhanced EZH1 recruitment. Differentiated mammary epithelia 
did not form in the combined absence of EZH1 and EZH2. Transplantation
experiments failed to demonstrate a role for EZH2 in the activity of mammary stem
and progenitor cells. In summary, while EZH1 and EZH2 serve redundant functions
in the establishment of H3K27me3 marks and the formation of mammary alveoli, the 
presence of EZH2 is required to control progressive differentiation of milk
secreting epithelium during pregnancy.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research 2015.
This work is written by (a) US Government employee(s) and is in the public domain
in the US.

PMCID: PMC4605299
PMID: 26250110  [PubMed - in process]


258. Med Oncol. 2015 Sep;32(9):226. doi: 10.1007/s12032-015-0673-0. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Long noncoding RNA-LET, which is repressed by EZH2, inhibits cell proliferation
and induces apoptosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell.

Sun Q(1), Liu H, Li L, Zhang S, Liu K, Liu Y, Yang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital to Nanchang University, No.1 Minde Road, Nanchang, 330006, Jiangxi
Province, China.

Recent studies have reported that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play critical
roles in carcinogenesis and progression. LncRNA-LET, a recently identified
lncRNA, has been shown to be a tumor suppressor in hepatocellular carcinoma.
However, the expression and functional of lncRNA-LET in other type of cancers
remain largely unknown. In this study, we found that lncRNA-LET was significantly
downregulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) tissues compared with
corresponding normal tissues. Decreased LET expression is significantly
correlated with advanced clinical stage, larger tumor size, increased lymph node 
tumor burden, and poor survival of NPC patients. Gain- and loss-of-function
experiments demonstrated that enhanced LET expression inhibited NPC cells
proliferation and induced cell apoptosis. By contrast, the knockdown of LET
promoted NPC cells proliferation and inhibited cell apoptosis. Importantly, we
found lncRNA-LET is transcriptional repressed by EZH2-mediated H3K27 histone
methylation on the LET promoter. The expressions of EZH2 and lncRNA-LET are
significantly inversely correlated in NPC tissues. Collectively, these findings
indicate a pivotal role for lncRNA-LET in NPC cell proliferation and apoptosis,
and reveal an epigenetic mechanism for lncRNA-LET dysregulation.

PMID: 26243049  [PubMed - in process]


259. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2015 Jun;21(6):500-3.

[miRNA-101 inhibits the expression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in
androgen-independent prostate cancer LNCaP cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu JX, Zhang QF, Tian CH, Zhang Y, Han XZ, Guo H.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of miRNA-101 on the expression of the
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EXH2) in human androgen-independent prostated cancer
LNCaP cells.
METHODS: We divided LNCaP cells into a blank control, a negative control, and a
miRNA-l01 transfection group, constructed the vector by transfecting synthetic
miRNA-101 mimics into the LNCaP cells, and evaluated the efficiency of
transfection by fluorescence microscopy. Then we determined the expression level 
of EZH2 mRNA by qRT-PCR in the three groups of cells and that of the EZH2 protein
in the negative control and transfection groups by Western blot.
RESULTS: Green fluorescence signals were observed in over 70% of the LNCaP cells 
in the transfection group after 24 hours of transfection. At 72 hours, the
expression of miRNA-101 was significantly upregulated in the transfected cells (P
< 0.01), that of EZH2 mRNA was remarkably lower in the transfection group (0.01 ±
0.10) than in the blank control (0.95 ± 0.40) and negative control (0.86 ± 0.30) 
groups (both P < 0.01), and that of the EZH2 protein was increased in the
negative control but decreased in the transfection group with the extension of
culture time.
CONCLUSION: miRNA-101, with its inhibitory effect on the expression of EZH2 in
LNCaP cells, is a potential biotherapeutic for prostate cancer.

PMID: 26242038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Pathol. 2015 Dec;237(4):508-19. doi: 10.1002/path.4596. Epub 2015 Sep 24.

Cdk8 deletion in the Apc(Min) murine tumour model represses EZH2 activity and
accelerates tumourigenesis.

McCleland ML(1), Soukup TM(2), Liu SD(1), Esensten JH(1), de Sousa E Melo F(2),
Yaylaoglu M(1), Warming S(2), Roose-Girma M(2), Firestein R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Genentech Inc, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc, South San Francisco, CA, USA.

CDK8 is a dissociable kinase module of the Mediator complex and has been shown to
play an important role in transcriptional regulation in organisms as diverse as
yeast and humans. Recent studies suggest that CDK8 functions as an oncoprotein in
melanoma and colon cancer. Importantly, these studies were conducted using in
vitro cell line models and the role of CDK8 in tumourigenesis in vivo has not
been explored. We have generated a mouse with a Cdk8 conditional knockout allele 
and examined the consequences of Cdk8 loss on normal tissue homeostasis and
tumour development in vivo. Cdk8 deletion in the young adult mouse did not induce
any gross or histopathological abnormalities, implying that Cdk8 is largely
dispensable for somatic cellular homeostasis. In contrast, Cdk8 deletion in the
Apc(Min) intestinal tumour model shortened the animals' survival and increased
tumour burden. Although Cdk8 deletion did not affect tumour initiation,
intestinal tumour size and growth rate were significantly increased in Cdk8-null 
animals. Transcriptome analysis performed on Cdk8-null intestinal cells revealed 
up-regulation of genes that are governed by the Polycomb group (PcG) complex. In 
support of these findings, Cdk8-null intestinal cells and tumours displayed a
reduction in histone H3K27 trimethylation, both globally and at the promoters of 
a number of PcG-regulated genes involved in oncogenic signalling. Together, our
findings uncover a tumour suppressor function for CDK8 in vivo and suggest that
the role of CDK8 activity in driving oncogenesis is context-specific. Sequencing 
data were deposited at GEO (Accession No. GSE71385). Copyright © 2015
Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26235356  [PubMed - in process]


261. Hum Pathol. 2015 Oct;46(10):1464-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

Immunoprofile-based subgrouping of urothelial bladder carcinomas for survival
prediction.

Kim K(1), Sung CO(2), Park BH(3), Ku JY(4), Go H(2), Ro JY(5), Kim J(2), Cho
YM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Asan
Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Green Cross Laboratories, Yongin-si,
Kyunggi-do, Republic of Korea. (4)University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston
Methodist Hospital, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Houston, TX
77030. (6)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
yongcho@amc.seoul.kr.

One of the major challenges in bladder cancer management is in distinguishing
aggressive from indolent tumors with similar clinicopathological factors,
especially in cases of high-grade T1 stage tumors. To define a set of prognostic 
factors that can be easily assessed in clinical practice with a high
cost-effectiveness, the expressions of 11 proteins were examined
immunohistochemically in 403 cases of transurethral resection of bladder tumors, 
then correlated to clinical outcomes. Based on the protein immunoprofiles,
urothelial carcinomas were divided into 4 intrinsic molecular subgroups with
different clinical outcomes: subgroups 1 and 4 with the poorest survival,
subgroup 2 with the best survival, and subgroup 3 with the intermediate survival 
outcome. The protein expression patterns of the 4 subgroups were mutually
exclusive: overexpression of p53, EZH2, E2F1, and IMP3 and high Ki-67
proliferation index in subgroup 1; overexpression of cytoplasmic survivin in
subgroup 4; overexpression of membranous TSP1 and cytoplasmic p27 in subgroup 2; 
and no representative protein overexpression in subgroup 3. Using these protein
immunoprofiles, 3 risk groups were generated, which predicted disease-specific
survival not only in total bladder carcinoma cases with 0.737 of predictive
accuracy but also in high-grade stage T1 tumors with 0.658 of predictive
accuracy. These results showed that urothelial carcinomas were composed of 4
clinically relevant molecular subgroups based on protein expression and that
overall survival of those patients could be predicted using a set of a small
number of protein expressions not only in total cases but also in high-grade
stage T1 tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26232864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proteomics. 2015 Nov;15(21):3603-12. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201500045. Epub 2015 Aug
24.

Native gel analysis of macromolecular protein complexes in cultured mammalian
cells.

Munawar N(1), Olivero G(1), Jerman E(2), Doyle B(1), Streubel G(2), Wynne K(1),
Bracken A(2), Cagney G(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin,
Belfield, Ireland. (2)Smurfit Institute of Genetics, Trinity College, Dublin,
Ireland.

Native gel electrophoresis enables separation of cellular proteins in their
non-denatured state. In experiments aimed at analysing proteins in higher order
or multimeric assemblies (i.e. protein complexes) it offers some advantages over 
rival approaches, particularly as an interface technology with mass spectrometry.
Here we separated fractions from HEK293 cells by native electrophoresis in order 
to survey protein complexes in the cytoplasmic, nuclear and chromatin
environments, finding 689 proteins distributed among 217 previously described
complexes. As expected, different fractions contained distinct combinations of
macromolecular complexes, with subunits of the same complex tending to
co-migrate. Exceptions to this observation could often be explained by the
presence of subunits shared among different complexes. We investigated one
identified complex, the Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 (PRC2), in more detail
following affinity purification of the EZH2 subunit. This approach resulted in
the identification of all previously reported members of PRC2. Overall, this work
demonstrates that the use of native gel electrophoresis as an upstream separating
step is an effective approach for analysis of the components and cellular
distribution of protein complexes.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26223664  [PubMed - in process]


263. Blood. 2015 Sep 3;126(10):1172-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-03-634428. Epub 2015
Jul 28.

Ezh2 loss in hematopoietic stem cells predisposes mice to develop heterogeneous
malignancies in an Ezh1-dependent manner.

Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Aoyama K(1), Sashida G(2), Oshima M(1), Tomioka T(3), Muto
T(1), Wang C(4), Iwama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; (2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; International
Research Center for Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan;
(3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; and.
(4)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; College of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia
University, Hohhot, China.

Recent genome sequencing revealed inactivating mutations in EZH2, which encodes
an enzymatic component of polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), in patients with 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and MDS/MPN 
overlap disorders. We herein demonstrated that the hematopoietic-specific
deletion of Ezh2 in mice induced heterogeneous hematopoietic malignancies.
Myelodysplasia was detected in mice following the deletion of Ezh2, and resulted 
in the development of MDS and MDS/MPN. Thrombocytosis was induced by Ezh2 loss
and sustained in some mice with myelodysplasia. Although less frequent, Ezh2 loss
also induced T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and the clonal expansion of B-1a
B cells. Gene expression profiling showed that PRC2 target genes were derepressed
upon the deletion of Ezh2 in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, but were
largely repressed during the development of MDS and MDS/MPN. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequence analysis of trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine
27 (H3K27me3) revealed a compensatory function of Ezh1, another enzymatic
component of PRC2, in this process. The deletion of Ezh1 alone did not cause
dysplasia or any hematologic malignancies in mice, but abolished the repopulating
capacity of hematopoietic stem cells when combined with Ezh2 loss. These results 
clearly demonstrated an essential role of Ezh1 in the pathogenesis of
hematopoietic malignancies induced by Ezh2 insufficiency, and highlighted the
differential functions of Ezh1 and Ezh2 in hematopoiesis.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26219303  [PubMed - in process]


264. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 24;6:7743. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8743.

MEG3 long noncoding RNA regulates the TGF-ß pathway genes through formation of
RNA-DNA triplex structures.

Mondal T(1), Subhash S(1), Vaid R(1), Enroth S(2), Uday S(1), Reinius B(1), Mitra
S(1), Mohammed A(1), James AR(1), Hoberg E(3), Moustakas A(4), Gyllensten U(2),
Jones SJ(5), Gustafsson CM(3), Sims AH(6), Westerlund F(7), Gorab E(8), Kanduri
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, SE-40530 Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department of 
Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Biomedical Center, SciLifeLab Uppsala,
Uppsala University, SE-75108 Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Department of Medical
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, PO Box 440, SE-405 30
Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)1] Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology,
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, PO Box 582, SE-751 23 Uppsala,
Sweden [2] Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, PO Box 595, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden. (5)Genome Sciences
Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia BC V5Z 4S6,
Canada. (6)Applied Bioinformatics of Cancer, University of Edinburgh Cancer
Research UK Centre, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, UK. (7)Department of Chemical and
Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg 412 96,
Sweden. (8)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de
Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo CEP:05508-090, Brazil.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) regulate gene expression by association with
chromatin, but how they target chromatin remains poorly understood. We have used 
chromatin RNA immunoprecipitation-coupled high-throughput sequencing to identify 
276 lncRNAs enriched in repressive chromatin from breast cancer cells. Using one 
of the chromatin-interacting lncRNAs, MEG3, we explore the mechanisms by which
lncRNAs target chromatin. Here we show that MEG3 and EZH2 share common target
genes, including the TGF-ß pathway genes. Genome-wide mapping of MEG3 binding
sites reveals that MEG3 modulates the activity of TGF-ß genes by binding to
distal regulatory elements. MEG3 binding sites have GA-rich sequences, which
guide MEG3 to the chromatin through RNA-DNA triplex formation. We have found that
RNA-DNA triplex structures are widespread and are present over the MEG3 binding
sites associated with the TGF-ß pathway genes. Our findings suggest that RNA-DNA 
triplex formation could be a general characteristic of target gene recognition by
the chromatin-interacting lncRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4525211
PMID: 26205790  [PubMed - in process]


265. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Dec;116(12):2744-54. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25199.

Effects of Novel ncRNA Molecules, p15-piRNAs, on the Methylation of DNA and
Histone H3 of the CDKN2B Promoter Region in U937 Cells.

Wu D(1,)(2), Fu H(1), Zhou H(1), Su J(1), Zhang F(1), Shen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fujian 
Institute of Hematology, Fuzhou, Fujian, 35001, China. (2)Medical Intensive Care 
Unit, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian, 35001, China.

Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) play key roles in epigenetic events. However, the exact 
mechanism of ncRNA guidance, particularly piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs), for the
targeting of epigenetic regulatory factors to specific gene regions is unclear.
Although piRNA function was first established in germ-line cells, piRNA may be
crucial in cancer cells. This study investigated the potential roles of
CDKN2B-related piRNA in leukemia cells to provide a potential tumorigenesis model
of leukemia. CDKN2B-related piRNAs, hsa_piR_014637 and hsa_piR_011186 were
transduced into the leukemia cell line U937 to study the effect of these two
piRNAs on cell-cycle progression, apoptosis, heterochromatin formation, CDKN2B
methylation and expression. Our results show that over-expressing hsa_piR_011186 
promoted cell-cycle progression and decreased apoptosis. We also observed
inhibition of CDKN2B gene expression. These effects were likely mediated by novel
piRC (piRNA complex) of CDKN2B-related piRNA that associate with DNMT1, Suv39H1
and/or EZH2 proteins to modulate the methylation of DNA and histone H3 in the
promoter region of the CDKN2B gene. The novel piRC complex facilitated epigenetic
modifications on the promoter of cell-cycle regulating genes, providing an
expanded view of the role of piRNA in the progression of leukemia cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26205624  [PubMed - in process]


266. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 22;5:12319. doi: 10.1038/srep12319.

PRC2 inhibition counteracts the culture-associated loss of engraftment potential 
of human cord blood-derived hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

Varagnolo L(1), Lin Q(2), Obier N(3), Plass C(4), Dietl J(5), Zenke M(2), Claus
R(6), Müller AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Radiology and Cell Research (MSZ) in the Center for
Experimental Molecular Medicine (ZEMM), University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Helmholtz Institute for Biomedical
Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (3)School of Cancer
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (4)Department of 
Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical
University of Würzburg, Germany. (6)1] Department of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk 
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany [2] Department
of Medicine, Div. Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, University 
of Freiburg Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.

Cord blood hematopoietic stem cells (CB-HSCs) are an outstanding source for
transplantation approaches. However, the amount of cells per donor is limited and
culture expansion of CB-HSCs is accompanied by a loss of engraftment potential.
In order to analyze the molecular mechanisms leading to this impaired potential
we profiled global and local epigenotypes during the expansion of human CB
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HPSCs). Human CB-derived CD34+ cells
were cultured in serum-free medium together with SCF, TPO, FGF, with or without
Igfbp2 and Angptl5 (STF/STFIA cocktails). As compared to the STF cocktail, the
STFIA cocktail maintains in vivo repopulation capacity of cultured CD34+ cells.
Upon expansion, CD34+ cells genome-wide remodel their epigenotype and depending
on the cytokine cocktail, cells show different H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 levels.
Expanding cells without Igfbp2 and Angptl5 leads to higher global H3K27me3
levels. ChIPseq analyses reveal a cytokine cocktail-dependent redistribution of
H3K27me3 profiles. Inhibition of the PRC2 component EZH2 counteracts the
culture-associated loss of NOD scid gamma (NSG) engraftment potential.
Collectively, our data reveal chromatin dynamics that underlie the
culture-associated loss of engraftment potential. We identify PRC2 component EZH2
as being involved in the loss of engraftment potential during the in vitro
expansion of HPSCs.

PMCID: PMC4510577
PMID: 26198814  [PubMed - in process]


267. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 4;112(31):E4216-25. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503690112. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

The Xist RNA-PRC2 complex at 20-nm resolution reveals a low Xist stoichiometry
and suggests a hit-and-run mechanism in mouse cells.

Sunwoo H(1), Wu JY(2), Lee JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department 
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138;
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114; Department of Genetics, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is initiated by the long noncoding RNA Xist,
which coats the inactive X (Xi) and targets Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
in cis. Epigenomic analyses have provided significant insight into Xist binding
patterns and chromatin organization of the Xi. However, such epigenomic analyses 
are limited by averaging of population-wide dynamics and do not inform behavior
of single cells. Here we view Xist RNA and the Xi at 20-nm resolution using
STochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy (STORM) in mouse cells. We observe
dynamics at the single-cell level not predicted by epigenomic analysis. Only ~50 
hubs of Xist RNA occur on the Xi in the maintenance phase, corresponding to
50-100 Xist molecules per Xi and contrasting with the chromosome-wide "coat"
observed by deep sequencing and conventional microscopy. Likewise, only ~50 hubs 
PRC2 are observed. PRC2 and Xist foci are not randomly distributed but showed
statistically significant spatial association. Knock-off experiments enable
visualization of the dynamics of dissociation and relocalization onto the Xi and 
support a functional tethering of Xist and PRC2. Our analysis reveals that
Xist-PRC2 complexes are less numerous than expected and suggests methylation of
nucleosomes in a hit-and-run model.

PMCID: PMC4534268
PMID: 26195790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;67:148-57. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.07.006.
Epub 2015 Jul 17.

JMJD3 as an epigenetic regulator in development and disease.

Burchfield JS(1), Li Q(2), Wang HY(1), Wang RF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Weill
Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY
10065, USA. (3)Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, Houston Methodist
Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 1300 York Avenue, 
New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: rwang3@tmhs.org.

Gene expression is epigenetically regulated through DNA methylation and covalent 
chromatin modifications, such as acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitination,
sumoylation, and methylation of histones. Histone methylation state is
dynamically regulated by different groups of histone methyltransferases and
demethylases. The trimethylation of histone 3 (H3K4) at lysine 4 is usually
associated with the activation of gene expression, whereas trimethylation of
histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27) is associated with the repression of gene
expression. The polycomb repressive complex contains the H3K27 methyltransferase 
Ezh2 and controls dimethylation and trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me2/3). The
Jumonji domain containing-3 (Jmjd3, KDM6B) and ubiquitously transcribed
X-chromosome tetratricopeptide repeat protein (UTX, KDM6A) have been identified
as H3K27 demethylases that catalyze the demethylation of H3K27me2/3. The role and
mechanisms of both JMJD3 and UTX have been extensively studied for their
involvement in development, cell plasticity, immune system, neurodegenerative
disease, and cancer. In this review, we will focus on recent progresses made on
understanding JMJD3 in the regulation of gene expression in development and
diseases. This article is part of a Directed Issue entitled: Epigenetics dynamics
in development and disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4564304 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26193001  [PubMed - in process]


269. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 May 1;8(5):4972-80. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-1297 regulates hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and apoptosis
by targeting EZH2.

Liu F(1), He Y(1), Shu R(2), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Liaocheng People's Hospital Liaocheng
252000, Shandong, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Jinan Central
Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University Ji'nan 250000, Shandong, China.

In this study, we suggested the level of miR-1297 was downreguled in the human
hepatocellular carcinoma compared to the normal cells. We demonstrate ectopic
expression of miR-1297 could significantly suppress hepatocellular carcinoma
cells proliferation and enhance the cell apoptosis. In vitro reporter assay
suggested EZH2 is a direct target gene of miR-1297. Furthermore, knockdown of
EZH2 have the same effect with miR-1297 overeexpression in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. These findings provide evidence that miR-1297 plays a key role
in inhibition of the hepatocellular carcinoma cells proliferation, and enhancing 
cell apoptosis through targeting EZH2, and strongly suggest that ex ogenous
miR-1297 may have therapeutic value in treating hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4503062
PMID: 26191190  [PubMed - in process]


270. Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 28;12(4):554-61. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.067. Epub 2015 
Jul 16.

Identification of Spen as a Crucial Factor for Xist Function through Forward
Genetic Screening in Haploid Embryonic Stem Cells.

Monfort A(1), Di Minin G(1), Postlmayr A(1), Freimann R(1), Arieti F(2), Thore
S(3), Wutz A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
ETH Hönggerberg, Otto-Stern-Weg 7, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)CEITEC-Central
European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 753/5, Brno 62500,
Czech Republic. (3)University of Bordeaux, European Institute for Chemistry and
Biology (IECB), ARNA Laboratory, Bordeaux 33000, France; Institut National de la 
Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, INSERM, U869, ARNA Laboratory, Bordeaux 33000,
France. (4)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology, ETH Hönggerberg, Otto-Stern-Weg 7, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: awutz@ethz.ch.

In mammals, the noncoding Xist RNA triggers transcriptional silencing of one of
the two X chromosomes in female cells. Here, we report a genetic screen for
silencing factors in X chromosome inactivation using haploid mouse embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) that carry an engineered selectable reporter system. This system was
able to identify several candidate factors that are genetically required for
chromosomal repression by Xist. Among the list of candidates, we identify the
RNA-binding protein Spen, the homolog of split ends. Independent validation
through gene deletion in ESCs confirms that Spen is required for gene repression 
by Xist. However, Spen is not required for Xist RNA localization and the
recruitment of chromatin modifications, including Polycomb protein Ezh2. The
identification of Spen opens avenues for further investigation into the
gene-silencing pathway of Xist and shows the usefulness of haploid ESCs for
genetic screening of epigenetic pathways.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4530576
PMID: 26190100  [PubMed - in process]


271. Leuk Res. 2015 Sep;39(9):990-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.06.005. Epub 2015 
Jun 14.

Next-generation-sequencing of recurrent childhood high hyperdiploid acute
lymphoblastic leukemia reveals mutations typically associated with high risk
patients.

Chen C(1), Bartenhagen C(2), Gombert M(3), Okpanyi V(3), Binder V(3), Röttgers
S(4), Bradtke J(4), Teigler-Schlegel A(4), Harbott J(4), Ginzel S(5), Thiele
R(6), Husemann P(3), Krell PF(3), Borkhardt A(3), Dugas M(2), Hu J(7), Fischer
U(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University
Union Hospital, Fuzhou, China. (2)Institute of Medical Informatics, University of
Münster, Münster, Germany. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and
Clinical Immunology, University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich
Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (4)Oncogenetic Laboratory, Department of
Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Justus Liebig University, Giessen, Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology,
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany; Department of Computer Science, Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University
of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany. (6)Department of Computer Science, 
Bonn-Rhine-Sieg University of Applied Sciences, Sankt Augustin, Germany.
(7)Fujian Institute of Hematology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital,
Fuzhou, China. Electronic address: jdhu@medmail.com.cn. (8)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, University Children's
Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Electronic address: ute.fischer@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

20% of children suffering from high hyperdiploid acute lymphoblastic leukemia
develop recurrent disease. The molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we
analyzed the genetic landscape of five patients at relapse, who developed
recurrent disease without prior high-risk indication using whole-exome- and
whole-genome-sequencing. Oncogenic mutations of RAS pathway genes (NRAS, KRAS,
FLT3, n=4) and deactivating mutations of major epigenetic regulators (CREBBP,
EP300, each n=2 and ARID4B, EZH2, MACROD2, MLL2, each n=1) were prominent in
these cases and virtually absent in non-recurrent cases (n=6) or other pediatric 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases (n=18). In relapse nucleotide variations were 
detected in cell fate determining transcription factors (GLIS1, AKNA). Structural
genomic alterations affected genes regulating B-cell development (IKZF1, PBX1,
RUNX1). Eleven novel translocations involved the genes ART4, C12orf60, MACROD2,
TBL1XR1, LRRN4, KIAA1467, and ELMO1/MIR1200. Typically, patients harbored only
single structural variations, except for one patient who displayed massive
rearrangements in the context of a germline tumor suppressor TP53 mutation and a 
Li-Fraumeni syndrome-like family history. Another patient harbored a germline
mutation in the DNA repair factor ATM. In summary, the relapse patients of our
cohort were characterized by somatic mutations affecting the RAS pathway,
epigenetic and developmental programs and germline mutations in DNA repair
pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26189108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Sep 1;25(17):3644-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.06.056. 
Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Discovery, design, and synthesis of indole-based EZH2 inhibitors.

Gehling VS(1), Vaswani RG(2), Nasveschuk CG(2), Duplessis M(2), Iyer P(2),
Balasubramanian S(2), Zhao F(2), Good AC(2), Campbell R(2), Lee C(2), Dakin
LA(2), Cook AS(2), Gagnon A(2), Harmange JC(2), Audia JE(2), Cummings RT(2),
Normant E(2), Trojer P(2), Albrecht BK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 215 First Street, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA. Electronic address: victor.gehling@constellationpharma.com. (2)Constellation
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 215 First Street, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

The discovery and optimization of a series of small molecule EZH2 inhibitors is
described. Starting from dimethylpyridone HTS hit (2), a series of indole-based
EZH2 inhibitors were identified. Biochemical potency and microsomal stability
were optimized during these studies and afforded compound 22. This compound
demonstrates nanomolar levels of biochemical potency (IC50=0.002 µM), cellular
potency (EC50=0.080 µM), and afforded tumor regression when dosed (200 mpk SC
BID) in an EZH2 dependent tumor xenograft model.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26189078  [PubMed - in process]


273. RNA Biol. 2015;12(9):959-65. doi: 10.1080/15476286.2015.1069463.

Cryptic RNA-binding by PRC2 components EZH2 and SUZ12.

Betancur JG(1,)(2,)(3), Tomari Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences; The University of Tokyo ;
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo , Japan. (2)b Department of Medical Genome Sciences ; The
University of Tokyo ; Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo , Japan. (3)c Present affiliation:
Laboratory for Developmental Genetics; RIKEN-IMS ; Tsurumi-ku; Yokohama ,
Kanagawa , Japan.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a histone-modifying complex that
di/tri-methylates histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), a mark of transcriptionally
repressed chromatin. However, how PRC2 is specifically recruited to its target
loci remains controversial, although it has been postulated that long non-coding 
RNAs (lncRNAs) can function as guides. Here we purified individual components of 
PRC2 from human cultured cells and found that EZH2 and SUZ12 can directly bind to
RNAs. In agreement with recent evidence, our results support the notion that
these two PRC2 subunits have RNA-binding activity, with general preference for
longer RNAs. However, the length alone does not explain their cryptic substrate
preference. Our data highlight the difficulty of characterizing the RNA-binding
activity of PRC2.

PMCID: PMC4615636 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26177152  [PubMed - in process]


274. Pharm Pat Anal. 2015;4(4):261-84. doi: 10.4155/ppa.15.16.

Inhibitors of emerging epigenetic targets for cancer therapy: a patent review
(2010-2014).

Tanaka M(1,)(2), Roberts JM(1), Qi J, Bradner JE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 360 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Gene regulatory pathways comprise an emerging and active area of chemical probe
discovery and investigational drug development. Emerging insights from cancer
genome sequencing and chromatin biology have identified leveraged opportunities
for development of chromatin-directed small molecules as cancer therapies. At
present, only six agents in two epigenetic target classes have been approved by
the US FDA, limited to treatment of hematological malignancies. Recently, new
classes of epigenetic inhibitors have appeared in literatures. First-in-class
compounds have successfully transitioned to clinical investigation, importantly
also in solid tumors and pediatric malignancies. This review considers patent
applications for small-molecule inhibitors of selected epigenetic targets from
2010 to 2014. Included are exemplary classes of chromatin-associated epigenomic
writers (DOT1L and EZH2), erasers (LSD1) and readers (BRD4).

PMID: 26174566  [PubMed - in process]


275. J Biomol Screen. 2015 Oct;20(9):1132-41. doi: 10.1177/1087057115594187. Epub 2015
Jul 14.

Screening for Small-Molecule Modulators of Long Noncoding RNA-Protein
Interactions Using AlphaScreen.

Pedram Fatemi R(1), Salah-Uddin S(2), Modarresi F(2), Khoury N(2), Wahlestedt
C(1), Faghihi MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami Miller 
School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences and Center for Therapeutic Innovation, University of Miami Miller School
of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 
and Center for Therapeutic Innovation, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and
Center for Therapeutic Innovation, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL, USA Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA mfaghihi@med.miami.edu.

Long non-protein coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an important class of molecules that
help orchestrate key cellular events. Although their functional roles in cells
are not well understood, thousands of lncRNAs and a number of possible mechanisms
by which they act have been reported. LncRNAs can exert their regulatory function
in cells by interacting with epigenetic enzymes. In this study, we developed a
tool to study lncRNA-protein interactions for high-throughput screening of
small-molecule modulators using AlphaScreen technology. We tested the interaction
of two lncRNAs: brain-derived neurotrophic factor antisense (BDNF-AS) and Hox
transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), with Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a
histone methyltransferase against a phytochemical library, to look for
small-molecule inhibitors that can alter the expression of downstream target
genes. We identified ellipticine, a compound that up-regulates BDNF
transcription. Our study shows the feasibility of using high-throughput screening
to identify modulators of lncRNA-protein interactions and paves the road for
targeting lncRNAs that are dysregulated in human disorders using small-molecule
therapies.

© 2015 Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening.

PMCID: PMC4576503
PMID: 26173710  [PubMed - in process]


276. Lipids Health Dis. 2015 Jul 14;14:70. doi: 10.1186/s12944-015-0068-4.

Glycol chitosan incorporated retinoic acid chlorochalcone (RACC) nanoparticles in
the treatment of Osteosarcoma.

Qin YG(1), Zhu LY(2), Wang CY(3), Zhang BY(4), Wang QY(5), Li RY(6), Liu Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin, 130041, China. qinyanguo0987@gmail.com. (2)Nursing School, Changchun
University of Chinese Medicine, Changchun, Jilin, 130117, China.
zhuly140@tom.com. (3)Norman Bethune Medical School, Jilin University, Changchun, 
Jilin, 130021, China. wangchenyu77@tom.com. (4)Norman Bethune Medical School,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, 130021, China. zhangboyan2230@126.com.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin, 130041, China. qingyu657@126.com. (6)Department of Orthopedics, The Second
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, 130041, China. ruiyan8c8@163.com.
(7)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin, 130041, China. liuzhen6532@yeah.net.

BACKGROUND: Osteosarcoma is the most common of all the bone malignancies and
accounts for 30-80% of the primary skeletal sarcomas. The overall survival rate
of patients with osteosarcoma is < 20% suggesting poor prognosis.
METHODS: The present study demonstrates the effect of retinoic acid
chlorochalcone (RACC) incorporated glycol chitosan (GC) nanoparticle transfection
in osteosarcoma cells. MG-63 and Saos-2 osteosarcoma cells were transfected with 
various concentrations of RACC-incorporated GC nanoparticle for 24 h. The effect 
on cell proliferation, Ezh2 expression, apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, cell
migration and invasiveness, Akt phosphorylation and local tumour growth and
metastases were studied.
RESULTS: MG-63 and Saos-2 osteosarcoma cells on RACC-incorporated GC nanoparticle
transfection for 24 h showed a concentration-dependent inhibition of cell
proliferation. Of the various concentrations of RACC tested, the effective
concentration started from 5 µM with an IC50 of 20 µM. Wound healing assay also
showed that RACC-incorporated GC nanoparticles inhibited migration of tumor cells
more effectively compared to the parent RA. RACC transfection resulted in
inhibition of cell proliferation, Ezh2 expression inhibition, apoptosis through
mitochondrial pathway by decrease in membrane potential and release of cytochrome
c and cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase. The invasiveness of cells treated
with 5 and 20 µM RACC was decreased by 49 and 76% respectively, compared to the
control. RACC-treated mice showed significantly lower number of metastases
compared to that in the control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, RACC-incorporated glycol chitosan nanoparticle strategy can be
promising for the treatment of osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4501080
PMID: 26170203  [PubMed - in process]


277. J Clin Pathol. 2015 Oct;68(10):771-87. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2015-203186. Epub
2015 Jul 10.

Clinicopathological correlates of hyperparathyroidism.

Duan K(1), Gomez Hernandez K(2), Mete O(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Endocrine Oncology Site Group, Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Medicine, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology, University Health 
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Endocrine Oncology 
Site Group, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Hyperparathyroidism is a common endocrine disorder with potential complications
on the skeletal, renal, neurocognitive and cardiovascular systems. While most
cases (95%) occur sporadically, about 5% are associated with a hereditary
syndrome: multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (MEN-1, MEN-2A, MEN-4),
hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome (HPT-JT), familial hypocalciuric
hypercalcaemia (FHH-1, FHH-2, FHH-3), familial hypercalciuric hypercalcaemia,
neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism and isolated familial hyperparathyroidism.
Recently, molecular mechanisms underlying possible tumour suppressor genes (MEN1,
CDC73/HRPT2, CDKIs, APC, SFRPs, GSK3ß, RASSF1A, HIC1, RIZ1, WT1, CaSR, GNA11,
AP2S1) and proto-oncogenes (CCND1/PRAD1, RET, ZFX, CTNNB1, EZH2) have been
uncovered in the pathogenesis of hyperparathyroidism. While bi-allelic
inactivation of CDC73/HRPT2 seems unique to parathyroid malignancy, aberrant
activation of cyclin D1 and Wnt/ß-catenin signalling has been reported in benign 
and malignant parathyroid tumours. Clinicopathological correlates of primary
hyperparathyroidism include parathyroid adenoma (80-85%), hyperplasia (10-15%)
and carcinoma (<1-5%). Secondary hyperparathyroidism generally presents with
diffuse parathyroid hyperplasia, whereas tertiary hyperparathyroidism reflects
the emergence of autonomous parathyroid hormone (PTH)-producing neoplasm(s) from 
secondary parathyroid hyperplasia. Surgical resection of abnormal parathyroid
tissue remains the only curative treatment in primary hyperparathyroidism, and
parathyroidectomy specimens are frequently encountered in this setting. Clinical 
and biochemical features, including intraoperative PTH levels, number, weight and
size of the affected parathyroid gland(s), are crucial parameters to consider
when rendering an accurate diagnosis of parathyroid proliferations. This review
provides an update on the expanding knowledge of hyperparathyroidism and
highlights the clinicopathological correlations of this prevalent disease.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26163537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9849-55. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3754-y. Epub 2015
Jul 11.

The possible role of EZH2 and DNMT1 polymorphisms in sporadic triple-negative
breast carcinoma in southern Chinese females.

Tao R(1,)(2), Chen Z(3), Wu P(1), Liu C(1), Peng Y(1), Zhao W(1), Hu C(2), Feng
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine, Southern Medical University Affiliated Fengxian Hospital,
Shanghai, 201400, China. (2)Guangzhou Kingmed Centre for Clinical Laboratory,
Guangzhou, 510330, China. (3)Third Clinical College, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, 510515, China. (4)Laboratory Medicine, Southern Medical University
Affiliated Fengxian Hospital, Shanghai, 201400, China. fengjing8801530@163.com.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) has a more invasive and metastatic potential
than the other types of breast cancer and hence is associated with poor
prognosis. Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) could lead 
to tumorigenesis by separately methylating histone H3K27 and CpG islands in tumor
suppressor genes. In order to investigate the association between oncogenesis and
the distribution of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of EZH2, DNMT1, a
case-control study on SNPs in TNBC cases from south China was conducted. A total 
of 13 SNPs were genotyped from 234 cases of TNBC tissues, and 300 normal blood
samples from age-matched control group were analyzed using Snapshot technology.
The expressions of EZH2 and DNMT1 were examined in the 234 cases of TNBC tissues 
by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The T allele of rs2288349 and the C allele of
rs16999593 increase the risk of TNBC, with relative risk coefficients of 1.76 and
1.69, respectively (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). The TC genotypes of rs2288349 and rs16999593 were
higher in TNBC compared with the control group; the cancer risk increased to 5.27
and 4.13, respectively (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). There were no significant differences between
the frequencies of the other 10 SNPs and the risk of TNBC (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). Five common
haplotypes (>8 % frequency) were identified with a cumulative frequency of 96 %
in the controls, while the haplotypes of AAGTAG, GGGTGA, and GACCAG were
significantly increased in the control group compared to that in patients
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The G allele of rs10274701 significantly increased the EZH2
expression level in TNBC (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). This is the first study to demonstrate a
significant association between TNBC risk and the polymorphisms of EZH2 and
DNMT1, and our researches indicate that the SNPs of EZH2 and DNMT1 are risk
predictors for TNBC.

PMID: 26162541  [PubMed - in process]


279. Genome Res. 2015 Sep;25(9):1325-35. doi: 10.1101/gr.177576.114. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

SETDB1 modulates PRC2 activity at developmental genes independently of H3K9
trimethylation in mouse ES cells.

Fei Q(1), Yang X(2), Jiang H(1), Wang Q(2), Yu Y(1), Yu Y(1), Yi W(1), Zhou S(1),
Chen T(3), Lu C(1), Atadja P(1), Liu XS(4), Li E(1), Zhang Y(2), Shou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)China Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Shanghai 201203, China;
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Signaling and Disease Research, School of Life
Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China; (3)Novartis
Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA;
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

SETDB1, a histone methyltransferase responsible for methylation of histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9), is involved in maintenance of embryonic stem (ES) cells and
early embryonic development of the mouse. However, how SETDB1 regulates gene
expression during development is largely unknown. Here, we characterized
genome-wide SETDB1 binding and H3K9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) profiles in mouse ES
cells and uncovered two distinct classes of SETDB1 binding sites, termed solo and
ensemble peaks. The solo peaks were devoid of H3K9me3 and enriched near
developmental regulators while the ensemble peaks were associated with H3K9me3. A
subset of the SETDB1 solo peaks, particularly those near neural
development-related genes, was found to be associated with Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) as well as PRC2-interacting proteins JARID2 and MTF2. Genetic
deletion of Setdb1 reduced EZH2 binding as well as histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
trimethylation level at SETDB1 solo peaks and facilitated neural differentiation.
Furthermore, we found that H3K27me3 inhibits SETDB1 methyltransferase activity.
The currently identified reciprocal action between SETDB1 and PRC2 reveals a
novel mechanism underlying ES cell pluripotency and differentiation regulation.

© 2015 Fei et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4561491
PMID: 26160163  [PubMed - in process]


280. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 8;5:11724. doi: 10.1038/srep11724.

Bridging Links between Long Noncoding RNA HOTAIR and HPV Oncoprotein E7 in
Cervical Cancer Pathogenesis.

Sharma S(1), Mandal P(1), Sadhukhan T(1), Roy Chowdhury R(2), Ranjan Mondal N(2),
Chakravarty B(2), Chatterjee T(2), Roy S(3), Sengupta S(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Netaji Subhas Sanatorium, 2nd
Floor, P.O. N.S.S, Kalyani 741251, West Bengal, India. (2)Department of
Gynecology, Saroj Gupta Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Kolkata,India.
(3)Sri Aurobindo Seva Kendra, 1H, Gariahat Road (S) Jodhpur Park, Kolkata-700068,
West Bengal, India.

Human Papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 oncoprotein E7 plays a major role in cervical 
carcinogenesis by interacting with and functionally inactivating various host
regulatory molecules. Long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) HOTAIR is one such regulator
that recruits chromatin remodelling complex PRC2, creating gene silencing
H3K27<U+2009>me3 marks. Hence, we hypothesized that HOTAIR could be a potential target
of E7, in HPV16 related cervical cancers (CaCx). We identified significant linear
trend of progressive HOTAIR down-regulation through HPV negative controls, HPV16 
positive non-malignants and CaCx samples. Majority of CaCx cases portrayed HOTAIR
down-regulation in comparison to HPV negative controls, with corresponding
up-regulation of HOTAIR target, HOXD10, and enrichment of cancer related
pathways. However, a small subset had significantly higher HOTAIR expression,
concomitant with high E7 expression and enrichment of metastatic pathways.
Expression of HOTAIR and PRC2-complex members (EZH2 and SUZ12), showed
significant positive correlation with E7 expression in CaCx cases and E7
transfected C33A cell line, suggestive of interplay between E7 and HOTAIR.
Functional inactivation of HOTAIR by direct interaction with E7 could also be
predicted by in silico analysis and confirmed by RNA-Immunoprecipitation. Our
study depicts one of the causal mechanisms of cervical carcinogenesis by HPV16
E7, through modulation of HOTAIR expression and function.

PMCID: PMC4495428
PMID: 26152361  [PubMed - in process]


281. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3883-92. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1501662112. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

Long noncoding RNA derived from CD244 signaling epigenetically controls CD8+
T-cell immune responses in tuberculosis infection.

Wang Y(1), Zhong H(1), Xie X(1), Chen CY(2), Huang D(2), Shen L(2), Zhang H(3),
Chen ZW(2), Zeng G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Key Laboratory for
Tropical Diseases Control of the Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China; (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for
Primate Biomedical Research, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago,
IL 60612; (3)Institute of Human Virology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Key
Laboratory for Tropical Diseases Control of the Ministry of Education, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (4)Department of Microbiology,
Zhongshan School of Medicine, Key Laboratory for Tropical Diseases Control of the
Ministry of Education, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China;
zenggch@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Molecular mechanisms for T-cell immune responses modulated by T cell-inhibitory
molecules during tuberculosis (TB) infection remain unclear. Here, we show that
active human TB infection up-regulates CD244 and CD244 signaling-associated
molecules in CD8(+) T cells and that blockade of CD244 signaling enhances
production of IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF-a. CD244 expression/signaling in TB correlates with
high levels of a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA)-BC050410 [named as
lncRNA-AS-GSTT1(1-72) or lncRNA-CD244] in the CD244(+)CD8(+) T-cell
subpopulation. CD244 signaling drives lncRNA-CD244 expression via sustaining a
permissive chromatin state in the lncRNA-CD244 locus. By recruiting polycomb
protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) to infg/tnfa promoters, lncRNA-CD244
mediates H3K27 trimethylation at infg/tnfa loci toward repressive chromatin
states and inhibits IFN-<U+03B3>/TNF-a expression in CD8(+) T cells. Such inhibition can
be reversed by knock down of lncRNA-CD244. Interestingly, adoptive transfer of
lncRNA-CD244-depressed CD8(+) T cells to Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(MTB)-infected mice reduced MTB infection and TB pathology compared with
lncRNA-CD244-expressed controls. Thus, this work uncovers previously unidentified
mechanisms in which T cell-inhibitory signaling and lncRNAs regulate T-cell
responses and host defense against TB infection.

PMCID: PMC4517270
PMID: 26150504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jul 2;6:e1802. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.150.

LincHOTAIR epigenetically silences miR34a by binding to PRC2 to promote the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human gastric cancer.

Liu YW(1), Sun M(1), Xia R(1), Zhang EB(2), Liu XH(1), Zhang ZH(3), Xu TP(3), De 
W(1), Liu BR(4), Wang ZX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. (2)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital
of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. (3)Department of
Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, PR China. (4)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.

lncRNAs play important roles in the epigenetic regulation of carcinogenesis and
progression. Previous studies suggest that HOTAIR contributes to gastric cancer
(GC) development, and the overexpression of HOTAIR predicts a poor prognosis. In 
this study, we found that HOTAIR was more highly expressed in diffuse-type GC
than in intestinal type (P=0.048). In the diffuse type, there is significant
relationship between HOTAIR expression and DFS (P<0.001). CDH1 was downregulated 
in diffuse-type GC tissues (P=0.0007) and showed a negative relationship with
HOTAIR (r(2)=0.154, P=0.0354). In addition, HOTAIR knockdown significantly
repressed migration, invasion and metastasis both in vitro and vivo and reversed 
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in GC cells. We also showed that HOTAIR 
recruiting and binding to PRC2 epigenetically represses miR34a, which controls
the targets C-Met (HGF/C-Met/Snail pathway) and Snail, thus contributing to GC
cell-EMT process and accelerating tumor metastasis. Moreover, it is demonstrated 
that HOTAIR crosstalk with microRNAs during epigenetic regulation. Our results
suggest that HOTAIR acts as an EMT regulator and may be a candidate prognostic
biomarker and a target for new therapies in GC patients.

PMCID: PMC4650715
PMID: 26136075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Sep 18;43(16):7838-49. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv667. Epub 2015
Jun 29.

DDB2 modulates TGF-ß signal transduction in human ovarian cancer cells by
downregulating NEDD4L.

Zhao R(1), Cui T(1), Han C(1), Zhang X(2), He J(1), Srivastava AK(1), Yu J(3),
Wani AA(4), Wang QE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiobiology, Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University
Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio
State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (3)Comprehensive
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. (4)Division of Radiobiology, Department of Radiology, The Ohio State 
University Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Comprehensive Cancer Center,
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(5)Division of Radiobiology, Department of Radiology, The Ohio State University
Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio
State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
qi-en.wang@osumc.edu.

The expression of DNA damage-binding protein 2 (DDB2) has been linked to the
prognosis of ovarian cancer and its underlying transcription regulatory function 
was proposed to contribute to the favorable treatment outcome. By applying gene
microarray analysis, we discovered neural precursor cell expressed,
developmentally downregulated 4-Like (NEDD4L) as a previously unidentified
downstream gene regulated by DDB2. Mechanistic investigation demonstrated that
DDB2 can bind to the promoter region of NEDD4L and recruit enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 histone methyltransferase to repress NEDD4L transcription by enhancing 
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) at the NEDD4L promoter. Given that
NEDD4L plays an important role in constraining transforming growth factor ß
signaling by targeting activated Smad2/Smad3 for degradation, we investigated the
role of DDB2 in the regulation of TGF-ß signaling in ovarian cancer cells. Our
data indicate that DDB2 enhances TGF-ß signal transduction and increases the
responsiveness of ovarian cancer cells to TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition. The
study has uncovered an unappreciated regulatory mode that hinges on the
interaction between DDB2 and NEDD4L in human ovarian cancer cells. The novel
mechanism proposes the DDB2-mediated fine-tuning of TGF-ß signaling and its
downstream effects that impinge upon tumor growth in ovarian cancers.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4652750
PMID: 26130719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2015;19(11):1419-22. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2015.1062879. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Potential therapeutic targets in ARID1A-mutated cancers.

Bitler BG(1), Fatkhutdinov N(1,)(2), Zhang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a 1 The Wistar Institute, Gene Expression and Regulation Program , Room 312,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA +1 215 495 6840 ; rzhang@wistar.org. (2)b 2 Kazan
Federal University , Kazan, Russia.

ARID1A is a subunit of the Switch/Sucrose Non-Fermentable (SWI/SNF)
chromatin-remodeling complex that regulates gene expression by controlling gene
accessibility. ARID1A shows one of the highest mutation rates across different
human cancer types. For example, ARID1A is mutated in ~ 50% of ovarian clear cell
carcinoma (OCCC). There is considerable interest in developing cancer
therapeutics that correlate with ARID1A mutational status. A recent study
demonstrated a synthetic lethality by targeting EZH2 histone methyltransferase
activity in ARID1A-mutated OCCC using a clinically applicable small-molecule
inhibitor. The observed synthetic lethality correlated with inhibition of
PI3K/AKT signaling. In addition, there is evidence indicating that ARID1A-mutated
cancer may also be subjected to therapeutic intervention by targeting residual
SWI/SNF activity, the PI3K/AKT pathway, the DNA damage response, the tumor
immunological microenvironment and stabilizing wild-type p53. In summary, we
propose EZH2 inhibitor-based combinatorial strategies for targeting
ARID1A-mutated cancers.

PMCID: PMC4674066
PMID: 26125128  [PubMed - in process]


285. Exp Hematol. 2015 Nov;43(11):930-935.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.06.005. Epub 
2015 Jun 26.

Inactivation of Eed impedes MLL-AF9-mediated leukemogenesis through
Cdkn2a-dependent and Cdkn2a-independent mechanisms in a murine model.

Danis E(1), Yamauchi T(1), Echanique K(1), Haladyna J(1), Kalkur R(1), Riedel
S(1), Zhu N(2), Xie H(3), Bernt KM(1), Orkin SH(3), Armstrong SA(2), Neff T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora,
CO, USA; Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, Zuckerman Research Center, New York, NY, USA; Leukemia Service,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Zuckerman
Research Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Harvard Medical School and Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; Section of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO, USA. Electronic address:
Tobias.Neff@ucdenver.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a chromatin regulator with central roles 
in development and cancer. The canonical function of PRC2 is the trimethylation
of histone 3 on lysine residue 27. This epigenetic modification is associated
with gene silencing. Both tumor suppressor and oncogenic functions have been
reported for PRC2, depending on cellular context. In leukemia mediated by the
leukemogenic fusion MLL-AF9, complete ablation of canonical PRC2 function by
genetic inactivation of the core component embryonic ectoderm development (Eed)
or by combined pharmacologic inhibition of the PRC2 methyltransferases EZH2 and
EZH1 has a strong anti-leukemic effect, and this effect has been linked to
de-repression of the PRC2 target locus Cdkn2a. We asked whether inactivation of
Cdkn2a is sufficient to restore leukemic activity of Eed-inactivated MLL-AF9
leukemia cells, using combined genetic inactivation of Cdkn2a and Eed. We found
that Cdkn2a inactivation partially rescues in vitro and in vivo growth of
Eed-inactivated MLL-AF9 cells. However, the growth of Eed-null Cdkn2a-null
MLL-AF9 cells in the absence of Cdkn2a remained severely compromised in vitro and
in vivo, compared with that of their Eed-floxed Cdkn2a-null counterparts. RNA
sequencing analysis revealed that several genes previously implicated in
inefficient growth of MLL-AF9-transformed cells, including Gata2, Egr1, and
Cdkn2b were de-repressed as a consequence of Eed inactivation. Furthermore, we
found that direct binding targets of MLL fusion proteins are negatively enriched 
in Eed-inactivated Cdkn2a-null MLL-AF9-transformed cells. Our data indicate that 
interference with PRC2 function affects MLL-AF9-mediated leukemogenesis by both
Cdkn2a-dependent and Cdkn2a-independent mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4630114 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26118502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2015 Sep 18;77:290-302. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.06.021. Epub
2015 Jun 25.

Preclinical pharmacokinetic studies of 3-deazaneplanocin A, a potent epigenetic
anticancer agent, and its human pharmacokinetic prediction using GastroPlus.

Sun F(1), Lee L(2), Zhang Z(3), Wang X(3), Yu Q(4), Duan X(5), Chan E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, 18 Science Drive,
Singapore 117543, Singapore; Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, National
University of Singapore, 10 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(2)Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 10 Medical Drive,
Singapore 117597, Singapore. (3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, National 
University of Singapore, 10 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore. (4)Cancer
Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A(*)STAR (Agency for
Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, Guilin Medical University, 109 Huancheng Road, Guilin 541004, PR
China; Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, National University of Singapore, 
10 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore. Electronic address:
xqduan9288@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Pharmacy, National University of
Singapore, 18 Science Drive, Singapore 117543, Singapore. Electronic address:
eli.w.y.chan@gmail.com.

DZNep is a potential epigenetic drug, and exerts potent anti-proliferative and
pro-apoptotic effects on broad-spectrum carcinomas via disruption of the EZH2
pathway. Antitumor studies on DZNep have been stuck in the preclinical phase
because of the lack of information about its integral pharmacokinetic (PK)
properties. To circumvent this problem, we extensively investigated the
disposition characteristics of the DZNep in rats. By incorporating the
disposition data across species into a whole-body physiologically based
pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models using the GastroPlus(TM) software, we simulated
human PK properties of DZNep and determined whether DZNep could be developed for 
human cancer therapy. Firstly, DZNep was found to cause nephrotoxicity in a
dose-dependent manner in rats and its safe dose was determined to be 10mg/kg.
DZNep showed a short plasma elimination half-life (1.1h) in rats, a low protein
binding in plasma (18.5%), a low partitioning to erythrocyte (0.78), and a low
intrinsic hepatic clearance in rats and humans. There was extensive tissue
distribution and predominant renal excretion (80.3%). The simulated rat PBPK
model of DZNep was well-verified with satisfactory coefficients of determination 
for all the tested tissues (R(2)>0.781). The simulated human PBPK model
successfully identified that intravenous administration of DZNep at appropriate
dosing regimen could be further developed for human non-small cell lung carcinoma
treatments. The present findings provide valuable information regarding
experimental or in silico PK characteristics of DZNep in rats and humans, which
is helpful to guide future studies of DZNep in both preclinical and clinical
phases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116990  [PubMed - in process]


287. Semin Hematol. 2015 Jul;52(3):172-83. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2015.04.003.
Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Epigenetic Therapy in Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Current and Future Directions.

Kim TK(1), Gore SD(1), Zeidan AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School
of Medicine, and Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New Haven Hospital, New Haven,
CT. (2)Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, and Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New Haven Hospital, New
Haven, CT. Electronic address: amer.zeidan@yale.edu.

Epigenetic modifications affect gene expression without changes in the actual DNA
sequence. Two of the most important mechanisms include DNA methylation and
histone tail modifications (especially acetylation and methylation). Epigenetic
modulation is a part of normal physiologic development; its dysregulation is an
important mechanism of pathogenesis of some cancers, including acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Despite significant progress in understanding the pathogenesis of
AML, therapeutic options remain quite limited. Technological advances have
facilitated understanding of aberrant DNA methylation and histone
methylation/acetylation as key elements in the development of AML and uncovered
several recurrent mutations in genes important for epigenetic regulation.
However, much remains to be learned about how to exploit this knowledge for
epigenetic therapeutic targeting. Currently, no epigenetic therapy is approved
for the treatment of AML, although two DNA methyltransferase inhibitors
(azacitidine and decitabine) are commonly used in clinical practice. Among the
other epigenetic modifiers undergoing research in AML, the histone deacetylase
inhibitors are the most studied. Other promising drugs, such as inhibitors of
histone methylation (eg, EZH2 and DOT1L inhibitors), inhibitors of histone
demethylases (eg, LSD1 inhibitors), inhibitors of bromodomain-containing
epigenetic "reader" BET proteins, and inhibitors of mutant isocitrate
dehydrogenases, are at early stages of clinical evaluation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26111464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 14;464(1):256-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.136. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

A new kinetochore component CENP-W interacts with the polycomb-group protein EZH2
to promote gene silencing.

Koh W(1), Park B(1), Lee S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea. 
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, College of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of Korea. 
Electronic address: leesoojin@cnu.ac.kr.

Polycomb recessive complex 2 (PRC2) plays a central roles in chromatin compaction
and remodeling. EZH2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2, is frequently overexpressed 
in many human tumors. Together with another essential core component, SUZ12, EZH2
trimethylates histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3). CENP-W was originally
identified as a putative oncogene overexpressed in various human tumors, and
later characterized as an essential factor for the formation of functional
kinetochore during mitosis. In this study, we found that CENP-W associates with
EZH2 to subsequently enhance the protein stability of EZH2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that ectopically expressed CENP-W bound the promoter
of EZH2 target genes to enhance EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression,
possibly by facilitating the recruitment of EZH2 to its target genes.
Collectively, this study suggests CENP-W is a novel kinetochore component that
may be involved in the EZH2-mediated silencing machinery.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26111449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. BMC Genomics. 2015;16 Suppl 8:S5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-16-S8-S5. Epub 2015 Jun 
18.

Bioinformatics analysis of thousands of TCGA tumors to determine the involvement 
of epigenetic regulators in human cancer.

Gnad F, Doll S, Manning G, Arnott D, Zhang Z.

BACKGROUND: Many cancer cells show distorted epigenetic landscapes. The Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA) project profiles thousands of tumors, allowing the discovery 
of somatic alterations in the epigenetic machinery and the identification of
potential cancer drivers among members of epigenetic protein families.
METHODS: We integrated mutation, expression, and copy number data from 5943
tumors from 13 cancer types to train a classification model that predicts the
likelihood of being an oncogene (OG), tumor suppressor (TSG) or neutral gene
(NG). We applied this predictor to epigenetic regulator genes (ERGs), and used
differential expression and correlation network analysis to identify dysregulated
ERGs along with co-expressed cancer genes. Furthermore, we quantified global
proteomic changes by mass spectrometry after EZH2 inhibition.
RESULTS: Mutation-based classifiers uncovered the OG-like profile of DNMT3A and
TSG-like profiles for several ERGs. Differential gene expression and correlation 
network analyses revealed that EZH2 is the most significantly over-expressed ERG 
in cancer and is co-regulated with a cell cycle network. Proteomic analysis
showed that EZH2 inhibition induced down-regulation of cell cycle regulators in
lymphoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Using classical driver genes to train an OG/TSG predictor, we
determined the most predictive features at the gene level. Our predictor
uncovered one OG and several TSGs among ERGs. Expression analyses elucidated
multiple dysregulated ERGs including EZH2 as member of a co-expressed cell cycle 
network.

PMCID: PMC4480953
PMID: 26110843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jun 21;21(23):7208-17. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i23.7208.

Long noncoding RNAs in hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yu TT(1), Xu XM(1), Hu Y(1), Deng JJ(1), Ge W(1), Han NN(1), Zhang MX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ting-Ting Yu, Xi-Ming Xu, Yi Hu, Jun-Jian Deng, Wei Ge, Na-Na Han, Mei-Xia
Zhang, Cancer Center, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060, Hubei
Province, China.

AIM: To study the expression of long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) in hepatitis B
virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: The lncRNA profiles between HBV-related HCC tissues and corresponding
normal liver tissues were generated using microarray analysis. Datasets were
analyzed using multiple algorithms to depict alterations in gene expression on
the basis of gene ontology (GO), pathway analysis, and lncRNA levels.
RESULTS: The microarray revealed that 1772 lncRNAs and 2508 mRNAs were
differently expressed. The pathway analysis demonstrated that the cell cycle,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, chemokine signaling pathway, and
phosphoinositide 3-kinase-protein kinase B signaling pathway may play important
roles in HCC. Several GO terms, such as cell cycle, DNA replication, immune
response, and signal transduction, were enriched in gene lists, suggesting a
potential correlation with HBV-related HCC. The upregulated large intergenic
noncoding RNA ULK4P2 was physically combined with enhancer of zeste homolog 2.
Therefore, the lncRNAs may participate in regulating HBV-related HCC.
CONCLUSION: lncRNAs play important roles in HCC, future studies should verify
whether large intergenic noncoding ULK4P2 functions by combining with enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 in HCC.

PMCID: PMC4476882
PMID: 26109807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 Jun 24;18(12). pii: pyv069. doi:
10.1093/ijnp/pyv069.

Expression and Dendritic Trafficking of BDNF-6 Splice Variant are Impaired in
Knock-In Mice Carrying Human BDNF Val66Met Polymorphism.

Mallei A(1), Baj G(2), Ieraci A(2), Corna S(2), Musazzi L(2), Lee FS(2),
Tongiorgi E(2), Popoli M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology and Functional Neurogenomics -
Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari and Center of Excellence
on Neurodegenerative Diseases, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
(Drs Mallei, Ieraci, Corna, Musazzi, and Popoli); Department of Life Sciences,
BRAIN Centre for Neuroscience, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy (Drs Baj and
Tongiorgi); Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College Cornell
University, New York, NY (Dr Lee). alessandra.mallei@unimi.it. (2)Laboratory of
Neuropsychopharmacology and Functional Neurogenomics - Dipartimento di Scienze
Farmacologiche e Biomolecolari and Center of Excellence on Neurodegenerative
Diseases, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy (Drs Mallei, Ieraci,
Corna, Musazzi, and Popoli); Department of Life Sciences, BRAIN Centre for
Neuroscience, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy (Drs Baj and Tongiorgi);
Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College Cornell University, New
York, NY (Dr Lee).

BACKGROUND: The human Val66Met polymorphism in brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF), a key factor in neuroplasticity, synaptic function, and cognition, has
been implicated in the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative 
disorders. BDNF is encoded by multiple transcripts with distinct regulation and
localization, but the impact of the Val66Met polymorphism on BDNF regulation
remains unclear.
METHODS: In BDNF Val66Met knock-in mice, which recapitulate the phenotypic
hallmarks of individuals carrying the BDNF(Met) allele, we measured expression
levels, epigenetic changes at promoters, and dendritic trafficking of distinct
BDNF transcripts using quantitative PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP),
and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: BDNF-4 and BDNF-6 transcripts were reduced in BDNF(Met/Met) mice,
compared with BDNF(Val/Val) mice. ChIP for acetyl-histone H3, a marker of active 
gene transcription, and trimethyl-histone-H3-Lys27 (H3K27me3), a marker of gene
repression, showed higher H3K27me3 binding to exon 5, 6, and 8 promoters in
BDNF(Met/Met). The H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is 
involved in epigenetic regulation of BDNF expression, because in neuroblastoma
cells BDNF expression was increased both by short interference RNA for EZH2 and
incubation with 3-deazaneplanocin A, an inhibitor of EZH2. In situ hybridization 
for BDNF-2, BDNF-4, and BDNF-6 after pilocarpine treatment showed that BDNF-6
transcript was virtually absent from distal dendrites of the CA1 and CA3 regions 
in BDNF(Met/Met) mice, while no changes were found for BDNF-2 and BDNF-4.
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired BDNF expression and dendritic targeting in BDNF(Met/Met)
mice may contribute to reduced regulated secretion of BDNF at synapses, and may
be a specific correlate of pathology in individuals carrying the Met allele.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of CINP.

PMCID: PMC4675980
PMID: 26108221  [PubMed - in process]


292. Hum Genomics. 2015 Jun 24;9:14. doi: 10.1186/s40246-015-0036-0.

SIRT1 affects DNA methylation of polycomb group protein target genes, a hotspot
of the epigenetic shift observed in ageing.

Wakeling LA(1), Ions LJ(2), Escolme SM(3), Cockell SJ(4), Su T(5), Dey M(6),
Hampton EV(7), Jenkins G(8), Wainwright LJ(9), McKay JA(10), Ford D(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre,
Newcastle University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
luisa.wakeling@ncl.ac.uk. (2)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Human 
Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University Medical School, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. Laura.Ions@nuth.nhs.uk. (3)Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University Medical
School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. s.m.escolme@ncl.ac.uk. (4)Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2
4HH, UK. simon.cockell@ncl.ac.uk. (5)Institute for Cell and Molecular
Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University Medical
School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. t.su2@newcastle.ac.uk. (6)Institute for
Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle
University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. m.dey@ncl.ac.uk.
(7)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre,
Newcastle University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
emilyhampton5@gmail.com. (8)Unilever R&D, Colworth Discover, Colworth Science
Park, Sharnbrook, Bedfordshire, MK44 1LQ, UK. gail.jenkins@unilever.com.
(9)Unilever R&D, Colworth Discover, Colworth Science Park, Sharnbrook,
Bedfordshire, MK44 1LQ, UK. linda.wainwright@unilever.com. (10)Institute of
Health and Society, Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University Medical
School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK. jill.mckay@ncl.ac.uk. (11)Institute for
Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle
University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
dianne.ford@ncl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: SIRT1 is likely to play a role in the extension in healthspan induced
by dietary restriction. Actions of SIRT1 are pleiotropic, and effects on
healthspan may include effects on DNA methylation. Polycomb group protein target 
genes (PCGTs) are suppressed by epigenetic mechanisms in stem cells, partly
through the actions of the polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs), and have been
shown previously to correspond with loci particularly susceptible to age-related 
changes in DNA methylation. We hypothesised that SIRT1 would affect DNA
methylation particularly at PCGTs. To map the sites in the genome where SIRT1
affects DNA methylation, we altered SIRT1 expression in human intestinal (Caco-2)
and vascular endothelial (HuVEC) cells by transient transfection with an
expression construct or with siRNA. DNA was enriched for the methylated fraction 
then sequenced (HuVEC) or hybridised to a human promoter microarray (Caco-2).
RESULTS: The profile of genes where SIRT1 manipulation affected DNA methylation
was enriched for PCGTs in both cell lines, thus supporting our hypothesis. SIRT1 
knockdown affected the mRNA for none of seven PRC components nor for DNMT1 or
DNMT3b. We thus find no evidence that SIRT1 affects DNA methylation at PCGTs by
affecting the expression of these gene transcripts. EZH2, a component of PRC2
that can affect DNA methylation through association with DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs), did not co-immunoprecipitate with SIRT1, and SIRT1 knockdown did not
affect the expression of EZH2 protein. Thus, it is unlikely that the effects of
SIRT1 on DNA methylation at PCGTs are mediated through direct intermolecular
association with EZH2 or through effects in its expression.
CONCLUSIONS: SIRT1 affects DNA methylation across the genome, but particularly at
PCGTs. Although the mechanism through which SIRT1 has these effects is yet to be 
uncovered, this action is likely to contribute to extended healthspan, for
example under conditions of dietary restriction.

PMCID: PMC4480908
PMID: 26104761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Respir Res. 2015 Jun 24;16:75. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0239-x.

Hyperoxia-induced methylation decreases RUNX3 in a newborn rat model of
bronchopulmonary dysplasia.

Zhu Y(1), Fu J(2), Yang H(3), Pan Y(4), Yao L(5), Xue X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, 110004, China. tingtingyuli_911@126.com. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110004, China.
fujh@sj-hospital.org. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, 110004, China. 1789661042@qq.com. (4)Department of 
Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110004,
China. 13840222897@qq.com. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang, 110004, China. yaoli7915@126.com.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, 110004, China. xuexd@sj-hospital.org.

BACKGROUND: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) in premature infants is a
predominantly secondary occurrence to intrauterine inflammation/infection and
postpartum mechanical ventilation; in recent years, an association with
epigenetics has also been found. DNA methylation, catalyzed by DNA methyl
transferases (DNMTs), and tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3), 
mediated by the methyltransferase, Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), are some
of the most commonly found modifications in epigenetics. Runt-related
transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) is associated with pulmonary epithelial and
vascular development and regulates expression at the post-transcriptional level
by DNA methylation through DNMT1 or DNMT3b. However, the involvements of these
epigenetic factors in the occurrence of BPD are, as yet, unclear.
METHODS: Newborn rats were randomly assigned to a model, hyperoxia (85 % O2) or
control, normoxia group (21 % O2). Lung tissues and alveolar type 2 (AT2)
epithelial cells were collected between 1-14 days. The expression of DNMTs, and
EZH2 was detected by immunohistochemistry, Western blot and real-time PCR. The
percentage of DNA methylation and H3K27me3 levels in the RUNX3 promoter region
was measured by bisulfite sequencing PCR and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
RUNX3 protein and mRNA expression in AT2 cells was also measured after inhibition
using the DNA methylation inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine, the H3K27me3
inhibitor, JMJD3, and the EZH2 inhibitor, DZNep.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, RUNX3 protein was downregulated and
DNMT3b and EZH2 were highly expressed in lung tissues and AT2 cells of the model 
group (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), while high DNA methylation and H3K27me3 modifications were
present in the RUNX3 promoter region, in lung tissues of the model group
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Following hyperoxia in the model group, JMJD3 and DZNep significantly
reversed the hyperoxia-induced down-regulation of RUNX3 expression in AT2 cells
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), more so than 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: 1) DNA methylation and H3K27 trimethylation are present in the BPD
model; 2) RUNX3 down-regulation is attributed to both DNMT3b-catalyzed DNA
methylation and EZH2-catalyzed histone methylation.

PMCID: PMC4499173
PMID: 26104385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Neuropathology. 2015 Oct;35(5):421-31. doi: 10.1111/neup.12201. Epub 2015 Jun 12.

EZH2 expression in gliomas: Correlation with CDKN2A gene deletion/ p16 loss and
MIB-1 proliferation index.

Purkait S(1), Sharma V(1), Jha P(1), Sharma MC(1), Suri V(1), Suri A(2), Sharma
BS(2), Sarkar C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New 
Delhi, India. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, India.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) mediated down-regulation of CDKN2A/p16 has
been observed in cell lines as well as in a few carcinomas. However, there is no 
study correlating EZH2 expression with CDKN2A/p16 status in gliomas. Hence, the
present study was conducted to evaluate EZH2 expression in astrocytic and
oligodendroglial tumors and correlate with CDKN2A/p16 status as well as MIB-1
labeling index (LI). Gliomas of all grades (n = 118) were studied using
immunohistochemistry to assess EZH2, p16 and MIB-1 LI and fluorescence in situ
hybrization to evaluate CDKN2A gene status. EZH2 expression and CDKN2A homozygous
deletion (HD) were both significantly more frequent in high-grade gliomas (HGG). 
Further, strong EZH2 expression (LI = 25%) was significantly more common in HGGs 
without CDKN2A HD (48.7%; 19/39) as compared to cases with deletion (15.8%;
3/19). Loss of p16 expression was noted in 100% and 51.3% of CDKN2A deleted and
non-deleted tumors, respectively. Notably, 80% (16/20) of the CDKN2A non-deleted 
HGGs with p16 loss had strong EZH2 expression, in contrast to only 15.8% (3/19)
in the deleted group. Loss of p16 expression significantly correlated with MIB-1 
LI, irrespective of EZH2 status. Thus, this study shows that EZH2 expression
correlates with tumor grade in both astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors and
hence can be used as a diagnostic marker to differentiate between low and HGGs.
Further, this is the first report demonstrating an inverse correlation of strong 
EZH2 expression with CDKN2A HD in HGGs. Loss of p16 protein expression is mostly 
attributable to CDKN2A HD and correlates significantly with MIB-1 LI. Notably,
our study for the first time suggests a possible epigenetic mechanism of p16 loss
in CDKN2A non-deleted HGGs mediated by strong EZH2 expression. A hypothetical
model for control of proliferative activity in low versus HGGs is therefore
proposed.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 26096306  [PubMed - in process]


295. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 19;5:10643. doi: 10.1038/srep10643.

EZH2 is crucial for both differentiation of regulatory T cells and T effector
cell expansion.

Yang XP(1), Jiang K(2), Hirahara K(2), Vahedi G(2), Afzali B(3), Sciume G(2),
Bonelli M(2), Sun HW(4), Jankovic D(5), Kanno Y(2), Sartorelli V(6), O'Shea
JJ(2), Laurence A(7).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medicine, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China [2]
Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch
National Institutes of Arthritis, and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Lymphocyte Cell Biology
Section, Molecular Immunology and Inflammation Branch National Institutes of
Arthritis, and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)1] Lymphocyte Cell Biology Section, Molecular
Immunology and Inflammation Branch National Institutes of Arthritis, and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA [2] MRC Centre for Transplantation, King's College London, UK.
(4)Biodata Mining and Discovery Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1930, USA. (5)Immunobiology Section, Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. (6)Laboratory of Muscle
Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1930, USA. (7)1] Northern Centre for cancer care, Freeman hospital,
Newcastle upon tyne, UK [2] NDM Experimental medicine, John Radcliffe hospital,
Oxford, UK.

The roles of EZH2 in various subsets of CD4(+) T cells are controversial and its 
mechanisms of action are incompletely understood. FOXP3-positive Treg cells are a
critical helper T cell subset, and dysregulation of Treg generation or function
results in systemic autoimmunity. FOXP3 associates with EZH2 to mediate gene
repression and suppressive function. Herein, we demonstrate that deletion of Ezh2
in CD4 T cells resulted in reduced numbers of Treg cells in vivo and
differentiation in vitro and an increased proportion of memory CD4 T cells in
part due to exaggerated production of effector cytokines. Furthermore, we found
that both Ezh2-deficient Treg cells and T effector cells were functionally
impaired in vivo: Tregs failed to constrain autoimmune colitis and T effector
cells neither provided a protective response to T. gondii infection nor mediated 
autoimmune colitis. The dichotomous function of EZH2 in regulating
differentiation and senescence in effector and regulatory T cells helps to
explain the apparent existing contradictions in literature.

PMCID: PMC4473539
PMID: 26090605  [PubMed - in process]


296. Breast Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 18;17:85. doi: 10.1186/s13058-015-0585-0.

Integration of microRNA signatures of distinct mammary epithelial cell types with
their gene expression and epigenetic portraits.

Pal B(1,)(2), Chen Y(3,)(4), Bert A(5), Hu Y(6), Sheridan JM(7,)(8), Beck
T(9,)(10), Shi W(11,)(12), Satterley K(13), Jamieson P(14,)(15), Goodall
GJ(16,)(17), Lindeman GJ(18,)(19,)(20), Smyth GK(21,)(22), Visvader JE(23,)(24).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. pal@wehi.edu.au. (2)Department
of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
pal@wehi.edu.au. (3)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. yuchen@wehi.edu.au. (4)Bioinformatics Division, 
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052,
Australia. yuchen@wehi.edu.au. (5)Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and
University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, 5000, Australia.
andrew.bert@health.sa.gov.au. (6)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
hu@wehi.edu.au. (7)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
sheridan@wehi.edu.au. (8)Department of Medical Biology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. sheridan@wehi.edu.au. (9)ACRF Stem
Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. mclennan@wehi.edu.au. (10)Department
of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
mclennan@wehi.edu.au. (11)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. shi@wehi.edu.au. 
(12)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. shi@wehi.edu.au. (13)Bioinformatics Division,
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052,
Australia. keith@wehi.edu.au. (14)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
jamieson.p@wehi.eu.au. (15)Department of Medical Biology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. jamieson.p@wehi.eu.au. (16)Centre for
Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA,
5000, Australia. Greg.Goodall@health.sa.gov.au. (17)School of Medicine and School
of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, 
Australia. Greg.Goodall@health.sa.gov.au. (18)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer
Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
VIC, 3052, Australia. lindeman@wehi.edu.au. (19)Department of Medicine, The
University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. lindeman@wehi.edu.au.
(20)Department of Medical Oncology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC,
3010, Australia. lindeman@wehi.edu.au. (21)Bioinformatics Division, The Walter
and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
smyth@wehi.edu.au. (22)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia. smyth@wehi.edu.au. (23)ACRF Stem
Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. visvader@wehi.edu.au. (24)Department
of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, 3010, Australia.
visvader@wehi.edu.au.

INTRODUCTION: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in governing lineage
specification and differentiation in multiple organs; however, little is known
about their specific roles in mammopoiesis. We have determined the global miRNA
expression profiles of functionally distinct epithelial subpopulations in mouse
and human mammary tissue, and compared these to their cognate transcriptomes and 
epigenomes. Finally, the human miRNA signatures were used to interrogate the
different subtypes of breast cancer, with a view to determining miRNA networks
deregulated during oncogenesis.
METHODS: RNA from sorted mouse and human mammary cell subpopulations was
subjected to miRNA expression analysis using the TaqMan MicroRNA Array.
Differentially expressed (DE) miRNAs were correlated with gene expression and
histone methylation profiles. Analysis of miRNA signatures of the intrinsic
subtypes of breast cancer in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database versus those
of normal human epithelial subpopulations was performed.
RESULTS: Unique miRNA signatures characterized each subset (mammary stem cell
(MaSC)/basal, luminal progenitor, mature luminal, stromal), with a high degree of
conservation across species. Comparison of miRNA and transcriptome profiles for
the epithelial subtypes revealed an inverse relationship and pinpointed key
developmental genes. Interestingly, expression of the primate-specific miRNA
cluster (19q13.4) was found to be restricted to the MaSC/basal subset.
Comparative analysis of miRNA signatures with H3 lysine modification maps of the 
different epithelial subsets revealed a tight correlation between active or
repressive marks for the top DE miRNAs, including derepression of miRNAs in
Ezh2-deficient cellular subsets. Interrogation of TCGA-identified miRNA profiles 
with the miRNA signatures of different human subsets revealed specific
relationships.
CONCLUSIONS: The derivation of global miRNA expression profiles for the different
mammary subpopulations provides a comprehensive resource for understanding the
interplay between miRNA networks and target gene expression. These data have
highlighted lineage-specific miRNAs and potential miRNA-mRNA networks, some of
which are disrupted in neoplasia. Furthermore, our findings suggest that key
developmental miRNAs are regulated by global changes in histone modification,
thus linking the mammary epigenome with genome-wide changes in the expression of 
genes and miRNAs. Comparative miRNA signature analyses between normal breast
epithelial cells and breast tumors confirmed an important linkage between luminal
progenitor cells and basal-like tumors.

PMCID: PMC4497411
PMID: 26080807  [PubMed - in process]


297. Epigenomics. 2015;7(3):337-41. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.14.

Small molecule inhibitors of EZH2: the emerging translational landscape.

Keilhack H(1), Smith JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.

PMID: 26077423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2015 May 27;6:78. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2015.00078.
eCollection 2015.

TR4 Nuclear Receptor Different Roles in Prostate Cancer Progression.

Lin SJ(1), Yang DR(2), Li G(3), Chang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical 
Center , Rochester, NY , USA. (2)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center , Rochester, NY , USA ; Department
of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University , Soochow ,
China. (3)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology,
Urology, Radiation Oncology and the Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester
Medical Center , Rochester, NY , USA ; Department of Urology, Sir-Run Run Shaw
Hospital, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou , China. (4)George Whipple Lab for
Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology and the
Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center , Rochester, NY ,
USA ; Sex Hormone Research Center, China Medical University Hospital , Taichung ,
Taiwan.

Nuclear receptors are important to maintain the tissue homeostasis. Each receptor
is tightly controlled and under a very complicated balance. In this review, we
summarize the current findings regarding the nuclear receptor TR4 and its role in
prostate cancer (PCa) progression. In general, TR4 can inhibit the PCa
carcinogenesis. However, when PPAR<U+03B3> is knocked out, activation of TR4 can have an
opposite effect to promote the PCa carcinogenesis. Clinical data also indicates
that higher TR4 expression is found in PCa tissues with high Gleason scores
compared to those tissues with low Gleason scores. In vitro and in vivo studies
show that TR4 can promote PCa progression. Mechanism dissection indicates that
TR4 inhibits PCa carcinogenesis through regulating the tumor suppressor ATM to
reduce DNA damages. On the other hand, in the absence of PPAR<U+03B3>, TR4 tends to
increase the stem cell population and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via
regulating CCL2, Oct4, EZH2, and miRNA-373-3p expression that results in
increased PCa carcinogenesis. In opposition to PCa initiation, TR4 can increase
PCa metastasis via modulating the CCL2 signals. Finally, targeting TR4 enhances
the chemotherapy and radiation therapy sensitivity in PCa. Together, these data
suggest TR4 is a key player to control PCa progression, and targeting TR4 with
small molecules may provide us a new and better therapy to suppress PCa
progression.

PMCID: PMC4445305
PMID: 26074876  [PubMed]


299. Blood. 2015 Aug 20;126(8):1005-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-04-643361. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Recurrent CDKN1B (p27) mutations in hairy cell leukemia.

Dietrich S(1), Hüllein J(2), Lee SC(3), Hutter B(4), Gonzalez D(5), Jayne S(6),
Dyer MJ(6), Oles M(7), Else M(8), Liu X(2), Slabicki M(2), Wu B(2), Troussard
X(9), Dürig J(10), Andrulis M(11), Dearden C(12), von Kalle C(13), Granzow M(14),
Jauch A(14), Fröhling S(2), Huber W(7), Meggendorfer M(15), Haferlach T(15), Ho
AD(16), Richter D(2), Brors B(4), Glimm H(2), Matutes E(12), Abdel Wahab O(3),
Zenz T(17).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine V, University Hospital Heidelberg, Genome Biology Unit,
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, and Department of Translational Oncology, 
National Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany; (2)Department of Translational Oncology, National Center for
Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany;
(3)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Leukemia Service, Department of
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; (4)Division
Applied Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany; (5)Centre for Molecular Pathology, Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust,
London, United Kingdom; (6)Ernest and Helen Scott Hematological Research
Institute, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; (7)Genome Biology 
Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, and. (8)Division of Molecular
Pathology, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom;
(9)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, CHU Côte de Nacre, Caen, France; (10)Department of 
Hematology, University Hospital, Essen, Germany; (11)Department of General
Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany;
(12)Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom; (13)Department of
Translational Oncology, National Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Heidelberg Center for Personalized
Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; 
(14)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany; and. (15)Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. (16)Department of 
Medicine V, University Hospital Heidelberg. (17)Department of Medicine V,
University Hospital Heidelberg, Department of Translational Oncology, National
Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany;

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(18):2865-6.
    Blood. 2015 Aug 20;126(8):930-1.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is marked by near 100% mutational frequency of
BRAFV600E mutations. Recurrent cooperating genetic events that may contribute to 
HCL pathogenesis or affect the clinical course of HCL are currently not
described. Therefore, we performed whole exome sequencing to explore the
mutational landscape of purine analog refractory HCL. In addition to the
disease-defining BRAFV600E mutations, we identified mutations in EZH2, ARID1A,
and recurrent inactivating mutations of the cell cycle inhibitor CDKN1B (p27).
Targeted deep sequencing of CDKN1B in a larger cohort of HCL patients identify
deleterious CDKN1B mutations in 16% of patients with HCL (n = 13 of 81). In 11 of
13 patients the CDKN1B mutation was clonal, implying an early role of CDKN1B
mutations in the pathogenesis of HCL. CDKN1B mutations were not found to impact
clinical characteristics or outcome in this cohort. These data identify HCL as
having the highest frequency of CDKN1B mutations among cancers and identify
CDNK1B as the second most common mutated gene in HCL. Moreover, given the known
function of CDNK1B, these data suggest a novel role for alterations in regulation
of cell cycle and senescence in HCL with CDKN1B mutations.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26065650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2015 May;13(4):221-34. doi: 10.1089/adt.2015.646.

Development and Use of Assay Conditions Suited to Screening for and Profiling of 
SET-Domain-Targeted Inhibitors of the MLL/SET1 Family of Lysine
Methyltransferases.

Ferry JJ(1), Smith RF(2), Denney N(2), Walsh CP(2), McCauley L(2), Qian J(3), Ma 
H(2), Horiuchi KY(1), Howitz KT(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry, Reaction Biology Corporation , Malvern,
Pennsylvania. (2)2 Department of Protein Sciences, Reaction Biology Corporation ,
Malvern, Pennsylvania. (3)3 Department of Cell Biology, Reaction Biology
Corporation , Malvern, Pennsylvania.

Methylation of histone H3 lysine-4 (H3K4) is an important, regulatory, epigenetic
post-translational modification associated with actively transcribed genes. In
humans, the principal mediators of this modification are part of the MLL/SET1
family of methyltransferases, which comprises six members, MLLs1-4 and
SET1A/SET1B. Aberrations in the structure, expression, and regulation of these
enzymes are implicated in various disease states, making them important potential
targets for drug discovery, particularly for oncology indications. The MLL/SET1
family members are most enzymatically active when part of a "core complex," the
catalytic SET-domain-containing subunits bound to a subcomplex consisting of the 
proteins WDR5, RbBP5, Ash2L and a homodimer of DPY-30 (WRAD2). The necessity of
MLL/SET1 members to bind WRAD2 for full activity is the basis of a particular
drug development strategy, which seeks to disrupt the interaction between the
MLL/SET1 subunits and WDR5. This strategy is not without its theoretical and
practical drawbacks, some of which relate to the ease with which complexes of
Escherichia coli-expressed MLL/SET1 and WRAD2 fall apart. As an alternative
strategy, we explore ways to stabilize the complex, focusing on the use of an
excess of WRAD2 to drive the binding equilibria toward complex formation while
maintaining low concentrations of the catalytic subunits. The purpose of this
approach is to seek inhibitors that bind the SET domain, an approach proven
successful with the related, but inherently more stable, enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) complex.

PMCID: PMC4490707 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26065558  [PubMed - in process]


301. Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:42-5. doi: 10.1002/hon.2215.

VII. Are lymphomas driven by epigenetic lesions?

Boss IW(1), Melnick AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sandra and Edward Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY, USA.

PMID: 26062053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. BMC Med Genomics. 2015;8 Suppl 2:S6. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-8-S2-S6. Epub 2015
May 29.

Identification of epigenetic modifications that contribute to pathogenesis in
therapy-related AML: Effective integration of genome-wide histone modification
with transcriptional profiles.

Yang XH, Wang B, Cunningham JM.

BACKGROUND: Therapy-related, secondary acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML) is an
increasingly frequent complication of intensive chemotherapy. This malignancy is 
often characterized by abnormalities of chromosome 7, including large deletions
or chromosomal loss. A variety of studies suggest that decreased expression of
the EZH2 gene located at 7q36.1 is critical in disease pathogenesis. This histone
methyltransferase has been implicated in transcriptional repression through
modifying histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3k27). However, the critical target genes of 
EZH2 and their regulatory roles remain unclear.
METHOD: To characterize the subset of EZH2 target genes that might contribute to 
t-AML pathogenesis, we developed a novel computational analysis to integrate
tissue-specific histone modifications and genome-wide transcriptional regulation.
Initial integrative analysis utilized a novel "seq2gene" strategy to explore
largely the target genes of chromatin immuneprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq)
enriched regions. By combining seq2gene with our Phenotype-Genotype-Network
(PGNet) algorithm, we enriched genes with similar expression profiles and genomic
or functional characteristics into "biomodules".
RESULTS: Initial studies identified SEMA3A (semaphoring 3A) as a novel oncogenic 
candidate that is regulated by EZH2-silencing, using data derived from both
normal and leukemic cell lines as well as murine cells deficient in EZH2. A
microsatellite marker at the SEMA3A promoter has been associated with
chemosensitivity and radiosensitivity. Notably, our subsequent studies in primary
t-AML demonstrate an expected up-regulation of SEMA3A that is EZH2-modulated.
Furthermore, we have identified three biomodules that are co-expressed with
SEMA3A and up-regulated in t-AML, one of which consists of previously
characterized EZH2-repressed gene targets. The other two biomodules include MAPK8
and TATA box targets. Together, our studies suggest an important role for EZH2
targets in t-AML pathogenesis that warrants further study.
CONCLUSION: These developed computational algorithms and systems biology
strategies will enhance the knowledge discovery and hypothesis-driven analysis of
multiple next generation sequencing data, for t-AML and other complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC4460748
PMID: 26043758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Virol. 2015 Aug;89(16):8392-405. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00572-15. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

H3K27 Demethylation at the Proviral Promoter Sensitizes Latent HIV to the Effects
of Vorinostat in Ex Vivo Cultures of Resting CD4+ T Cells.

Tripathy MK(1), McManamy ME(1), Burch BD(1), Archin NM(1), Margolis DM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA Department of Epidemiology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA dmargo@med.unc.edu.

Histone methyltransferase inhibitors (HMTis) and histone deacetylase inhibitors
(HDACis) are reported to synergistically induce the expression of latent human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), but studies have largely been performed
with cell lines. As specific and potent HMTis directed at EZH1 (enhancer of zeste
2 Polycomb repressive complex 2 subunit 1)/EZH2 are now in human testing, we
wished to rigorously test such an inhibitor in a primary resting T-cell model of 
HIV latency. We found that GSK343, a potent and selective EZH2/EZH1 inhibitor,
reduced trimethylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27) of the HIV provirus in
resting cells. Remarkably, this epigenetic change was not associated with
increased proviral expression in latently infected resting cells. However,
following the reduction in H3K27 at the HIV long terminal repeat (LTR),
subsequent exposure to the HDACi suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid or vorinostat
(VOR) resulted in increases in HIV gag RNA and HIV p24 antigen production that
were up to 2.5-fold greater than those induced by VOR alone. Therefore, in
primary resting CD4(+) T cells, true mechanistic synergy in the reversal of HIV
latency may be achieved by the combination of HMTis and HDACis. Although other
cellular effects of EZH2 inhibition may contribute to the sensitization of the
HIV LTR to subsequent exposure to VOR, and to increase viral antigen production, 
this synergistic effect is directly associated with H3K27 demethylation at
nucleosome 1 (Nuc-1). Based upon our findings, the combination of HMTis and
HDACis should be considered for testing in animal models or clinical
trials.IMPORTANCE: Demethylation of H3K27 mediated by the histone
methyltransferase inhibitor GSK343 in primary resting T cells is slow, occurring 
over 96 h, but by itself does not result in a significant upregulation of
cell-associated HIV RNA expression or viral antigen production. However,
following H3K27 demethylation, latent viral expression within infected primary
resting CD4(+) T cells is synergistically increased upon exposure to the histone 
deacetylase inhibitor vorinostat. Demethylation at H3K27 sensitizes the HIV
promoter to the effects of an HDACi and provides a proof-of-concept for the
testing of combination epigenetic approaches to disrupt latent HIV infection, a
necessary step toward the eradication of HIV infection.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4524215
PMID: 26041287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 27;43(13):6236-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv567. Epub 2015
Jun 3.

A fine balance: epigenetic control of cellular quiescence by the tumor suppressor
PRDM2/RIZ at a bivalent domain in the cyclin a gene.

Cheedipudi S(1), Puri D(2), Saleh A(3), Gala HP(4), Rumman M(3), Pillai MS(5),
Sreenivas P(4), Arora R(5), Sellathurai J(6), Schrøder HD(6), Mishra RK(7),
Dhawan J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, National Center for
Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road, Bangalore 560065, India Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
Hyderabad 500 007, India Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Bad
Nauheim 61231, Germany. (2)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, National Center for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road,
Bangalore 560065, India Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics,
Freiburg D-79108, Germany. (3)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, National Center for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road,
Bangalore 560065, India Manipal University, Manipal 576104 India. (4)Institute
for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, National Center for Biological
Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road, Bangalore 560065, India Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 500 
007, India. (5)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine,
National Center for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road, Bangalore
560065, India. (6)Institute of Clinical Research, SDU Muscle Research Cluster
(SMRC), University of Southern Denmark, Odense 5000 C, Denmark. (7)Council of
Scientific and Industrial Research-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology,
Hyderabad 500 007, India. (8)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, National Center for Biological Sciences, GKVK Post, Bellary Road,
Bangalore 560065, India Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Centre for 
Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 500 007, India jdhawan@ncbs.res.in.

Adult stem cell quiescence is critical to ensure regeneration while minimizing
tumorigenesis. Epigenetic regulation contributes to cell cycle control and
differentiation, but few regulators of the chromatin state in quiescent cells are
known. Here we report that the tumor suppressor PRDM2/RIZ, an H3K9
methyltransferase, is enriched in quiescent muscle stem cells in vivo and
controls reversible quiescence in cultured myoblasts. We find that PRDM2
associates with >4400 promoters in G0 myoblasts, 55% of which are also marked
with H3K9me2 and enriched for myogenic, cell cycle and developmental regulators. 
Knockdown of PRDM2 alters histone methylation at key promoters such as Myogenin
and CyclinA2 (CCNA2), and subverts the quiescence program via global
de-repression of myogenesis, and hyper-repression of the cell cycle. Further,
PRDM2 acts upstream of the repressive PRC2 complex in G0. We identify a novel
G0-specific bivalent chromatin domain in the CCNA2 locus. PRDM2 protein interacts
with the PRC2 protein EZH2 and regulates its association with the bivalent domain
in the CCNA2 gene. Our results suggest that induction of PRDM2 in G0 ensures that
two antagonistic programs-myogenesis and the cell cycle-while stalled, are poised
for reactivation. Together, these results indicate that epigenetic regulation by 
PRDM2 preserves key functions of the quiescent state, with implications for stem 
cell self-renewal.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4513853
PMID: 26040698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 27;43(13):6270-84. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv574. Epub 2015
Jun 1.

PRC2 regulates RNA polymerase III transcribed non-translated RNA gene
transcription through EZH2 and SUZ12 interaction with TFIIIC complex.

Liu C(1), Li S(1), Dai X(1), Ma J(1), Wan J(1), Jiang H(1), Wang P(1), Liu Z(1), 
Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking
University Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China
Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy,
Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University
Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education
and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University
Health Science Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China Laboratory of
Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science
Center, #38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100191, China Hongquan.Zhang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Polycomb repression complex 2 (PRC2) component EZH2 tri-methylates H3K27 and
exerts epigenetic repression on target gene expression. EZH2-mediated epigenetic 
control of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcribed coding gene transcription has
been well established. However, little is known about EZH2-mediated epigenetic
regulation of RNA polymerase III (Pol III) transcription. Here we present a
paradigm that EZH2 is involved in the repression of Pol III transcription via
interaction with transcriptional factor complex IIIC (TFIIIC). EZH2 and H3K27me3 
co-occupy the promoter of tRNA(Tyr), 5S rRNA and 7SL RNA genes. Depletion of EZH2
or inhibition of EZH2 methyltransferase activity led to upregulation of Pol III
target gene transcription. EZH2-mediated repression of Pol III transcribed gene
expression requires presence of SUZ12. SUZ12 was able to interact with TFIIIC
complex and knockdown of SUZ12 decreased occupancy of EZH2 and H3K27me3 at the
promoter of Pol III target genes. Our findings pointed out a previously
unidentified role of PRC2 complex in suppressing transcription of Pol III
transcribed non-translated RNA genes, putting Pol III on a new layer of
epigenetic regulation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4513857
PMID: 26038315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Blood. 2015 Jul 9;126(2):167-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-12-615898. Epub 2015 Jun
2.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 component Suz12 is required for hematopoietic stem 
cell function and lymphopoiesis.

Lee SC(1), Miller S(2), Hyland C(2), Kauppi M(1), Lebois M(2), Di Rago L(2),
Metcalf D(1), Kinkel SA(1), Josefsson EC(1), Blewitt ME(3), Majewski IJ(1),
Alexander WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology and. (2)The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; (3)The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; Department of
Medical Biology and Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a chromatin modifier that regulates stem 
cells in embryonic and adult tissues. Loss-of-function studies of PRC2 components
have been complicated by early embryonic dependence on PRC2 activity and the
partial functional redundancy of enhancer of zeste homolog 1 (Ezh1) and enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), which encode the enzymatic component of PRC2. Here, we
investigated the role of PRC2 in hematopoiesis by conditional deletion of
suppressor of zeste 12 protein homolog (Suz12), a core component of PRC2.
Complete loss of Suz12 resulted in failure of hematopoiesis, both in the embryo
and the adult, with a loss of maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In 
contrast, partial loss of PRC2 enhanced HSC self-renewal. Although Suz12 was
required for lymphoid development, deletion in individual blood cell lineages
revealed that it was dispensable for the development of granulocytic, monocytic, 
and megakaryocytic cells. Collectively, these data reveal the multifaceted role
of PRC2 in hematopoiesis, with divergent dose-dependent effects in HSC and
distinct roles in maturing blood cells. Because PRC2 is a potential target for
cancer therapy, the significant consequences of modest changes in PRC2 activity, 
as well as the cell and developmental stage-specific effects, will need to be
carefully considered in any therapeutic context.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26036803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cell Prolif. 2015 Aug;48(4):436-42. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12177. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

hMOF (human males absent on the first), an oncogenic protein of human oral tongue
squamous cell carcinoma, targeting EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2).

Li Q(1), Sun H(1), Shu Y(1), Zou X(1), Zhao Y(2), Ge C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical 
Sciences, Beijing, 100071, China. (2)Department of Orthopaedics, First Affiliated
Hospital of the General Hospital of People's Liberation Army, Beijing, 100048,
China.

OBJECTIVES: MOF (males absent on the first) is a histone acetyltransferase
belonging to the MYST (MOZ, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2 and TIP60) family. In mammals, MOF
plays critical roles in transcription activation by acetylating histone H4 at
K16. Human MOF (hMOF) essentially participates in behaviour of several human
cancers. However, its role in human oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC)
remains elusive, but we propose that hMOF regulates OTSCC cell population growth.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real time PCR and western blot analysis were applied, and 
it was found that hMOF level was up-regulated in human OTSCC. High hMOF
expression predicted poor overall and disease-free survival. hMOF knockdown
attenuated OTSCC cell growth and transformation.
RESULTS: EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) was up-regulated in human OTSCC
tissues and its level positively correlated with level of hMOF. hMOF knockdown
inhibited EZH2 expression by reducing its promoter activity. Moreover, we have
demonstrated that EZH2 was critically essential for function of hMOF in human
OTSCC.
CONCLUSIONS: Human males absent on the first regulated OSTCC growth through EZH2,
thus EZH2 may serve as a candidate for anti-OTSCC therapy.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26032517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0126466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126466.
eCollection 2015.

Cancer Cells Hijack PRC2 to Modify Multiple Cytokine Pathways.

Abou El Hassan M(1), Huang K(1), Eswara MB(1), Zhao M(1), Song L(1), Yu T(1), Liu
Y(1), Liu JC(2), McCurdy S(3), Ma A(4), Wither J(5), Jin J(4), Zacksenhaus E(6), 
Wrana JL(1), Bremner R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Lab Medicine and Pathobiology, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Structural and 
Chemical Biology, Icahn School of Medicine, Mt Sinai Hospital, New York, New
York, United States of America. (5)Toronto Western Research Institute, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (6)Toronto General Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Lab Medicine
and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (7)Lunenfeld
Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mt Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Department of Lab Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is an epigenetic regulator induced in many
cancers. It is thought to drive tumorigenesis by repressing division, stemness,
and/or developmental regulators. Cancers evade immune detection, and diverse
immune regulators are perturbed in different tumors. It is unclear how such
cell-specific effects are coordinated. Here, we show a profound and
cancer-selective role for PRC2 in repressing multiple cytokine pathways. We find 
that PRC2 represses hundreds of IFN<U+03B3> stimulated genes (ISGs), cytokines and
cytokine receptors. This target repertoire is significantly broadened in cancer
vs non-cancer cells, and is distinct in different cancer types. PRC2 is therefore
a higher order regulator of the immune program in cancer cells. Inhibiting PRC2
with either RNAi or EZH2 inhibitors activates cytokine/cytokine receptor
promoters marked with bivalent H3K27me3/H3K4me3 chromatin, and augments
responsiveness to diverse immune signals. PRC2 inhibition rescues immune gene
induction even in the absence of SWI/SNF, a tumor suppressor defective in ~20% of
human cancers. This novel PRC2 function in tumor cells could profoundly impact
the mechanism of action and efficacy of EZH2 inhibitors in cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4450877
PMID: 26030458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 10;35(10):1292-301. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.187. Epub 2015 Jun
1.

MacroH2A1 downregulation enhances the stem-like properties of bladder cancer
cells by transactivation of Lin28B.

Park SJ(1,)(2), Shim JW(1), Park HS(1), Eum DY(1), Park MT(1), Mi Yi J(1), Choi
SH(1), Kim SD(1), Son TG(1), Lu W(3), Kim ND(2), Yang K(1,)(4,)(5), Heo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Science
(DIRAMS), Busan, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. (3)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dongnam Institute of Radiological & Medical 
Sciences, Busan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Korea
Institute of Radiological & Medical Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The histone variant, macroH2A1, has an important role in embryonic stem cell
differentiation and tumor progression in various types of tumors. However, the
regulatory roles of macroH2A1 on bladder cancer progression have not been fully
elucidated. Here, we show that macroH2A1 knockdown promotes stem-like properties 
of bladder cancer cells. The knockdown of macroH2A1 in bladder cancer cells
increased tumorigenicity, radioresistance, degeneration of reactive oxygen
species, increased sphere formation capability and an increase in the proportion 
of side populations. We found that macroH2A1 is required for the suppression of
Lin28B identified as a novel downstream target of macroH2A1 in bladder cancer.
Loss of macroH2A1 expression significantly correlated with the elevated levels of
Lin28B expression and subsequently inhibited the mature let-7 microRNA
expression. Furthermore, the stable overexpression of Lin28B enhances the several
phenotypes, including tumorigenicity and sphere-forming ability, which are
induced by macroH2A1 depletion. Importantly, Lin28B expression was regulated by
macroH2A1-mediated reciprocal binding of p300 and EZH2/SUV39H1. Our results
suggest that Lin28B/let-7 pathway is tightly regulated by macroH2A1 and its
cofactors, and have a pivotal role in the bladder tumor progression and the
regulation of stem-like characteristics of bladder cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4791524
PMID: 26028027  [PubMed - in process]


310. Exp Hematol. 2015 Aug;43(8):698-712. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.05.001. Epub 2015
May 28.

Targeting EZH2 and PRC2 dependence as novel anticancer therapy.

Xu B(1), Konze KD(2), Jin J(2), Wang GG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address: greg_wang@med.unc.edu.

Distinctive patterns of chromatin modification control gene expression and define
cellular identity during development and cell differentiation. Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), the sole mammalian enzymatic complex capable of
establishing gene-repressive high-degree methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27
(H3K27), plays crucial roles in regulation of normal and malignant hematopoiesis.
Recently, increasing evidence has indicated that recurrent gain-of-function
mutation and overexpression of EZH2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2, drive and
promote malignant transformation such as B-cell lymphomagenesis, providing a
rationale for PRC2 inhibition as a novel anticancer strategy. Here, we summarize 
the recently developed strategies for inhibition of PRC2, which include a series 
of highly specific, highly potent, small-molecule inhibitors of EZH2 and EZH1, an
EZH2-related methyltransferase. PRC2 establishes functional crosstalk with
numerous epigenetic machineries during dynamic regulation of gene transcription. 
Perturbation of such functional crosstalk caused by genetic events observed in
various hematologic cancers, such as inactivation of SNF5 and somatic mutation of
UTX, confers PRC2 dependence, thus rendering an increased sensitivity to PRC2
inhibition. We discuss our current understanding of EZH2 somatic mutations
frequently found in B-cell lymphomas and recurrent mutations in various other
epigenetic regulators as novel molecular predictors and determinants of PRC2
sensitivity. As recent advances have indicated a critical developmental or
tumor-suppressive role for PRC2 and EZH2 in various tissue types, we discuss
concerns over potentially toxic or even adverse effects associated with EZH2/1
inhibition in certain biological contexts or on cancer genetic background.
Collectively, inhibition of PRC2 catalytic activity has emerged as a promising
therapeutic intervention for the precise treatment of a range of genetically
defined hematologic malignancies and can be potentially applied to a broader
spectrum of human cancers that bear similar genetic and epigenetic
characteristics.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4706459 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26027790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Hepatol. 2015 Oct;63(4):886-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.05.016. Epub 2015 May 
27.

Hotair mediates hepatocarcinogenesis through suppressing miRNA-218 expression and
activating P14 and P16 signaling.

Fu WM(1), Zhu X(2), Wang WM(3), Lu YF(4), Hu BG(5), Wang H(6), Liang WC(3), Wang 
SS(7), Ko CH(8), Waye MM(3), Kung HF(9), Li G(10), Zhang JF(11).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Guangzhou Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 511458, China. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Diagnosis, Guangdong
Medical College, Dong Guan 523808, China. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. (5)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University, 
Binzhou, Shandong, China. (6)Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (7)Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, Hong Kong, China. (8)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (9)School of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;
Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging Infectious Diseases, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (10)Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong,
China; School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China; Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine
Laboratory, Lui Che Woo Institute of Innovative Medicine, Li Ka Shing Institute
of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: gangli@cuhk.edu.hk.
(11)Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; School of Biomedical
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China; Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Laboratory, Lui Che Woo
Institute of Innovative Medicine, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong,
China. Electronic address: zhangjf06@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Long non-coding RNA Hotair has been considered as a
pro-oncogene in multiple cancers. Although there is emerging evidence that
reveals its biological function and the association with clinical prognosis, the 
precise mechanism remains largely elusive.
METHODS: We investigated the function and mechanism of Hotair in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell models and a xenograft mouse model. The regulatory network
between miR-218 and Hotair was elucidated by RNA immunoprecipitation and
luciferase reporter assays. Finally, the correlation between Hotair, miR-218 and 
the target gene Bmi-1 were evaluated in 52 paired HCC specimens.
RESULTS: In this study, we reported that Hotair negatively regulated miR-218
expression in HCC, which might be mediated through an EZH2-targeting-miR-218-2
promoter regulatory axis. Further investigation revealed that Hotair knockdown
dramatically inhibited cell viability and induced G1-phase arrest in vitro and
suppressed tumorigenicity in vivo by promoting miR-218 expression. Oncogene Bmi-1
was shown to be a functional target of miR-218, and the main downstream targets
signaling, P16(Ink4a) and P14(ARF), were activated in Hotair-suppressed
tumorigenesis. In primary human HCC specimens, Hotair and Bmi-1 were concordantly
upregulated whereas miR-218 was downregulated in these tissues. Furthermore,
Hotair was inversely associated with miR-218 expression and positively correlated
with Bmi-1 expression in these clinical tissues.
CONCLUSION: Hotair silence activates P16(Ink4a) and P14(ARF) signaling by
enhancing miR-218 expression and suppressing Bmi-1 expression, resulting in the
suppression of tumorigenesis in HCC.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26024833  [PubMed - in process]


312. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2015 Mar 4;6(5):491-5. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.5b00037.
eCollection 2015.

EPZ011989, A Potent, Orally-Available EZH2 Inhibitor with Robust in Vivo
Activity.

Campbell JE(1), Kuntz KW(1), Knutson SK(1), Warholic NM(1), Keilhack H(1), Wigle 
TJ(1), Raimondi A(1), Klaus CR(1), Rioux N(1), Yokoi A(2), Kawano S(2), Minoshima
Y(2), Choi HW(3), Porter Scott M(1), Waters NJ(1), Smith JJ(1), Chesworth R(1),
Moyer MP(1), Copeland RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc. , 400 Technology Square, Fourth Floor, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, United States. (2)Eisai Co., Ltd. , Tokodai 5-1-3, Tsukuba, Ibarakai
300-2635, Japan. (3)Eisai, Inc. , 4 Corporate Drive, Andover, Massachusetts
01810, United States.

Inhibitors of the protein methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2)
may have significant therapeutic potential for the treatment of B cell lymphomas 
and other cancer indications. The ability of the scientific community to explore 
fully the spectrum of EZH2-associated pathobiology has been hampered by the lack 
of in vivo-active tool compounds for this enzyme. Here we report the discovery
and characterization of EPZ011989, a potent, selective, orally bioavailable
inhibitor of EZH2 with useful pharmacokinetic properties. EPZ011989 demonstrates 
significant tumor growth inhibition in a mouse xenograft model of human B cell
lymphoma. Hence, this compound represents a powerful tool for the expanded
exploration of EZH2 activity in biology.

PMCID: PMC4434464 [Available on 2016-05-14]
PMID: 26005520  [PubMed]


313. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;65:104-12. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.05.011.
Epub 2015 May 22.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 depletion induces cellular senescence via histone
demethylation along the INK4/ARF locus.

Jie B(1), Weilong C(2), Ming C(3), Fei X(4), Xinghua L(5), Junhua C(6), Guobin
W(7), Kaixiong T(8), Xiaoming S(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, 
Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
bjbjbj-000@163.com. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1277
Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: changwl365@foxmail.com. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal
Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: caiming918@21cn.com.
(4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, 
Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
xu2fei3@163.com. (5)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, No. 1277
Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: liu_xinghua@outlook.com. (6)Department of Gastrointestinal
Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: lipid@tom.com. (7)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei
Province 430022, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
Wangguobin1954@126.com. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430022, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: tao_kaixiong@163.com. (9)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, No. 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan, Hubei
Province 430022, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
xmshuai@hust.edu.cn.

Polycomb group proteins are epigenetic transcriptional repressors that function
through recognition and modification of histone methylation and chromatin
structure. As a member of PcG proteins, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
targets cell cycle regulatory proteins which govern cell cycle progression and
cellular senescence. In previous work, we reported that EZH2 depletion
functionally induced cellular senescence in human gastric cancer cells with
mutant p53. However, whether EZH2 expression contributes to the change of key
cell cycle regulators and the mechanism involved are still unclear. To address
this issue, we investigated the effects of EZH2 depletion on alteration of
histone methylation pattern. In gastric cancer cells, INK4/ARF locus was
activated to certain extent in consequence of a decrease of H3K27me3 along it
caused by EZH2 silence, which contributed substantially to an increase in the
expression of p15(INK4b), p14(ARF) and p16(INK4a) and resulted in cellular
senescence ultimately. Furthermore, MKN28 cells, which did not express p16(INK4a)
and p21(cip), could be induced to senescence via p15(INK4b) activation and
suppression of p15(INK4b) reversed senescence progression induced by EZH2
downregulated. These data unravel a crucial role of EZH2 in the regulation of
INK4/ARF expression and senescence procedure in gastric cancer cells, and show
that the cellular senescence could just depend on the activation of p15(INK4b)/Rb
pathway, suggesting the cell-type and species specificity involved in the
mechanisms of senescence inducement.

Crown Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26004298  [PubMed - in process]


314. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2015;24(8):1031-43. doi:
10.1517/13543784.2015.1051220. Epub 2015 May 25.

Targeting of cancer stem cells by inhibitors of DNA and histone methylation.

Momparler RL(1), Côté S.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Montréal, Centre de recherche, Département de Pharmacologie ,
CHU-Saint-Justine, Montréal, Québec , Canada richard.l.momparler@umontreal.ca.

INTRODUCTION: Curative chemotherapy should target cancer stem cells (CSCs). The
key characteristics of CSCs are a block in differentiation and an epigenetic
signature similar to embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Differentiation by ESCs and
CSCs is suppressed by gene silencing through the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) and/or DNA methylation. PRC2 contains the EZH2 subunit, which catalyzes
the trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27, a gene silencing marker. It is
possible to reverse this 'double lock' mechanism using a combination of
inhibitors of EZH2 and DNA methylation (5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine), which exhibits
remarkable synergistic antineoplastic activity in preclinical studies.
AREAS COVERED: The authors discuss several specific EZH2 inhibitors that have
been synthesized with antineoplastic activity. One such inhibitor, EPZ-6438
(E7438), has been shown to be effective against lymphoma in a Phase I study. The 
indirect EZH2 inhibitor, 3-deazaneplanocin-A (DZNep), also exhibits remarkable
anticancer activity due to its inhibition of methionine metabolism.
EXPERT OPINION: Agents that target EZH2 warrant Phase I trials. Due to its
positive pharmacodynamics, DZNep merits a high priority for clinical
investigation. Agents that show positive results in Phase I studies should be
advanced to clinical trials for use in combination with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
due to the interesting potential of this epigenetic therapy to target CSCs.

PMID: 26004134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biochem. 2015 Nov;158(5):373-84. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvv055. Epub 2015 May 22.

Mediator complex cooperatively regulates transcription of retinoic acid target
genes with Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 during neuronal differentiation.

Fukasawa R(1), Iida S(1), Tsutsui T(2), Hirose Y(1), Ohkuma Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan;
(2)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, California 92093, USA; and. (3)Laboratory of Gene Regulation, Graduate 
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630
Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan; Department of Biochemistry, Nagasaki University
School of Medicine, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan
ohkumay@pha.u-toyama.ac.jp.

The Mediator complex (Mediator) plays key roles in transcription and functions as
the nexus for integration of various transcriptional signals. Previously, we
screened for Mediator cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)-interacting factors and
identified three proteins related to chromatin regulation. One of them, SUZ12 is 
required for both stability and activity of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2).
PRC2 primarily suppresses gene expression through histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation, resulting in stem cell maintenance and differentiation;
perturbation of this process leads to oncogenesis. Recent work showed that
Mediator contributes to the embryonic stem cell state through DNA loop formation,
which is strongly associated with chromatin architecture; however, it remains
unclear how Mediator regulates gene expression in cooperation with chromatin
regulators (i.e. writers, readers and remodelers). We found that Mediator CDKs
interact directly with the PRC2 subunit EZH2, as well as SUZ12. Known PRC2 target
genes were deregulated by Mediator CDK knockdown during neuronal differentiation,
and both Mediator and PRC2 complexes co-occupied the promoters of developmental
genes regulated by retinoic acid. Our results provide a mechanistic link between 
Mediator and PRC2 during neuronal differentiation.

© The Authors 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26002960  [PubMed - in process]


316. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jul;34(1):455-60. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4003. Epub 2015 May 21.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 promotes mammary stem and luminal progenitor
cell expansion, metastasis and inhibits estrogen receptor-positive cellular
differentiation in a model of basal breast cancer.

Wu J(1), Crowe DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois Cancer Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Mammary stem cells (MSCs) are the progenitor population for human breast
epithelia. MSCs give rise during mammary gland development to estrogen receptor
(ER)-negative basal cells and the ER- luminal progenitor (LP) population which
maintains ER+ and ER- luminal cells. The MSC population is expanded and
tumorigenic in some mouse mammary cancer models, and these tumor-initiating cells
have been isolated from human breast cancers. MSC expansion is associated with
aggressive biological behavior in human breast cancer. The LP population is
tumorigenic in some mouse mammary cancer models, and is the progenitor population
of basal breast cancer in humans. The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a
methyltransferase which catalyzes lysine 27 methylation in histone H3 resulting
in suppression of target gene expression. The histone demethylase JMJD3 opposes
the activity of EZH2 by demethylating histone H3 lysine 27. EZH2 is a member of
the polycomb group of proteins which regulates cell type identity. EZH2
expression was found to be increased in histologically normal human breast tissue
among women with high breast cancer risk, and was elevated in ductal hyperplasia 
and ductal carcinoma in situ. EZH2 overexpression is associated with poorly
differentiated and aggressive breast cancer in humans. However, the mechanisms by
which EZH2 results in increased breast cancer risk and aggressive tumors are not 
completely characterized. Using in vivo transplantation of mammary cancer stem
cells transduced with EZH2 or JMJD3 shRNAs, we demonstrated that EZH2 promotes
mammary stem and LP cell expansion, metastasis and inhibits ER-positive cellular 
differentiation.

PMID: 25998860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(10):8185-91. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3498-8. Epub 2015
May 21.

FOXP4 modulates tumor growth and independently associates with miR-138 in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Yang T(1), Li H(1), Thakur A(1), Chen T(1), Xue J(1), Li D(1), Chen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical
College of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xian, 710061, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical
College of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xian, 710061, China.
mingweic2@aol.com.

Family of forkhead box transcription factors, including forkhead box P4 (FOXP4), 
plays an important role in oncogenesis. The current study is to evaluate the role
of FOXP4 in regulating human non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Quantitative
RT-PCR and Western blot were performed to evaluate the gene and protein
expressions of FOXP4 in six NSCLC cell lines and 55 NSCLC patients. Lentivirus of
small hairpin RNA (FOXP4-shRNA) was used to downregulate FOXP4 in NSCLC cell
lines A549 and H1703 cells. Its effect on NSCLC growth, invasion, and cell cycle 
were evaluated by cell proliferation assay, migration assay, and cell cycle
assay, respectively. Dual luciferase assay and Western blot were used to examine 
whether microRNA-138 (miR-138) was an upstream regulator of FOXP4. The dependence
of FOXP4 on miR-138 associated signaling pathway was evaluated by ectopically
overexpressing enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a known miR-138 target in
NSCLC. FOXP4 was highly expressed in both NSCLC cell lines and NSCLC patients.
FOXP4 downregulation by FOXP4-shRNA markedly reduced cancer cell growth and
invasion, as well as induced cell cycle arrest in A549 and H1703 cells. MiR-138
was confirmed to be an upstream regulator of FOXP4 and directly regulated FOXP4
expression in A549 and H1703 cells. FOXP4 downregulation-mediated inhibition on
cancer cell growth and invasion was independent on overexpressing EZH2, another
direct target of miR-138 in NSCLC. Our data demonstrated that FOXP4 was a
critical regulator in NSCLC and independently associated with miR-138 regulation.

PMID: 25994569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Oncol. 2015 Oct;9(8):1565-79. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2015.04.013. Epub 2015
May 8.

Genome methylation patterns in male breast cancer - Identification of an epitype 
with hypermethylation of polycomb target genes.

Johansson I(1), Lauss M(1), Holm K(1), Staaf J(1), Nilsson C(2), Fjällskog ML(2),
Ringnér M(1), Hedenfalk I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Clinical Sciences, and CREATE Health
Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. (2)Department of Oncology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Clinical Sciences, and CREATE Health
Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden. Electronic address: Ingrid.Hedenfalk@med.lu.se.

Male breast cancer (MBC) is a rare disease that shares both similarities and
differences with female breast cancer (FBC). The aim of this study was to assess 
genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in MBC and compare them with the previously 
identified transcriptional subgroups of MBC, luminal M1 and M2, as well as the
intrinsic subtypes of FBC. Illumina's 450K Infinium arrays were applied to 47 MBC
and 188 FBC tumors. Unsupervised clustering of the most variable CpGs among MBC
tumors revealed two stable epitypes, designated ME1 and ME2. The methylation
patterns differed significantly between the groups and were closely associated
with the transcriptional subgroups luminal M1 and M2. Tumors in the ME1 group
were more proliferative and aggressive than ME2 tumors, and showed a tendency
toward inferior survival. ME1 tumors also displayed hypermethylation of PRC2
target genes and high expression of EZH2, one of the core components of PRC2.
Upon combined analysis of MBC and FBC tumors, ME1 MBCs clustered among luminal B 
FBC tumors and ME2 MBCs clustered within the predominantly luminal A FBC cluster.
The majority of the MBC tumors remained grouped together within the clusters
rather than being interspersed among the FBC tumors. Differences in the genomic
location of methylated CpGs, as well as in the regulation of central canonical
pathways may explain the separation between MBC and FBC tumors in the respective 
clusters. These findings further suggest that MBC is not readily defined using
conventional criteria applied to FBC.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25990542  [PubMed - in process]


319. Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 15;403(2):128-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.05.010. Epub 2015 
May 16.

Ezh2 maintains retinal progenitor proliferation, transcriptional integrity, and
the timing of late differentiation.

Zhang J(1), Taylor RJ(2), La Torre A(2), Wilken MS(3), Cox KE(2), Reh TA(2),
Vetter ML(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, United States. (2)Department of Biological Structure, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. (3)Department of Biological Structure,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; Molecular and Cellular
Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(4)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
UT, United States. Electronic address: monica.vetter@neuro.utah.edu.

Epigenetic regulation, including histone modification, is a critical component of
gene regulation, although precisely how this contributes to the development of
complex tissues such as the neural retina is still being explored. We show that
during retinal development in mouse, there are dynamic patterns of expression of 
the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) catalytic subunit EZH2 in retinal
progenitors and some differentiated cells, as well as dynamic changes in the
histone modification H3K27me3. Using conditional knockout of Ezh2 using either
Pax6-aCre or Six3-Cre, we find selective reduction in postnatal retinal
progenitor proliferation, disruption of retinal lamination, and enhanced
differentiation of several late born cell types in the early postnatal retina,
including photoreceptors and Müller glia, which are ultimately increased in
number and become reactive. RNA-seq identifies many non-retinal genes upregulated
with loss of Ezh2, including multiple Hox genes and the cell cycle regulator
Cdkn2a, which are established targets of EZH2-mediated repression. ChIP analysis 
confirms loss of the H3K27me3 modification at these loci. Similar gene
upregulation is observed in retinal explants treated with an EZH2 chemical
inhibitor. There is considerable overlap with EZH2-regulated genes reported in
non-neural tissues, suggesting that EZH2 can regulate similar genes in multiple
lineages. Our findings reveal a conserved role for EZH2 in constraining the
expression of potent developmental regulators to maintain lineage integrity and
retinal progenitor proliferation, as well as regulating the timing of late
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4469612 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 25989023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. EMBO J. 2015 Jul 2;34(13):1773-85. doi: 10.15252/embj.201488166. Epub 2015 May
15.

Reciprocal regulation of amino acid import and epigenetic state through Lat1 and 
EZH2.

Dann SG(1), Ryskin M(2), Barsotti AM(2), Golas J(2), Shi C(2), Miranda M(2),
Hosselet C(2), Lemon L(2), Lucas J(2), Karnoub M(3), Wang F(2), Myers JS(2),
Garza SJ(4), Follettie MT(2), Geles KG(2), Klippel A(3), Rollins RA(2), Fantin
VR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Oncology Research Unit, San Diego, CA, USA stephen.dann@pfizer.com.
(2)Pfizer Oncology Research Unit, Pearl River, NY, USA. (3)Celgene, Summit, NJ,
USA. (4)Pfizer Oncology Research Unit, San Diego, CA, USA.

Lat1 (SLC7A5) is an amino acid transporter often required for tumor cell import
of essential amino acids (AA) including Methionine (Met). Met is the obligate
precursor of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), the methyl donor utilized by all
methyltransferases including the polycomb repressor complex (PRC2)-specific EZH2.
Cell populations sorted for surface Lat1 exhibit activated EZH2, enrichment for
Met-cycle intermediates, and aggressive tumor growth in mice. In agreement, EZH2 
and Lat1 expression are co-regulated in models of cancer cell differentiation and
co-expression is observed at the invasive front of human lung tumors. EZH2
knockdown or small-molecule inhibition leads to de-repression of RXRa resulting
in reduced Lat1 expression. Our results describe a Lat1-EZH2 positive feedback
loop illustrated by AA depletion or Lat1 knockdown resulting in SAM reduction and
concomitant reduction in EZH2 activity. shRNA-mediated knockdown of Lat1 results 
in tumor growth inhibition and points to Lat1 as a potential therapeutic target.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4516430 [Available on 2016-07-02]
PMID: 25979827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Lab Hematol. 2015 May;37 Suppl 1:115-21. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12361.

The utility of next-generation sequencing in diagnosis and monitoring of acute
myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes.

Duncavage EJ(1), Tandon B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Myeloid malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of disorders that share a common
biology and are a major source of morbidity and mortality. In the last several
years, studies using next-generation sequencing (NGS) have identified a core set 
of recurrently mutated myeloid malignancy genes in the majority of patients with 
AML and MDS, including those with normal cytogenetics. DNA-level mutations in
several of these genes including NPM1, FLT3, and CEBPA in AML and ASXL1, ETV6,
EZH2, RUNX1, and TP53 in MDS are associated with changes in patient outcomes and 
are now tested for in clinical laboratories. In addition to providing prognostic 
information, these gene mutations can be used to monitor patient disease burden
through the use of ultrasensitive detection techniques. In this review, we will
focus on the clinical utility of various NGS-based methods including whole-genome
sequencing, exome sequencing, and targeted panel-based sequencing in the initial 
diagnosis and management of AML and MDS and cover recent methodological advances 
for the molecular monitoring of AML and MDS.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25976969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jun;55(1):76-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2015.04.003. Epub 
2015 Apr 17.

Genetics factors associated with myelodysplastic syndromes.

Macedo LC(1), Silvestre AP(1), Rodrigues C(1), de Alencar JB(1), Zacarias JM(1), 
Ambrosio-Albuquerque EP(2), Sell AM(1), Visentainer JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sciences Basic Health Department, State University of Maringa, Maringa, PR,
Brazil. (2)Biotechnology, Genetics and Cellular Biology Department, State
University of Maringa, Maringa, PR, Brazil. (3)Sciences Basic Health Department, 
State University of Maringa, Maringa, PR, Brazil. Electronic address:
jelvisentainer@uem.br.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a clinically and cytogenetically
heterogeneous group of clonal diseases. Clonal chromosomal abnormalities are
observed in 30-50% of patients with MDS. The deletions are among the most common 
alterations, and often involve the long arms of chromosomes 5, 7, 8, 13, and 20
and the short arms of chromosomes 12 and 17. The advent of new technologies for
the detection of genetic abnormalities led to the description of a new set of
recurrent mutations, leading to new insights into the pathophysiology of MDS. The
recent recognition that genes involved in the regulation of histone function
(EZH2, ASXL1, and UTX) and DNA methylation (DNMT3A, IDH1/IDH2, and TET2) are
frequently mutated in MDS, has led to the proposal that there is an important
link between genetic and epigenetic alterations in this disease. In fact,
regulatory factors have also been considered as miR-143/miR-145, miR-146a,
miR-125a and MiR-21. Somatic mutations may influence the clinical phenotype but
are not included in current prognostic scoring systems. In recent years research 
has brought new insights into these diseases, but few of the findings are
sufficiently robust to be incorporated into the clinical routine at this time.
Thus, the aim of this study was to review the role of genetic factors involved in
the diagnosis and development of the different phenotypes of MDS.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25976472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2015 May 14;10(5):e0125480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125480.
eCollection 2015.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 as an independent prognostic marker for cancer: a
meta-analysis.

Chen S(1), Huang L(2), Sun K(3), Wu D(4), Li M(1), Li M(1), Zhong B(1), Chen
M(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, P.R. China. (2)Division of Respiration, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China. (3)Division
of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, P.R. China. (4)Division of Cardiology, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Novel biomarkers are of particular interest for predicting cancer
prognosis. This study aimed to explore the associations between enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) and patient survival in various cancers.
METHODS: Relevant literature was retrieved from PubMed and Web of Science
databases. Pooled hazard ratios (HRs), odds ratios (ORs), and 95% confidence
intervals (CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: Forty-nine studies (8,050 patients) were included. High EZH2 expression 
was significantly associated with shorter overall (hazard ratio [HR] 1.74, 95%
CI: 1.46-2.07), disease-free (HR 1.59, 95% CI: 1.27-1.99), metastasis-free (HR
2.19, 95% CI: 1.38-3.47), progression-free (HR 2.53, 95% CI: 1.52-4.21),
cancer-specific (HR 3.13, 95% CI: 1.70-5.74), and disease-specific (HR 2.29, 95% 
CI: 1.56-3.35) survival, but not recurrence-free survival (HR 1.38, 95% CI:
0.93-2.06). Moreover, EZH2 expression significantly correlated with distant
metastasis (OR 3.25, 95% CI: 1.07-9.87) in esophageal carcinoma; differentiation 
(OR 3.00, 95% CI: 1.37-6.55) in non-small cell lung cancer; TNM stage (OR 3.18,
95% CI: 2.49-4.08) in renal cell carcinoma; and histological grade (OR 4.50, 95% 
CI: 3.33-6.09), estrogen receptor status (OR 0.15, 95% CI: 0.11-0.20) and
progesterone receptor status (OR 0.30, 95% CI: 0.23-0.39) in breast cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggested that EZH2 might be an independent prognostic
factor for multiple survival measures in different cancers.

PMCID: PMC4431777
PMID: 25974088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Jul;36(7):800-10. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv064. Epub 2015 May 
12.

Survival of skin cancer stem cells requires the Ezh2 polycomb group protein.

Adhikary G(1), Grun D(1), Balasubramanian S(1), Kerr C(2), Huang JM(1), Eckert
RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, 108 N. Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. (2)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
108 N. Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum
Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
108 N. Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum
Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Department of
Dermatology, University of Maryland School of Medicine and Department of
Reproductive Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21201, USA reckert@umaryland.edu.

Polycomb group proteins, including Ezh2, are important candidate stem cell
maintenance proteins in epidermal squamous cell carcinoma. We previously showed
that epidermal cancer stem cells (ECS cells) represent a minority of cells in
tumors, are highly enriched in Ezh2 and drive aggressive tumor formation. We now 
show that Ezh2 is required for ECS cell survival, migration, invasion and tumor
formation and that this is associated with increased histone H3 trimethylation on
lysine 27, a mark of Ezh2 action. We also show that Ezh2 knockdown or treatment
with Ezh2 inhibitors, GSK126 or EPZ-6438, reduces Ezh2 level and activity,
leading to reduced ECS cell spheroid formation, migration, invasion and tumor
growth. These studies indicate that epidermal squamous cell carcinoma cells
contain a subpopulation of cancer stem (tumor-initiating) cells that are enriched
in Ezh2, that Ezh2 is required for optimal ECS cell survival and tumor formation 
and that treatment with Ezh2 inhibitors may be a strategy for reducing ECS cell
survival and suppressing tumor formation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4580538 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25969142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Cancer Cell. 2015 May 11;27(5):617-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.04.006.

SRSF2 Mutations Contribute to Myelodysplasia by Mutant-Specific Effects on Exon
Recognition.

Kim E(1), Ilagan JO(2), Liang Y(3), Daubner GM(4), Lee SC(1), Ramakrishnan A(5), 
Li Y(6), Chung YR(1), Micol JB(1), Murphy ME(7), Cho H(1), Kim MK(1), Zebari
AS(2), Aumann S(1), Park CY(8), Buonamici S(9), Smith PG(9), Deeg HJ(5), Lobry
C(10), Aifantis I(11), Modis Y(12), Allain FH(4), Halene S(3), Bradley RK(13),
Abdel-Wahab O(14).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Computational Biology Program, Public Health 
Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109,
USA; Basic Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
98109, USA. (3)Hematology, Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. 
(4)Institute for Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA; Division of Medical Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (6)Department of Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (7)Clinical Research
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(8)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (9)H3 Biomedicine, Cambridge,
MA 03129, USA. (10)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Medicale
(INSERM) U1009, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France; Université
Paris-Sud, 91400 Orsay, France. (11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA. (12)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Medicine, University of
Cambridge, MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.
(13)Computational Biology Program, Public Health Sciences Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Basic Sciences
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
Electronic address: rbradley@fhcrc.org. (14)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA;
Leukemia Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: abdelwao@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 May 11;27(5):607-9.

Mutations affecting spliceosomal proteins are the most common mutations in
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), but their role in MDS pathogenesis
has not been delineated. Here we report that mutations affecting the splicing
factor SRSF2 directly impair hematopoietic differentiation in vivo, which is not 
due to SRSF2 loss of function. By contrast, SRSF2 mutations alter SRSF2's normal 
sequence-specific RNA binding activity, thereby altering the recognition of
specific exonic splicing enhancer motifs to drive recurrent mis-splicing of key
hematopoietic regulators. This includes SRSF2 mutation-dependent splicing of
EZH2, which triggers nonsense-mediated decay, which, in turn, results in impaired
hematopoietic differentiation. These data provide a mechanistic link between a
mutant spliceosomal protein, alterations in the splicing of key regulators, and
impaired hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4429920 [Available on 2016-05-11]
PMID: 25965569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Future Oncol. 2015;11(10):1451-4. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.61.

Determination of synthetic lethal interactions to provide therapeutic direction
to end aggressive prostate cancer.

Ellis L.

PMID: 25963421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Aug;12(2):2503-10. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3745. Epub 2015 May 7.

Involvement of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in cisplatin-resistance in ovarian
cancer cells by interacting with several genes.

Wang H(1), Yu Y(1), Chen C(1), Wang Q(1), Huang T(1), Hong F(2), Zhu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250033, P.R. China. (2)Department of Obstetrics, The Second Hospital of 
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250033, P.R. China.

In the present study, gene expression profiles of cisplatin-sensitive ovarian
cancer (OC) cells were compared with those of cisplatin-resistant OC cells to
identify key genes and pathways contributing to cisplatin resistance in ovarian
cancer cells. The GSE15372 gene expression data set was downloaded from Gene
Expression Omnibus, and included five biological replicates of
cisplatin-sensitive OC cells and five biological replicates of
cisplatin-resistant OC cells. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were screened
using the limma package in R, based on the cut-off values of P<0.05 and |log2
(fold change)|>1. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment
analysis and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis were performed on the DEGs using
the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integration Discovery. The
protein-protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed for the DEGs using
STRING, and sub-networks were analyzed by Clustering with Overlapping
Neighborhood Expansion. A total of 556 DEGs were identified in the
cisplatin-sensitive OC cells, of which 246 were upregulated and 310 were
downregulated. Functional enrichment analysis revealed metabolism-associated
pathways, DNA replication and cell cycle were significantly enriched in the
downregulated genes, while cell growth and differentiation, response to stimulus,
and apoptosis were significantly enriched in the upregulated genes. A PPI
network, including 342 nodes was constructed for the DEGs and four subnetworks
were extracted from the entire network. A total of 34 DEGs interacting with
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) were identified, which were associated with
DNA replication, pyrimidine metabolism and cell cycle. In conclusion, a number of
key genes and pathways associated with the cisplatin-resistance of OC were
revealed, particularly EZH2. These findings assist in the development of therapy 
for OC.

PMCID: PMC4464270
PMID: 25955318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS One. 2015 May 8;10(5):e0125017. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125017.
eCollection 2015.

Tetraspanin Family Member, CD82, Regulates Expression of EZH2 via Inactivation of
p38 MAPK Signaling in Leukemia Cells.

Nishioka C(1), Ikezoe T(1), Yang J(2), Yokoyama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of hematology and Respiratory Medicine immunology, Kochi Medical
School, Kochi University, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505, Japan. (2)Department of
immunology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Nankoku, Kochi 783-8505,
Japan.

PURPOSE: We recently found that the tetraspanin family member, CD82, which is
aberrantly expressed in chemotherapy-resistant CD34(+)/CD38- acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML) cells, negatively regulates matrix metalloproteinase 9, and plays 
an important role in enabling CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells to adhere to the bone
marrow microenvironment. This study explored novel functions of CD82 that
contribute to AML progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We employed microarray analysis comparing the gene
expression profiles between CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells transduced with CD82 shRNA 
and CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells transduced with control shRNA. Real-time RT-PCR and
western blot analysis were performed to examine the effect of CD82 knockdown on
the expression of the polycomb group member, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), 
in leukemia cells. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was performed to examine
the effect of CD82 expression on the amount of EZH2 bound to the promoter regions
of tumor suppressor genes in leukemia cells. We also utilized
methylation-specific PCR to examine whether CD82 expression influences the
methylation status of the tumor suppressor gene promoter regions in leukemia
cells.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed that levels of EZH2 decreased after
shRNA-mediated depletion of CD82 in CD34(+)/CD38(-) AML cells. Moreover, the
antibody-mediated blockade of CD82 in leukemia cells lowered EZH2 expression via 
activation of p38 MAPK signaling, decreased the amount of EZH2 bound to the
promoter regions of the tumor suppressor genes, and inhibited histone H3 lysine
27 trimethylation in these promoter regions, resulting in upregulation of the
tumor suppressors at both the mRNA and protein levels.

PMCID: PMC4425466
PMID: 25955299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Jul;11(7):1980-6. doi: 10.1039/c5mb00233h.

Genome-wide transcriptional profiling analysis reveals annexin A6 as a novel EZH2
target gene involving gastric cellular proliferation.

Qi Y(1), Zhang X, Kang Y, Wu J, Chen J, Li H, Guo Y, Liu B, Shao Z, Zhao X.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, State Key laboratory on Oncogenes and
Bio-ID Center, School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
800 Dongchuan Rd., Shanghai 200240, China. xiaodongzhao@sjtu.edu.cn.

A histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) catalyzes
trimethylation at histone H3 lysine27 (H3K27me3) and is frequently dysregulated
in a wide range of human cancers. EZH2-mediated gene silencing contributes to
carcinogenesis and regulates stem cell maintenance and differentiation; however, 
the underlining mechanisms remain to be completely understood. Here, we found
that downregulation of EZH2 by RNA interference (RNAi) in gastric cancer cells
suppresses cell growth, migration, invasion, and induces cell cycle arrest.
Transcriptome analysis identified 1223 EZH2 responsive genes upon EZH2 knockdown.
These genes are involved in the biological processes of cell cycle, proliferation
and metastasis. Particularly, we found that annexin A6 (ANXA6) is a new target of
EZH2 and is repressed in gastric cancer cells. Restoration of ANXA6 expression
inhibits gastric cellular proliferation. We further demonstrated that
EZH2-mediated H3K27me3, rather than promoter DNA methylation, is primarily
responsible for ANXA6 inhibition. Taken together, our results provide a framework
for understanding EZH2 biology and reveal ANXA6 as a new EZH2 target involving
gastric cellular proliferation.

PMID: 25947258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13049-59.

Wedelolactone disrupts the interaction of EZH2-EED complex and inhibits
PRC2-dependent cancer.

Chen H(1,)(2), Gao S(1), Li J(1), Liu D(1), Sheng C(1), Yao C(1,)(2), Jiang W(1),
Wu J(1,)(2), Chen S(1,)(3), Huang W(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)School of
Life Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei 230039, China. (3)Sun Yat-sen University
Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. (4)The Key
Laboratory of Tumor Targeted Medicine in Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Double
Bio-product Inc., Guangzhou 510663, China.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is responsible for the trimethylation
of H3K27 (H3K27me3), plays a part in tumorigenesis, development and/or
maintenance of adult tissue specificity. The pivotal role of PRC2 in cancer makes
it a therapeutic target for epigenetic cancer therapy. However, natural compounds
targeting the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) - embryonic ectoderm development
(EED) interaction to disable PRC2 complex are scarcely reported. Here, we
reported the screening and identification of natural compounds which could
disrupt the EZH2-EED interaction. One of these compounds, wedelolactone, binds to
EED with a high affinity (KD = 2.82 µM), blocks the EZH2-EED interaction in
vitro, induces the degradation of PRC2 core components and modulates the
expression of detected PRC2 downstream targets and cancer-related genes.
Furthermore, some PRC2-dependent cancer cells undergone growth arrest upon
treatment with wedelolactone. Thus, wedelolactone and its derivatives which
target the EZH2-EED interaction could be candidates for the treatment of
PRC2-dependent cancer.

PMCID: PMC4536998
PMID: 25944687  [PubMed - in process]


331. Epigenomics. 2015;7(2):301-20. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.88.

Epigenetic modifiers in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Haladyna JN(1), Yamauchi T, Neff T, Bernt KM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/BMT, University of Colorado School
of Medicine & Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Genome scale sequencing in patients with cancer has revealed a lower frequency of
genetic aberrations in hematologic disorders compared with most other
malignancies, suggesting a prominent role for epigenetic mechanisms. In parallel,
epigenetic modifiers that are altered in cancer play critical roles in normal
hematopoietic development, influencing both self-renewal of hematopoietic stem
cells and differentiation into the different lineages. In this review, we aim to 
compare the role of several key DNA or histone modifying enzymes and complexes in
normal development and hematopoietic malignancies, including DNMT3A, TET2, IDH1, 
IDH2, MLL1, MLL4, DOT1L, PRC1/2 and WSHC1/NSD2/MMSET. Insights into their
biological mechanisms led to the development of therapies designed to target
mutant IDH1 and IDH2, DOT1L in MLL-rearranged leukemias and EZH2 in several
cancer types including lymphomas. Inhibitors for these enzymes are currently in
clinical trials.

PMID: 25942537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Epigenomics. 2015;7(2):137-41. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.81.

The role of epigenomics in the neurodegeneration of ataxia-telangiectasia.

Li J(1), Jiang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models & Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences & Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China.

PMID: 25942530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncoimmunology. 2014 Dec 21;3(11):e970025. eCollection 2014.

Ectopic expression of embryonic stem cell and other developmental genes in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Litvinov IV(1), Netchiporouk E(1), Cordeiro B(1), Zargham H(1), Pehr K(1),
Gilbert M(2), Zhou Y(3), Moreau L(1), Woetmann A(4), Ødum N(4), Kupper TS(5),
Sasseville D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology; McGill University Health Centre ; Montréal, QC
Canada. (2)Division of Dermatology; Université Laval ; Québec City, QC Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Skin Science; University of British Columbia ;
Vancouver, BC Canada. (4)Department of International Health, Immunology, and
Microbiology; University of Copenhagen ; Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Department of
Dermatology; Harvard Skin Disease Research Center; Brigham and Women's Hospital; 
Harvard University ; Boston, MA USA.

Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) is a potentially devastating malignancy. The
pathogenesis of this cancer remains poorly elucidated. Previous studies focused
on analysis of expression and function of known oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes. However, emerging reports highlight that it is also important to analyze
the expression of genes that are ectopically expressed in CTCL (e.g., embryonic
stem cell genes (ESC), cancer testis (CT) genes, etc.). Currently, it is not
known whether ESC genes are expressed in CTCL. In the current work, we analyze by
RT-PCR the expression of 26 ESC genes, many of which are known to regulate
pluripotency and promote cancer stem cell-like phenotype, in a historic cohort of
60 patients from Boston and in a panel of 11 patient-derived CTCL cell lines and 
compare such expression to benign inflammatory dermatoses that often clinically
mimic CTCL. Our findings document that many critical ESC genes including NANOG,
SOX2, OCT4 (POU5F1) and their upstream and downstream signaling members are
expressed in CTCL. Similarly, polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) genes (i.e.,
EZH2, EED, and SUZ12) are also expressed in CTCL lesional skin. Furthermore,
select ESC genes (OCT4, EED, TCF3, THAP11, CHD7, TIP60, TRIM28) are
preferentially expressed in CTCL samples when compared to benign skin biopsies.
Our work suggests that ESC genes are ectopically expressed together with CT
genes, thymocyte development genes and B cell-specific genes and may be working
in concert to promote tumorigenesis. Specifically, while ESC genes may be
promoting cancer stem cell-like phenotype, CT genes may be contributing to
aneuploidy and genomic instability by producing aberrant chromosomal
translocations. Further analysis of ESC expression and function in this cancer
will greatly enhance our fundamental understanding of CTCL and will help us
identify novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4368148
PMID: 25941598  [PubMed]


334. J Neurooncol. 2015 May;122(3):481-9. doi: 10.1007/s11060-015-1753-x. Epub 2015
May 5.

MiR-137 inhibits proliferation and angiogenesis of human glioblastoma cells by
targeting EZH2.

Sun J(1), Zheng G, Gu Z, Guo Z.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Intensive Care Unit of Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Command; Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Geriatric Infection and 
Organ Function Support & Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Geriatric Infection and
Organ Function Support, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

It is suggested that microRNAs play important roles in the development of various
cancers. Here, we showed that miR-137 is downregulated in glioblastoma (GBM) cell
lines and that low levels of miR-137 are associated with a poor prognostic
phenotype of GBM patients. Ectopic expression of miR-137 significantly inhibited 
GBM cell proliferation and angiogenesis. In addition, ectopic expression of
miR-137 inhibited tumor growth and angiogenesis in a SCID mouse xenograft model. 
EZH2 was identified as a direct target of miR-137 by using luciferase reporter
and Western blot assays, and EZH2 overexpression can rescue the inhibitory effect
of miR-137 on cell proliferation and angiogenesis. Furthermore, tumor samples
from GBM patients showed an inverse relationship between miR-137 and EZH2 levels.
Our results suggest that miR-137 may serve as a biomarker in GBM, and the
modulation of its activity may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of GBM patients.

PMID: 25939439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Oct;135(10):2446-54. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.175. Epub 2015
May 4.

Confluence-Induced Squamous Differentiation Is Not Accompanied by Changes in
H3K27me3 Repressive Epigenetic Mark.

Gannon OM(1), de Long LM(1), Hazar-Rethinam M(1), Topkas E(1), Endo-Munoz LB(1), 
Thomas GP(1), Zhang P(1), Saunders NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, The University of
Queensland, Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Recent studies have reported that epigenetic mechanisms may regulate the
initiation and progress of squamous differentiation in normal and transformed
keratinocytes. In particular, the role of the repressive H3K27me3 mark in the
regulation of squamous differentiation has been prominent. However, there is
conflicting literature showing that squamous differentiation may be dependent
upon or independent of changes in H3K27me3 status. In this study we have examined
the binding of trimethylated H3K27 to the promoters of proliferation or
differentiation genes in keratinocytes undergoing squamous differentiation in
vitro and in vivo. Initially, we examined the expression levels for EZH1, EZH2,
and H3K27me3 in differentiating keratinocytes in vitro and in vivo. We extended
this to include H3K27me3 chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq).
Based on these studies, we could find no evidence for an association between
widespread gain or loss of H3K27me3 on the promoters of proliferation-specific or
differentiation-specific target genes, respectively, during squamous
differentiation in adult human keratinocytes. These data suggest that squamous
differentiation may occur independent of regulation by H3K27me3 on proliferation 
and differentiation genes of normal adult human keratinocytes.

PMID: 25938557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Leuk Res. 2015 Jul;39(7):709-18. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.03.017. Epub 2015
Apr 6.

Whole genome and transcriptome analysis of a novel AML cell line with a normal
karyotype.

Gosse G(1), Celton M(2), Lamontagne V(2), Forest A(2), Wilhelm BT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory for High Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC,
Canada; The Leucegene Project, Canada. (2)Institute for Research in Immunology
and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory for High
Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC, Canada. (3)Institute for Research in
Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; Laboratory
for High Throughput Genomics, Montreal, QC, Canada; The Leucegene Project,
Canada. Electronic address: brian.wilhelm@umontreal.ca.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) occurs when hematopoietic progenitor cells acquire
genetic defects blocking the regulation of normal growth and differentiation.
Although recurrent translocations have been identified in AML, almost half of
adult AML patients present with a normal karyotype (NK-AML). While cell line
models exist to study AML, they frequently have abnormal/unstable karyotypes,
while primary cells from NK-AML patients are difficult to maintain in vitro. Here
we provide a thorough molecular characterization of a recently established cell
line, CG-SH, which has normal cytogenetics, representing a useful new model for
NK-AML. Using high-throughput DNA sequencing, we first defined the genetic
background of this cell line. In addition to identifying potentially deleterious 
SNVs in genes relevant to AML, we also found insertions in both GATA2 and EZH2,
two genes previously linked to AML. We further characterized the growth of this
model system in vitro with a cytokine mix that promotes faster cell growth. We
assessed gene expression changes after the addition of cytokines to the culture
media and found differential expression in genes implicated in proliferation,
apoptosis and differentiation. Our results provide a detailed molecular
characterization of genetic defects in this cell line derived from an NK-AML
patient.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25934047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2015 May 1;10(5):e0122143. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122143.
eCollection 2015.

Integrative Analysis of Normal Long Intergenic Non-Coding RNAs in Prostate
Cancer.

Bawa P(1), Zackaria S(2), Verma M(2), Gupta S(2), Srivatsan R(2), Chaudhary B(2),
Srinivasan S(2).

Author information: 
(1)IBAB, Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India; Manipal University, Manipal, Karnataka, India. (2)IBAB,
Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Bangalore, Karnataka,
India.

Recently, large numbers of normal human tissues have been profiled for non-coding
RNAs and more than fourteen thousand long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs)
are found expressed in normal human tissues. The functional roles of these normal
lincRNAs (nlincRNAs) in the regulation of protein coding genes in normal and
disease biology are yet to be established. Here, we have profiled two RNA-seq
datasets including cancer and matched non-neoplastic tissues from 12 individuals 
from diverse demography for both coding genes and nlincRNAs. We find 130
nlincRNAs significantly regulated in cancer, with 127 regulated in the same
direction in the two datasets. Interestingly, according to Illumina Body Map,
significant numbers of these nlincRNAs display baseline null expression in normal
prostate tissues but are specific to other tissues such as thyroid, kidney, liver
and testis. A number of the regulated nlincRNAs share loci with coding genes,
which are either co-regulated or oppositely regulated in all cancer samples
studied here. For example, in all cancer samples i) the nlincRNA, TCONS_00029157,
and a neighboring tumor suppressor factor, SIK1, are both down regulated; ii)
several thyroid-specific nlincRNAs in the neighborhood of the thyroid-specific
gene TPO, are both up-regulated; and iii) the TCONS_00010581, an isoform of HEIH,
is down-regulated while the neighboring EZH2 gene is up-regulated in cancer.
Several nlincRNAs from a prostate cancer associated chromosomal locus, 8q24, are 
up-regulated in cancer along with other known prostate cancer associated genes
including PCAT-1, PVT1, and PCAT-92. We observe that there is significant bias
towards up-regulation of nlincRNAs with as high as 118 out of 127 up-regulated in
cancer, even though regulation of coding genes is skewed towards down-regulation.
Considering that all reported cancer associated lincRNAs (clincRNAs) are biased
towards up-regulation, we conclude that this bias may be functionally relevant.

PMCID: PMC4416928
PMID: 25933431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Ann Lab Med. 2015 May;35(3):288-97. doi: 10.3343/alm.2015.35.3.288. Epub 2015 Apr
1.

Incidences and Prognostic Impact of c-KIT, WT1, CEBPA, and CBL Mutations, and
Mutations Associated With Epigenetic Modification in Core Binding Factor Acute
Myeloid Leukemia: A Multicenter Study in a Korean Population.

Park SH(1), Lee HJ(2), Kim IS(3), Kang JE(4), Lee EY(1), Kim HJ(5), Kim YK(5),
Won JH(6), Bang SM(7), Kim H(8), Song MK(9), Chung JS(9), Shin HJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Pusan National University Hospital, Biomedical Research Institute,
Pusan National University Hospital, Busan, Korea. (2)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Korean Red cross, Changwon, Korea. (3)Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Pusan National University
Yangsan Hospital, Yangsan, Korea. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Jinhae
Yonsei Hospital, Changwon, Korea. (5)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Chonnam
National University Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun, Korea. (6)Department of
Hematology-Oncology, Soonchunhyang University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.
(7)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam, Korea. (8)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Ulsan University Hospital,
Ulsan, Korea. (9)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Biomedical Research
Institute, Pusan National University Hospital, Busan, Korea.

BACKGROUND: To identify potential molecular prognostic markers in core binding
factor (CBF) AML, we analyzed incidences and prognostic impacts of mutations in
c-KIT, WT1, CEBPA, CBL, and a number of epigenetic genes in CBF AML.
METHODS: Seventy one and 21 AML patients with t(8;21) and inv(16) were enrolled
in this study, respectively. NPM1, CEBPA, c-KIT, IDH1/2, DNMT3A, EZH2, WT1, and
CBL mutations were analyzed by direct sequencing. Patients were categorized with 
respect to c-KIT and WT1 mutation status, and both clinical features and
prognoses were compared.
RESULTS: The incidences of FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD), NPM1, CEBPA,
IDH1/2, DNMT3A, EZH2, and CBL mutations were low (=5%) in CBF AML patients.
However, c-KIT and WT1 mutations occurred frequently (10.9% and 13.8%,
respectively). t(8;21) patients with c-KIT mutations showed significantly shorter
overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS) periods than those without 
mutations (P<0.001, for both); however, although the limited number of t(8;21)
patients were analyzed, WT1 mutation status did not affect prognosis
significantly. Relapse or death during follow-up occurred more frequently in
t(8;21) patients carrying c-KIT mutations than in those without the mutation,
although the difference was significant only in a specific patient subgroup with 
no WT1 mutations (P=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: The incidences of mutations in epigenetic genes are very low in CBF 
AML; however, c-KIT and WT1 mutations occur more frequently than others. The poor
prognostic impact of c-KIT mutation in t(8;21) AML patients only applies in a
specific patient subgroup without WT1 mutations. The prognostic impact of WT1
mutation in CBF AML is not evident and further investigation is required.

PMCID: PMC4390696
PMID: 25932436  [PubMed - in process]


339. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(10):1596-610. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1026485.

Destabilization of pluripotency in the absence of Mad2l2.

Pirouz M(1), Rahjouei A, Shamsi F, Eckermann KN, Salinas-Riester G, Pommerenke C,
Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Cell Biology ; Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry ; Goettingen ; Germany.

The induction and maintenance of pluripotency requires the expression of several 
core factors at appropriate levels (Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, Prdm14). A subset of these 
proteins (Oct4, Sox2, Prdm14) also plays crucial roles for the establishment of
primordial germ cells (PGCs). Here we demonstrate that the Mad2l2 (MAD2B, Rev7)
gene product is not only required by PGCs, but also by pluripotent embryonic stem
cells (ESCs), depending on the growth conditions. Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs were unstable 
in LIF/serum medium, and differentiated into primitive endoderm. However, they
could be stably propagated using small molecule inhibitors of MAPK signaling.
Several components of the MAPK cascade were up- or downregulated even in
undifferentiated Mad2l2(-/-) ESCs. Global levels of repressive histone H3
variants were increased in mutant ESCs, and the epigenetic signatures on
pluripotency-, primitive endoderm-, and MAPK-related loci differed. Thus, H3K9me2
repressed the Nanog promoter, while the promoter of Gata4 lost H3K27me3 and
became de-repressed in LIF/serum condition. Promoters associated with genes
involved in MAPK signaling also showed misregulation of these histone marks. Such
epigenetic modifications could be indirect consequences of mutating Mad2l2.
However, our previous observations suggested the histone methyltransferases as
direct (G9a) or indirect (Ezh2) targets of Mad2l2. In effect, the intricate
balance necessary for pluripotency becomes perturbed in the absence of Mad2l2.

PMCID: PMC4614513 [Available on 2016-04-30]
PMID: 25928475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Molecules. 2015 Apr 27;20(5):7620-36. doi: 10.3390/molecules20057620.

5-Methoxyquinoline Derivatives as a New Class of EZH2 Inhibitors.

Xiang P(1), Jie H(1), Zhou Y(1), Yang B(2), Wang HJ(1), Hu J(1), Hu J(3), Yang
SY(1), Zhao YL(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu
610041, China. (2)West China School of Pharmacy, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China. (3)The Second Division of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Center of PLA,
Center of General Surgery of PLA, General Hospital of Chengdu Military Region,
Chengdu 610083, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, and Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Biotherapy, Chengdu 610041, China. zhaoyinglan@scu.edu.cn.

A series of quinoline derivatives was synthesized and biologically evaluated as
Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2) inhibitors. Structure-activity relationship 
(SAR) studies led to the discovery of
5-methoxy-2-(4-methyl-1,4-diazepan-1-yl)-N-(1-methylpiperidin-4-yl)quinolin-4-ami
ne (5k), which displayed an IC50 value of 1.2 µM against EZH2, decreased global
H3K27me3 level in cells and also showed good anti-viability activities against
two tumor cell lines. Due to the low molecular weight and the fact that no
quinoline derivative has been reported as an EZH2 inhibitor, this compound could 
serve as a lead compound for further optimization.

PMID: 25923513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cell Signal. 2015 Aug;27(8):1589-96. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.04.008. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2) methyltransferase regulates transgelin/smooth 
muscle-22a expression in endothelial cells in response to interleukin-1ß and
transforming growth factor-ß2.

Maleszewska M(1), Gjaltema RA(1), Krenning G(1), Harmsen MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Pathology and Medical Biology, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ Groningen, The
Netherlands. (2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, Hanzeplein 1 (EA11), 9713 GZ
Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: m.c.harmsen@umcg.nl.

Smooth muscle-22a (SM22a), encoded by transgelin (TAGLN), is expressed in
mesenchymal lineage cells, including myofibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. It
is an F-actin binding protein that regulates the organization of actin
cytoskeleton, cellular contractility and motility. SM22a is crucial for the
maintenance of smooth muscle cell phenotype and its function. SM22a is also
expressed in the processes of mesenchymal transition of epithelial (EMT) or
endothelial cells (EndMT). The expression of TAGLN/SM22a is induced by
transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) signaling and enhanced by concomitant
interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) signaling. We investigated the epigenetic regulation of
TAGLN expression by enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2), the methyltransferase of 
Polycomb, in the context of TGFß and IL-1ß signaling in endothelial cells. We
demonstrate that the expression of EZH2 in endothelial cells was regulated by the
inflammatory cytokine IL-1ß. A decrease in both expression and activity of EZH2
led to an increase in TAGLN expression. Inhibition of EZH2 augmented
TGFß2-induced SM22a expression. The decrease of EZH2 levels in endothelial cells 
co-stimulated with IL-1ß and TGFß2 correlated with decreased H3K27me3 levels at
the TAGLN proximal promoter. Moreover, the SM22a expression increased. Taken
together, this suggests that EZH2 regulates the chromatin structure at the TAGLN 
promoter through tri-methylation of H3K27. EZH2 therefore acts as an epigenetic
integrator of IL-1ß and TGFß2 signaling, providing an example of how cellular
signaling can be resolved at the level of epigenetic regulation. Since IL-1ß and 
TGFß2 represent the pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic conditions during vascular 
fibroproliferative disease, we surmise that EZH2, as the molecule that integrates
their signaling, could also be a promising target for development of future
therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25917318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Hum Pathol. 2015 Jul;46(7):971-80. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.01.023. Epub 2015 
Mar 18.

MicroRNA-144 suppresses tumorigenesis and tumor progression of astrocytoma by
targeting EZH2.

Lin L(1), Zheng Y(1), Tu Y(2), Wang Z(2), Liu H(2), Lu X(1), Xu L(1), Yuan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Shantou University, Shantou 515041, China. (2)Department of Experimental Surgery,
Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Shantou University, Shantou 515041, China. Electronic address: yjunst@163.com.

Our previous study demonstrated that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
overexpression may be associated with aggressive tumor progression and poor
prognosis in human astrocytoma. The aim of this study was to investigate the
underlying mechanisms of EZH2 on astrocytoma tumorigenesis. An online program
miRWalk (http://www.umm.uni-heidelberg.de/apps/zmf/mirwalk/) was used to predict 
possible microRNAs (miRNAs) that might target EZH2 messenger RNA (mRNA). Then the
functions of the miRNA-EZH2 mRNA axis in astrocytoma cell proliferation,
invasion, and migration were also assessed. We further evaluated the clinical
value of the miRNA-EZH2 mRNA axis in astrocytomas. As a result, we identified
EZH2 as a target gene of miR-144. In addition, forced expression of miR-144
suppressed astrocytoma cell proliferation, invasion, and migration by
down-regulating EZH2. Moreover, miR-144 down-regulation and EZH2 mRNA
up-regulation were both significantly associated with advanced World Health
Organization grades and low Karnofsky performance status score of astrocytoma
patients. Importantly, survival analysis identified the combined expression of
miR-144 and EZH2 (miR-144/EZH2) as an independent prognostic factor for overall
survival in astrocytoma patients. In conclusion, miR-144 may function as a tumor 
suppressor by regulating EZH2 expression, and miR-144/EZH2 expression may be a
highly sensitive marker for the prognosis in astrocytoma patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2586-94. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2976. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR promotes tumor cell invasion and metastasis by
recruiting EZH2 and repressing E-cadherin in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Wu Y(1), Zhang L(2), Zhang L(1), Wang Y(3), Li H(3), Ren X(4), Wei F(3), Yu W(3),
Liu T(3), Wang X(1), Zhou X(1), Yu J(3), Hao X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial and Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery,
Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Breast Cancer Medical Oncology, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China. (3)Biotherapy Center, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Immunology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Tianjin, P.R. China.

HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), a long intergenic non-coding RNA (lncRNA),
functions as a molecular scaffold to link and target the histone modification
complexes PRC2 and LSD1, then reprograms chromatin states by coupling histone
H3K27 methylation and H3K4 demethylation for epigenetic gene silencing to promote
cancer metastasis. It is associated with poor survival in several solid cancers. 
In this study, we show that HOTAIR expression increased in oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) compared with non-tumor tissue and is associated with
metastasis, the stage and histological differentiation. In addition,
overexpression of HOTAIR indicated poor overall survival (OS) and disease-free
survival (DFS) in OSCC patients. Knockdown of HOTAIR by siRNA in OSCC cells
decreased cell proliferation and colony formation, increased cell invasion and
migration, and induced apoptosis in vitro. Furthermore, significant negative
correlation between HOTAIR levels and E-cadherin levels was found in OSCC tissues
and cell lines, and HOTAIR contributed to the regulation of E-cadherin through
binding to EZH2 and H3K27me3 with the E-cadherin promoter. Our findings suggest
that HOTAIR expression is associated with OSCC and may be one of critical targets
in progression and metastasis, and an indicator of poor survival in OSCC.

PMID: 25901533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Feb 15;7(2):175-93. eCollection 2015.

Diverse involvement of EZH2 in cancer epigenetics.

Völkel P(1), Dupret B(2), Le Bourhis X(2), Angrand PO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Plasticity & Cancer - Inserm U908, University of Lille Bâtiment SN3, Cité
Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France ; Interdisciplinary Research
Institute - CNRS USR3078/University of Lille Parc de la Haute Borne, 50 avenue de
Halley, F-59658 Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. (2)Cell Plasticity & Cancer - Inserm
U908, University of Lille Bâtiment SN3, Cité Scientifique, F-59655 Villeneuve
d'Ascq, France.

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 (PRC2) which
catalyzes methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me) and mediates gene
silencing of target genes via local chromatin reorganization. Numerous evidences 
show that EZH2 plays a critical role in cancer initiation, progression and
metastasis, as well as in cancer stem cell biology. Indeed, EZH2 dysregulation
alters gene expression programs in various cancer types. The molecular mechanisms
responsible for EZH2 alteration appear to be diverse and depending on the type of
cancer. Furthermore, accumulating evidences indicate that EZH2 could also act as 
a PRC2-independent transcriptional activator in cancer. In this review, we
address the current understanding of the oncogenic role of EZH2, including the
mechanisms of EZH2 dysregulation in cancer and progresses in therapeutic
approaches targeting EZH2.

PMCID: PMC4399085
PMID: 25901190  [PubMed]


345. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 4;35(5):558-66. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.114. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Development of secondary mutations in wild-type and mutant EZH2 alleles
cooperates to confer resistance to EZH2 inhibitors.

Gibaja V(1), Shen F(1), Harari J(1), Korn J(1), Ruddy D(1), Saenz-Vash V(1), Zhai
H(1), Rejtar T(1), Paris CG(1), Yu Z(2), Lira M(1), King D(1), Qi W(2), Keen
N(1), Hassan AQ(1), Chan HM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA. (2)China
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Shanghai, China.

The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is frequently
dysregulated in cancers, and gain-of-function (GOF) EZH2 mutations have been
identified in non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Small-molecule inhibitors against EZH2
demonstrated anti-tumor activity in EZH2-mutated lymphomas and entered clinical
trials. Here, we developed models of acquired resistance to EZH2 inhibitor EI1
with EZH2-mutated lymphoma cells. Resistance was generated by secondary mutations
in both wild-type (WT) and GOF Y641N EZH2 alleles. These EZH2 mutants retained
the substrate specificity of their predecessor complexes but became refractory to
biochemical inhibition by EZH2 inhibitors. Resistant cells were able to maintain 
a high level of H3K27Me3 in the presence of inhibitors. Interestingly, mutation
of EZH2 WT alone generated an intermediate resistance phenotype, which is
consistent with a previously proposed model of cooperation between EZH2 WT and
Y641N mutants to promote tumorigenesis. In addition, the findings presented here 
have implications for the clinical translation of EZH2 inhibitors and underscore 
the need to develop novel EZH2 inhibitors to target potential resistance emerging
in clinical settings.

PMCID: PMC4744243
PMID: 25893294  [PubMed - in process]


346. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 11;35(6):715-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.122. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Hepatitis B virus X protein induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation
directed by RelA in complex with EZH2 and TET2.

Fan H(1,)(2), Zhang H(1,)(2), Pascuzzi PE(3), Andrisani O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN,
USA. (2)Department of Purdue Center for Cancer Research, Purdue University, West 
Lafayette, IN, USA. (3)Purdue University Libraries, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN, USA.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major risk factor for developing
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and HBV X protein (HBx) acts as cofactor in
hepatocarcinogenesis. In liver tumors from animals modeling HBx- and HBV-mediated
hepatocarcinogenesis, downregulation of chromatin regulating proteins SUZ12 and
ZNF198 induces expression of several genes, including epithelial cell adhesion
molecule (EpCAM). EpCAM upregulation occurs in HBV-mediated HCCs and hepatic
cancer stem cells, by a mechanism not understood. Herein we demonstrate HBx
induces EpCAM expression via active DNA demethylation. In hepatocytes, EpCAM is
silenced by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and ZNF198/LSD1/Co-REST/HDAC1
chromatin-modifying complexes. Cells with stable knockdown of SUZ12, an essential
PRC2 subunit, upon HBx expression demethylate a CpG dinucleotide located adjacent
to NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA half-site. This NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA site is in a CpG island downstream from 
EpCAM transcriptional start site (TSS). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
assays demonstrate HBx-dependent RelA occupancy of NF-<U+03BA>B half-site, whereas RelA 
knockdown suppresses CpG demethylation and EpCAM expression. Tumor necrosis
factor-a activates RelA, propagating demethylation to nearby CpG sites, shown by 
sodium bisulfite sequencing. RelA-dependent demethylation occurring upon HBx
expression requires methyltrasferase EZH2, TET2 a key factor in cytosine
demethylation and inactive DNMT3L, shown by knockdown assays and sodium bisulfite
sequencing. Co-immunoprecipitations and sequential ChIP assays demonstrate that
RelA in the presence of HBx forms a complex with EZH2, TET2 and DNMT3L, although 
the role of DNMT3L remains to be understood. Interestingly, the human EpCAM gene 
also has a CpG island downstream from its TSS, and a NF-<U+03BA>B-binding site flanked
by CpGs. HepG2 cells derived from human HCC exhibit demethylation of these
NF-<U+03BA>B-flanking CpG sites, and HBV replication propagates demethylation to nearby 
CpG sites. DLK1, another PRC2 target gene, also upregulated in HBV-mediated HCCs,
is demethylated in liver tumors at CpG dinucleotides flanking the NF-<U+03BA>B-binding
sequence, supporting that this active DNA demethylation mechanism functions
during oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC4615262 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 25893293  [PubMed - in process]


347. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2015 Mar 21;6:42. doi: 10.1186/s13287-015-0045-x.

Predicting involvement of polycomb repressive complex 2 in direct conversion of
mouse fibroblasts into induced neural stem cells.

Yaqubi M(1), Mohammadnia A(2), Fallahi H(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering
and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. moein.yaqubi@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Molecular Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Iran. shakour.biology@yahoo.com. (3)Department of 
Biology, School of Science, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran.
h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir. (4)Medical Biology Research Center, Kermanshah University
of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran. h.fallahi@razi.ac.ir.

INTRODUCTION: Mouse fibroblasts could be directly converted into induced neural
stem cells (iNSCs), by introducing a set of known transcription factors (TFs).
This process, known as direct reprogramming, is an alternative source of NSCs
production for cell therapy applications, hence, more common sources for such
cells including embryonic stem cell (ESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cell
(iPSCs) are also in use. Despite their importance, the exact role of different
TFs involved in the conversion of fibroblasts into iNSCs and the interactions
between these factors has not been studied.
METHODS: Here, we have used available microarray data to construct a gene
regulatory network to understand the dynamic of regulatory interactions during
this conversion. We have implemented other types of data such as information
regarding TFs binding sites and valid protein-protein interactions to improve the
network reliability. The network contained 1857 differentially expressed (DE)
genes, linked by11054 interactions. The most important TFs identified based on
topology analysis of the network. Furthermore, in selecting such TFs, we have
also considered their role in the regulation of nervous system development.
RESULTS: Based on these analyses, we found that Ezh2, Jarid2, Mtf2, Nanog,
Pou5f1, Sall4, Smarca4, Sox2, Suz12, and Tcf3 are the main regulators of direct
conversion of mouse fibroblasts into iNSCs. Because, members of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) were present in the most effective TFs' list, we have
concluded that this complex is one of the major factors in this conversion.
Additionally, gene expression profiling of iNSCs, obtained from a different data 
sets, showed that Sox2 and Ezh2 are two main regulators of the direct
reprogramming process.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide an insight into molecular events that occur
during direct reprogramming of fibroblasts into iNSCs. This information could be 
useful in simplifying the production of iNSCs, by reducing the number of required
factors, for use in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC4397673
PMID: 25890371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 12;14:82. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0355-8.

Long noncoding RNA PVT1 indicates a poor prognosis of gastric cancer and promotes
cell proliferation through epigenetically regulating p15 and p16.

Kong R(1,)(2), Zhang EB(3), Yin DD(4), You LH(5), Xu TP(6), Chen WM(7), Xia R(8),
Wan L(9), Sun M(10), Wang ZX(11), De W(12), Zhang ZH(13).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medical Examination Center, Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital,
Yangzhou, Jiangsu, PR China. 31815857@qq.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.
31815857@qq.com. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. 273459189@qq.com. (4)Cancer
Research and Therapy Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Southeast
University, Nanjing, 210029, Jiangsu, PR China. jsnydandan@sina.com. (5)Nanjing
Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health
Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
991310547@qq.com. (6)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. xutongpeng_njmu@163.com.
(7)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China. chenwenming_njmu@163.com. (8)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, PR China. 854620993@qq.com. (9)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Jiangjiayuan Road, Nanjing, 210011,
Jiangsu, PR China. 411076921@qq.com. (10)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.
504997498@qq.com. (11)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Jiangjiayuan Road, Nanjing, 210011, Jiangsu, PR
China. zhaoxiawang88@hotmail.com. (12)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.
dewei@njmu.edu.cn. (13)Departments of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.
zhihongzhang1003@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Mounting evidence indicates that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) could 
play a pivotal role in cancer biology. However, the overall biological role and
clinical significance of PVT1 in gastric carcinogenesis remains largely unknown.
METHODS: Expression of PVT1 was analyzed in 80 GC tissues and cell lines by
qRT-PCR. The effect of PVT1 on proliferation was evaluated by MTT and colony
formation assays, and cell apoptosis was evaluated by Flow-cytometric analysis.
GC cells transfected with shPVT1 were injected into nude mice to study the effect
of PVT1 on tumorigenesis in vivo. RIP was performed to confirm the interaction
between PVT1 and EZH2. ChIP was used to study the promoter region of related
genes.
RESULTS: The higher expression of PVT1 was significantly correlated with deeper
invasion depth and advanced TNM stage. Multivariate analyses revealed that PVT1
expression served as an independent predictor for overall survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031).
Further experiments demonstrated that PVT1 knockdown significantly inhibited the 
proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Importantly, we also showed that PVT1
played a key role in G1 arrest. Moreover, we further confirmed that PVT1 was
associated with enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and that this association was 
required for the repression of p15 and p16. To our knowledge, this is the first
report showed that the role and the mechanism of PVT1 in the progression of
gastric cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results suggest that lncRNA PVT1 may serve as a
candidate prognostic biomarker and target for new therapies in human gastric
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4399399
PMID: 25890171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cancer. 2015 Mar 7;14:55. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0325-1.

Antitumor effects of pharmacological EZH2 inhibition on malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor through the miR-30a and KPNB1 pathway.

Zhang P(1), Yang X(2), Ma X(3), Ingram DR(4), Lazar AJ(5), Torres KE(6), Pollock 
RE(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. pinzhang@mdanderson.org. (2)AM Biotechnologies, 12521
Gulf Freeway, Houston, TX, USA. xianbin.yang@thioaptamer.com. (3)Department of
Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. XMa1@mdanderson.org. (4)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. DRIngram@mdanderson.org.
(5)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. alazar@mdanderson.org. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
ketorres@mdanderson.org. (7)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. raphael.pollock@osumc.edu.
(8)Current address: Department of Surgical Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. raphael.pollock@osumc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a key epigenetic regulator in
cancer cell survival, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and tumorigenesis.
Inhibition of EZH2 has become a promising therapeutic option for various human
malignancies. Previously, we demonstrated that the EZH2/miR-30d/karyopherin
(importin) beta 1 (KPNB1) signaling pathway is critical for malignant peripheral 
nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) cell survival in vitro and for tumorigenesis in vivo. 
Here, we sought to determine the antitumor effects of pharmacological inhibition 
of EZH2 on MPNST in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: We investigated the effects of an EZH2 inhibitor, 3-deazaneplanocin A
(DZNep), on MPNST cell cycle, survival and apoptosis in vitro and on MPNST
xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
RESULTS: We found that DZNep treatment impaired MPNST cell viability and
proliferation by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in vitro. Consistently,
DZNep treatment also reduced EZH2 and KPNB1 protein levels and upregulated
miR-30d expression in MPNST cells. Intraperitoneal administration of DZNep
significantly suppressed MPNST tumor initiation and growth rates in a MPNST
xenograft mouse model. Immunoblot and immunohistochemical analyses showed that
DZNep downregulated EZH2/KPNB1 signaling in vivo, thereby inhibiting MPNST tumor 
cell proliferation, and induced cell death. We also found that EZH2 inhibited
expression of another miR-30 family member, miR-30a, in MPNST cells. Similar to
miR-30d, miR-30a inhibited KPNB1 by targeting the KPNB1 3' untranslated region in
MPNST cells. Our data also showed that EZH2 suppressed miR-200b expression and
induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition in MPNST cells.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrated that DZNep, an inhibitor of
S-adenosyl-methionine-dependent methyltransferase, suppressed
EZH2/miR-30a,d/KPNB1 signaling and blocked MPNST tumor cell growth and survival
in vitro and in vivo. More importantly, our study indicated that pharmacological 
interference of EZH2 is a potential therapeutic approach for MPNST.

PMCID: PMC4357176
PMID: 25890085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Epigenetics. 2015;10(6):484-95. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1040619. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 epigenomic signature defines age-associated
hypermethylation and gene expression changes.

Dozmorov MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biostatistics; Virginia Commonwealth University ; Richmond ,
VA , USA.

Although age-associated gene expression and methylation changes have been
reported throughout the literature, the unifying epigenomic principles of aging
remain poorly understood. Recent explosion in availability and resolution of
functional/regulatory genome annotation data (epigenomic data), such as that
provided by the ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics projects, provides an opportunity 
for the identification of epigenomic mechanisms potentially altered by
age-associated differentially methylated regions (aDMRs) and regulatory
signatures in the promoters of age-associated genes (aGENs). In this study we
found that aDMRs and aGENs identified in multiple independent studies share a
common Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 signature marked by EZH2, SUZ12, CTCF
binding sites, repressive H3K27me3, and activating H3K4me1 histone modification
marks, and a "poised promoter" chromatin state. This signature is depleted in RNA
Polymerase II-associated transcription factor binding sites, activating H3K79me2,
H3K36me3, H3K27ac marks, and an "active promoter" chromatin state. The PRC2
signature was shown to be generally stable across cell types. When considering
the directionality of methylation changes, we found the PRC2 signature to be
associated with aDMRs hypermethylated with age, while hypomethylated aDMRs were
associated with enhancers. In contrast, aGENs were associated with the PRC2
signature independently of the directionality of gene expression changes. In this
study we demonstrate that the PRC2 signature is the common epigenomic context of 
genomic regions associated with hypermethylation and gene expression changes in
aging.

PMCID: PMC4623031 [Available on 2016-04-16]
PMID: 25880792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 12;15:273. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1208-y.

DNA methylation and histone modifications regulate SOX11 expression in lymphoid
and solid cancer cells.

Nordström L(1), Andersson E(2), Kuci V(3), Gustavsson E(4), Holm K(5), Ringnér
M(6), Guldberg P(7), Ek S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunotechnology, CREATE Health, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
lena.nordstrom@immun.lth.se. (2)Danish Cancer Society Research Center,
Copenhagen, Denmark. elinandersson74@gmail.com. (3)Department of
Immunotechnology, CREATE Health, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
venera.kuci@immun.lth.se. (4)Department of Immunotechnology, CREATE Health, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. elin.gustavsson@roche.com. (5)Department of Oncology
and Pathology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Skåne University Hospital,
Lund, Sweden. karolina.holm@med.lu.se. (6)Department of Oncology and Pathology,
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
markus.ringner@med.lu.se. (7)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen,
Denmark. PerG@cancer.dk. (8)Department of Immunotechnology, CREATE Health, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden. sara.ek@immun.lth.se.

BACKGROUND: The neural transcription factor SOX11 is present at specific stages
during embryo development with a very restricted expression in adult tissue,
indicating precise regulation of transcription. SOX11 is strongly up-regulated in
some malignancies and have a functional role in tumorgenesis. With the aim to
explore differences in epigenetic regulation of SOX11 expression in normal versus
neoplastic cells, we investigated methylation and histone modifications related
to the SOX11 promoter and the possibility to induce re-expression using histone
deacetylase (HDAC) or EZH2 inhibitors.
METHODS: The epigenetic regulation of SOX11 was investigated in distinct
non-malignant cell populations (n = 7) and neoplastic cell-lines (n = 42) of
different cellular origins. DNA methylation was assessed using bisulfite
sequencing, methylation-specific melting curve analysis, MethyLight and
pyrosequencing. The presence of H3K27me3 was assessed using ChIP-qPCR. The HDAC
inhibitors Vorinostat and trichostatin A were used to induce SOX11 in cell lines 
with no endogenous expression.
RESULTS: The SOX11 promoter shows a low degree of methylation and strong
enrichment of H3K27me3 in non-malignant differentiated cells, independent of
cellular origin. Cancers of the B-cell lineage are strongly marked by de novo
methylation at the SOX11 promoter in SOX11 non-expressing cells, while solid
cancer entities display a more varying degree of SOX11 promoter methylation. The 
silencing mark H3K27me3 was generally present at the SOX11 promoter in
non-expressing cells, and an increased enrichment was observed in cancer cells
with a low degree of SOX11 methylation compared to cells with dense methylation. 
Finally, we demonstrate that the HDAC inhibitors (vorinostat and trichostatin A) 
induce SOX11 expression in cancer cells with low levels of SOX11 methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that SOX11 is strongly marked by repressive histone marks in
non-malignant cells. In contrast, SOX11 regulation in neoplastic tissues is more 
complex involving both DNA methylation and histone modifications. The possibility
to re-express SOX11 in non-methylated tissue is of clinical relevance, and was
successfully achieved in cell lines with low levels of SOX11 methylation. In
breast cancer patients, methylation of the SOX11 promoter was shown to correlate 
with estrogen receptor status, suggesting that SOX11 may be functionally
re-expressed during treatment with HDAC inhibitors in specific patient subgroups.

PMCID: PMC4403777
PMID: 25880212  [PubMed - in process]


352. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):7159-66. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3417-z. Epub 2015
Apr 17.

Overexpression of YB1 and EZH2 are associated with cancer metastasis and poor
prognosis in renal cell carcinomas.

Wang Y(1), Chen Y(2), Geng H(3), Qi C(4), Liu Y(2), Yue D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tianjin Institute of Urology, Tianjin Medical
University Second Hospital, Tianjin, 300211, China. (2)School of Laboratory
Medicine, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300203, China. (3)Research Center 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(4)Department of Urology, Children's Hospital of Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang,
050031, China. (5)School of Laboratory Medicine, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, 300203, China. danyue0705@sina.cn.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common type of kidney cancers in adults,
and metastasis represents the major cause of mortality of RCC patients. The Y-box
binding protein 1 (YB1) is a multifunctional oncoprotein in various malignancies.
Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a polycomb histone methyltransferase, is a
key epigenetic modifier implicated in various cancer metastasis. However, the
expression patterns and clinical correlations of both YB1 and EZH2 in RCC remain 
largely unclear. In this study, the expression of YB1 and EZH2 were examined
using immunohistochemistry staining in a study cohort including 165 RCC and 80
tumor adjacent normal tissues. RCC tissues showed a significant higher nuclear
expression of YB1 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and EZH2 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) as compared with the normal
counterparts. In addition, YB1 and EZH2 nuclear overexpression were found to be
positively associated with RCC stage (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005), Fuhrman tumor
grade (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.044), and metastasis (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009).
Overall survival analysis indicated patients with YB1 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.004, HR 5.656
(2.006-10.944)) and/or EZH2 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006, HR 4.551 (2.124-9.438)) nuclear
overexpression correlated with poor survival. More interestingly, YB1 and EZH2
nuclear expression was correlated (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005). Further studies demonstrated that 
EZH2 expression was significantly downregulated in YB1 knockdown RCC cell lines. 
Functionally, YB1 knockdown inhibited RCC invasion in vitro. In conclusion, YB1
and EZH2 expression was correlated and associated with RCC incidence, tumor
stage, grade, metastasis, and survival.

PMID: 25877750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10868-79.

microRNA-217 inhibits tumor progression and metastasis by downregulating EZH2 and
predicts favorable prognosis in gastric cancer.

Chen DL(1,)(2), Zhang DS(1,)(2), Lu YX(1,)(2), Chen LZ(1,)(2), Zeng ZL(1,)(3), He
MM(1,)(2), Wang FH(1,)(2), Li YH(1,)(2), Zhang HZ(1,)(4), Pelicano H(5), Zhang
W(6), Xu RH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Experimental Research, Sun Yat-sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (5)Department of Translational
Molecular Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 
USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Unit 85, Center for RNAi and Non-Coding RNA,
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

microRNA-217 (miR-217) is frequently dysregulated in cancer. Here, we report that
miR-217 levels were lower in tumor tissue compared with the adjacent normal
tissue. Low levels of miR-217 were associated with aggressive tumor phenotypes
and poor overall survival in gastric cancer patients. The ectopic expression of
miR-217 inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion in vitro and tumor
growth and metastasis in vivo, whereas knockdown of endogenous miR-217 increased 
cell proliferation and invasion. Further experiments revealed that Polycomb group
protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) was a direct target of miR-217 in
gastric cancer cells. Knockdown of EZH2 mimicked the tumor-suppressive effects of
miR-217 in gastric cancer cells, whereas the reintroduction of EZH2 abolished its
effects. Taken together, these results demonstrated that miR-217 may be used as a
prognostic marker, and the newly identified miR-217-EZH2 axis may be a potential 
target in the development of therapeutic strategies for gastric cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4484425
PMID: 25869101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Cancer. 2015 Oct 15;137(8):2007-18. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29566. Epub 2015 Apr
24.

ABCB1 and ABCG2 restrict the brain penetration of a panel of novel
EZH2-Inhibitors.

Zhang P(1,)(2), de Gooijer MC(2), Buil LC(2), Beijnen JH(3,)(4), Li G(1), van
Tellingen O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Bio-Pharmacy/Mouse Cancer Clinic,
The Netherlands Cancer Institute (Antoni van Leeuwenhoek), Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute/Slotervaart Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Division of Drug
Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) has emerged as a promising therapeutic target 
for treatment of a broad spectrum of tumors including gliomas. We explored the
interactions of five novel, structurally similar EZH2 inhibitors (EPZ005687,
EPZ-6438, UNC1999, GSK343 and GSK126) with P-glycoprotein (P-gp/ABCB1) and breast
cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2). The compounds were screened by in vitro
transwell assays and EPZ005687, EPZ-6438 and GSK126 were further tested in vivo
using wild-type (WT), Abcb1 and/or Abcg2 knockout mice. All EZH2 inhibitors are
transported by P-gp and BCRP, although in vitro the transporter affinity of
GSK126 was obscured by very low membrane permeability. Both P-gp and Bcrp1
restrict the brain penetration of EPZ005687 and GSK126, whereas the brain
accumulation of EPZ-6438 is limited by P-gp only and efflux of EPZ-6438 was
completely abrogated by elacridar. Intriguingly, an unknown factor present in all
knockout mouse strains causes EPZ005687 and EPZ-6438 retention in plasma relative
to WT mice, a phenomenon not seen with GSK126. In WT mice, the GSK126
tissue-to-plasma ratio for all tissues is lower than for EPZ005687 or EPZ-6438.
Moreover, the oral bioavailability of GSK126 is only 0.2% in WT mice, which
increases to 14.4% in Abcb1;Abcg2 knockout mice. These results are likely due to 
poor membrane permeability and question the clinical usefulness of GSK126.
Although all tested EZH2 inhibitors are substrates of P-gp and BCRP, restricting 
the brain penetration and potential utility for treatment of glioma, EPZ-6438
would be the most suitable candidate of this series.

© 2015 UICC.

PMID: 25868794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun;100(6):E890-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4053. Epub 
2015 Apr 13.

High Diagnostic Accuracy Based on CLDN10, HMGA2, and LAMB3 Transcripts in
Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma.

Barros-Filho MC(1), Marchi FA(1), Pinto CA(1), Rogatto SR(1), Kowalski LP(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Research Center/AC Camargo Cancer Center (M.C.B.F., F.A.M.,
C.A.P., S.R.R., S.R.R.), Sao Paulo 01509-010, SP, Brazil; and Faculty of Medicine
(S.R.R.), Sao Paulo State University, Botucatu 18618-970, SP, Brazil.

CONTEXT: Thyroid nodules are common in adult population and papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC) is the most frequent malignant finding. The natural history of
PTC remains poorly understood and current diagnostic methods limitations are
responsible for a significant number of potentially avoidable surgeries.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to identify molecular markers to improve the
diagnosis of thyroid lesions.
DESIGN: Gene expression profiling was performed using microarray in 61 PTC and 13
surrounding normal tissues (NT). A reliable gene list was established using
cross-study validation (138 matched PTC/NT from external databases). Results were
collectively interpreted by in silico analysis. A panel of 28 transcripts was
evaluated by RT-qPCR, including benign thyroid lesions (BTL) and other follicular
cell-derived thyroid carcinomas (OFDTC). A diagnostic algorithm was developed
(training set: 23 NT, 8 BTL, and 86 PTC), validated (independent set: 10 NT, 140 
BTL, 120 PTC, and 12 OFDTC) and associated with clinical features.
RESULTS: GABRB2 was ranked as the most frequently up-regulated gene in PTC
(cross-study validation). Altered genes in PTC suggested a loss of T4
responsiveness and dysregulation of retinoic acid metabolism, highlighting the
putative activation of EZH2 and histone deacetylases (predicted in silico). An
algorithm combining CLDN10, HMGA2, and LAMB3 transcripts was able to discriminate
tumors from BTL samples (94% sensitivity and 96% specificity in validation set). 
High algorithm scores were associated with regional lymph node metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: A promising tool with high performance for PTC diagnosis based on
three transcripts was designed with the potential to predict lymph node
metastasis risk.

PMID: 25867809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Immunol. 2015 May 15;194(10):5007-13. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403247. Epub 2015 
Apr 10.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 Confers BRG1 Dependency on the CIITA Locus.

Abou El Hassan M(1), Yu T(1), Song L(1), Bremner R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G1X5, Canada; (2)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, Ontario M5G1X5, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada; and
Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5T 3A9, Canada bremner@lunenfeld.ca.

CIITA (or MHC2TA) coordinates constitutive and IFN-<U+03B3>-induced expression of MHC
class II genes. IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness of CIITA requires BRG1 (SMARCA4), the ATPase
engine of the chromatin remodeling SWI/SNF complex (also called BAF). SWI/SNF is 
defective in many human cancers, providing a mechanism to explain IFN-<U+03B3>
resistance. BRG1 dependency is mediated through remote elements. Short CIITA
reporters lacking these elements respond to IFN-<U+03B3>, even in BRG1-deficient cells, 
suggesting that BRG1 counters a remote repressive influence. The nature of this
distal repressor is unknown, but it would represent a valuable therapeutic target
to reactivate IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness in cancer. In this article, we show that the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components EZH2 and SUZ12, as well as the
associated histone mark H3K27me3, are codetected at interenhancer regions across 
the CIITA locus. IFN-<U+03B3> caused a BRG1-dependent reduction in H3K27me3, associated 
with nucleosome displacement. SUZ12 knockdown restored IFN-<U+03B3> responsiveness in
BRG1-null cells, and it mimicked the ability of BRG1 to induce active histone
modifications (H3K27ac, H3K4me) at the -50-kb enhancer. Thus, PRC2 confers BRG1
dependency on the CIITA locus. Our data suggest that, in addition to its known
roles in promoting stemness and proliferation, PRC2 may inhibit immune
surveillance, and it could be targeted to reactivate CIITA expression in SWI/SNF 
deficient cancers.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25862816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Apr 3;7(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0074-4. eCollection
2015.

Polycomb-mediated silencing in neuroendocrine prostate cancer.

Clermont PL(1), Lin D(2), Crea F(3), Wu R(4), Xue H(4), Wang Y(4), Thu KL(5), Lam
WL(6), Collins CC(7), Wang Y(8), Helgason CD(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Research
Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ; Interdisciplinary
Oncology Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 675 W 10th
Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada. (2)Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ; Vancouver Prostate Centre, 899 West 12th Avenue, 
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 M9 Canada. (3)Department of Experimental Therapeutics,
British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1
L3 Canada ; Vancouver Prostate Centre, 899 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 
M9 Canada ; Department of Urologic Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, 2775 Laurel Street, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 M9 Canada.
(4)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Research
Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada. (5)Department of
Integrative Oncology, Genetics Unit, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675
W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada. (6)Interdisciplinary Oncology
Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 675 W 10th Avenue, 
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ; Department of Integrative Oncology, Genetics
Unit, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC
V5Z 1 L3 Canada. (7)Vancouver Prostate Centre, 899 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver,
BC V5Z 1 M9 Canada ; Department of Urologic Sciences, Faculty of Medicine,
University of British Columbia, 2775 Laurel Street, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 M9
Canada. (8)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer
Research Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ;
Interdisciplinary Oncology Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of British
Columbia, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ; Vancouver Prostate
Centre, 899 West 12th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 M9 Canada ; Department of
Urologic Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 2775
Laurel Street, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 M9 Canada. (9)Department of Experimental
Therapeutics, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 W 10th Avenue,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 L3 Canada ; Interdisciplinary Oncology Program, Faculty of
Medicine, University of British Columbia, 675 W 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 1 
L3 Canada ; Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, 910 W 10th
Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E3 Canada.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC) is a highly aggressive subtype 
of prostate cancer (PCa) for which the median survival remains less than a year. 
Current treatments are only palliative in nature, and the lack of suitable
pre-clinical models has hampered previous efforts to develop novel therapeutic
strategies. Addressing this need, we have recently established the first in vivo 
model of complete neuroendocrine transdifferentiation using patient-derived
xenografts. Few genetic differences were observed between parental PCa and
relapsed NEPC, suggesting that NEPC likely results from alterations that are
epigenetic in nature. Thus, we sought to identify targetable epigenetic
regulators whose expression was elevated in NEPC using genome-wide profiling of
patient-derived xenografts and clinical samples.
RESULTS: Our data indicate that multiple members of the polycomb group (PcG)
family of transcriptional repressors were selectively upregulated in NEPC.
Notably, CBX2 and EZH2 were consistently the most highly overexpressed epigenetic
regulators across multiple datasets from clinical and xenograft tumor tissues.
Given the striking upregulation of PcG genes and other transcriptional
repressors, we derived a 185-gene list termed 'neuroendocrine-associated
repression signature' (NEARS) by overlapping transcripts downregulated across
multiple in vivo NEPC models. In line with the striking upregulation of PcG
family members, NEARS was preferentially enriched with PcG target genes,
suggesting a driving role for PcG silencing in NEPC. Importantly, NEARS was
significantly associated with high-grade tumors, metastatic progression, and poor
outcome in multiple clinical datasets, consistent with extensive literature
linking PcG genes and aggressive disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: We have explored the epigenetic landscape of NEPC and provided
evidence of increased PcG-mediated silencing associated with aberrant
transcriptional regulation of key differentiation genes. Our results position
CBX2 and EZH2 as potential therapeutic targets in NEPC, providing opportunities
to explore novel strategies aimed at reversing epigenetic alterations driving
this lethal disease.

PMCID: PMC4391120
PMID: 25859291  [PubMed]


358. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2015;16(6):559-70.

Targeting EZH2 for cancer therapy: progress and perspective.

Han Li C, Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, the Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. frankch@cuhk.edu.hk.

Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is the core component of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), possessing the enzymatic activity in generating
di/tri-methylated lysine 27 in histone H3. EZH2 has important roles during early 
development, and its dysregulation is heavily linked to oncogenesis in various
tissue types. Accumulating evidences suggest a remarkable therapeutic potential
by targeting EZH2 in cancer cells. The first part reviews current strategies to
target EZH2 in cancers, and evaluates the available compounds and agents used to 
disrupt EZH2 functions. Then we provide insight to the future direction of the
research on targeting EZH2 in different cancer types. We comprehensively discuss 
the current understandings of the 1) structure and biological activity of EZH2,
2) its role during the assembling of PRC2 and recruitment of other protein
components, 3) the molecular events directing EZH2 to target genomic regions, and
4) post-translational modification at EZH2 protein. The discussion provides the
basis to inspire the development of novel strategies to abolish EZH2-related
effects in cancer cells.

PMID: 25854924  [PubMed - in process]


359. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 8;10(4):e0118840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118840.
eCollection 2015.

MK3 modulation affects BMI1-dependent and independent cell cycle check-points.

Prickaerts P(1), Niessen HE(1), Dahlmans VE(1), Spaapen F(1), Salvaing J(1),
Vanhove J(1), Geijselaers C(1), Bartels SJ(1), Partouns I(1), Neumann D(1), Speel
EJ(2), Takihara Y(3), Wouters BG(4), Voncken JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Pathology, Maastricht University
Medical Centre, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (3)Department of Stem Cell Biology, 
Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Campbell Family
Institute for Cancer Research, Departments of Radiation Oncology and Medical
Biophysics, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada, Maastricht Radiation
Oncology (MaastRO) Lab, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Although the MK3 gene was originally found deleted in some cancers, it is highly 
expressed in others. The relevance of MK3 for oncogenesis is currently not clear.
We recently reported that MK3 controls ERK activity via a negative feedback
mechanism. This prompted us to investigate a potential role for MK3 in cell
proliferation. We here show that overexpression of MK3 induces a proliferative
arrest in normal diploid human fibroblasts, characterized by enhanced expression 
of replication stress- and senescence-associated markers. Surprisingly, MK3
depletion evokes similar senescence characteristics in the fibroblast model. We
previously identified MK3 as a binding partner of Polycomb Repressive Complex 1
(PRC1) proteins. In the current study we show that MK3 overexpression results in 
reduced cellular EZH2 levels and concomitant loss of epigenetic H3K27me3-marking 
and PRC1/chromatin-occupation at the CDKN2A/INK4A locus. In agreement with this, 
the PRC1 oncoprotein BMI1, but not the PCR2 protein EZH2, bypasses MK3-induced
senescence in fibroblasts and suppresses P16INK4A expression. In contrast, BMI1
does not rescue the MK3 loss-of-function phenotype, suggesting the involvement of
multiple different checkpoints in gain and loss of MK3 function. Notably, MK3
ablation enhances proliferation in two different cancer cells. Finally, the
fibroblast model was used to evaluate the effect of potential tumorigenic MK3
driver-mutations on cell proliferation and M/SAPK signaling imbalance. Taken
together, our findings support a role for MK3 in control of proliferation and
replicative life-span, in part through concerted action with BMI1, and suggest
that the effect of MK3 modulation or mutation on M/SAPK signaling and,
ultimately, proliferation, is cell context-dependent.

PMCID: PMC4390245
PMID: 25853770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2015 May;22(5):370-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.3005. Epub 2015 Apr 
6.

A lncRNA regulates alternative splicing via establishment of a splicing-specific 
chromatin signature.

Gonzalez I(1), Munita R(2), Agirre E(1), Dittmer TA(3), Gysling K(2), Misteli
T(3), Luco RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)ATIP-AVENIR team, Institute of Human Genetics, CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier,
France. (2)Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago, Chile. (3)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Alternative pre-mRNA splicing is a highly cell type-specific process essential to
generating protein diversity. However, the mechanisms responsible for the
establishment and maintenance of heritable cell-specific alternative-splicing
programs are poorly understood. Recent observations point to a role of histone
modifications in the regulation of alternative splicing. Here we report a new
mechanism of chromatin-mediated splicing control involving a long noncoding RNA
(lncRNA). We have identified an evolutionarily conserved nuclear antisense
lncRNA, generated from within the human FGFR2 locus, that promotes
epithelial-specific alternative splicing of FGFR2. The lncRNA acts through
recruitment of Polycomb-group proteins and the histone demethylase KDM2a to
create a chromatin environment that impairs binding of a repressive
chromatin-splicing adaptor complex important for mesenchymal-specific splicing.
Our results uncover a new function for lncRNAs in the establishment and
maintenance of cell-specific alternative splicing via modulation of chromatin
signatures.

PMID: 25849144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cell Signal. 2015 Jul;27(7):1336-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.03.021. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

The Bmi-1 helix-turn and ring finger domains are required for Bmi-1 antagonism of
(-) epigallocatechin-3-gallate suppression of skin cancer cell survival.

Balasubramanian S(1), Scharadin TM(1), Han B(1), Xu W(1), Eckert RL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA;
Department of Dermatology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
MD, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA; Department of Greenebaum Cancer Center,
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic
address: reckert@umaryland.edu.

The Bmi-1 Polycomb group (PcG) protein is an important epigenetic regulator of
chromatin status. Elevated Bmi-1 expression is observed in skin cancer and
contributes to cancer cell survival. (-) Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an
important green tea-derived cancer prevention agent, reduces Bmi-1 level
resulting in reduced skin cancer cell survival. This is associated with increased
p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1) expression, reduced cyclin, and cyclin dependent kinase
expression, and increased cleavage of apoptotic markers. These EGCG-dependent
changes are attenuated by vector-mediated maintenance of Bmi-1 expression. In the
present study, we identify Bmi-1 functional domains that are required for this
response. Bmi-1 expression reverses the EGCG-dependent reduction in SCC-13 cell
survival, but Bmi-1 mutants lacking the helix-turn-helix-turn-helix-turn
(Bmi-1<U+0394>HT) or ring finger (Bmi-1<U+0394>RF) domains do not reverse the EGCG impact. The 
reduction in Ring1B ubiquitin ligase activity, observed in the presence of mutant
Bmi-1, is associated with reduced ability of these mutants to interact with and
activate Ring1B ubiquitin ligase, the major ligase responsible for the
ubiquitination of histone H2A during chromatin condensation. This results in less
chromatin condensation leading to increased tumor suppressor gene expression and 
reduced cell survival; thereby making the cells more susceptible to the
anti-survival action of EGCG. We further show that these mutants act in a
dominant-negative manner to inhibit the action of endogenous Bmi-1. Our results
suggest that the HT and RF domains are required for Bmi-1 ability to maintain
skin cancer cell survival in response to cancer preventive agents.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4756650
PMID: 25843776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jul 5;409:51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.03.023. Epub
2015 Apr 2.

Selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 receptors EP2 and EP4 modulates DNA
methylation and histone modification machinery proteins in human endometriotic
cells.

Arosh JA(1), Lee J(2), Starzinski-Powitz A(3), Banu SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory, Department of
Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA. Electronic address:
jarosh@cvm.tamu.edu. (2)Reproductive Endocrinology and Cell Signaling Laboratory,
Department of Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, 77843 Texas, USA.
(3)Molekulare Zellbiologie und Humangenetik, Institut für Zellbiologie und
Neurowissenschaft, Siesmayerstraße 70, Geb. B, 60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Endometriosis is an inflammatory gynecological disease of reproductive-age women.
The prevalence of endometriosis is 5-10% in reproductive-age women. Modern
medical treatments are directed to inhibit the action of estrogen in
endometriotic cells. However, hormonal therapies targeting estrogen can be
prescribed only for a short time because of their undesirable side effects.
Recent studies from our laboratory, using human endometriotic epithelial cell
line 12Z and stromal cell line 22B derived from red lesion, discovered that
selective inhibition of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) receptors EP2 and EP4 inhibits
adhesion, invasion, growth, and survival of 12Z and 22B cells by modulating
integrins, MMPs and TIMPs, cell cycle, survival, and intrinsic apoptotic
pathways, suggesting multiple epigenetic mechanisms. The novel findings of the
present study indicate that selective pharmacological inhibition of EP2 and EP4: 
(i) decreases expression of DNMT3a, DNMT3b, H3K9me3, H3K27me3, SUV39H1, HP1a,
H3K27, EZH2, JMJD2a, HDAC1, HDAC3, MeCP2, CoREST and Sin3A; (ii) increases
expression of H3K4me3, H3H9ac, H3K27ac; and (iii) does not modulate the
expression of DNMT1, hSET1, LSD1, MBD1, p300, HDAC2, and JMJD3 epigenetic
machinery proteins in an epithelial and stromal cell specific manner. In this
study, we report for the first time that inhibition of PGE2-EP2/EP4 signaling
modulates DNA methylation, H3 histone methylation and acetylation, and epigenetic
memory machinery proteins in human endometriotic epithelial cells and stromal
cells. Thus, targeting EP2 and EP4 receptors may emerge as long-term nonsteroidal
therapy for treatment of active endometriotic lesions in women.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25843056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Expert Rev Proteomics. 2015 Jun;12(3):317-28. doi: 10.1586/14789450.2015.1033409.
Epub 2015 Apr 3.

Functional proteomics of the epigenetic regulators ASXL1, ASXL2 and ASXL3: a
convergence of proteomics and epigenetics for translational medicine.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Omics Network, National Cancer Center - Japan, 5-1-1 Tsukiji
Chuo Ward, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

ASXL1, ASXL2 and ASXL3 are epigenetic scaffolds for BAP1, EZH2, NCOA1, nuclear
receptors and WTIP. Here, functional proteomics of the ASXL family members are
reviewed with emphasis on mutation spectra, the ASXM2 domain and the plant
homeodomain (PHD) finger. Copy number gains of ASXL1 occur in chromosome 20q11.2 
duplication syndrome and cervical cancer. Truncation mutations of ASXLs occur in 
autism, Bohring-Opitz and related syndromes, hematological malignancies and solid
tumors, such as prostate cancer, breast cancer and high-grade glioma, which are
gain- or loss-of-function mutations. The ASXM2 domain is a binding module for
androgen receptor and estrogen receptor a, while the PHD finger is a ligand of
WTIP LIM domains and a putative chromatin-binding module. Phylogenetic analyses
of 139 human PHD fingers revealed that ASXL PHD fingers cluster with those of
BPTF, DIDO, ING1, KDM5A (JARID1A), KMT2E (MLL5), PHF2, PHF8 and PHF23. The cell
context-dependent epigenetic code of ASXLs should be deciphered to develop
therapeutics for human diseases.

PMID: 25835095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jun;14(6):1445-53. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0971. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

TR4 Nuclear Receptor Alters the Prostate Cancer CD133+ Stem/Progenitor Cell
Invasion via Modulating the EZH2-Related Metastasis Gene Expression.

Zhu J(1), Yang DR(1), Sun Y(2), Qiu X(3), Chang HC(4), Li G(2), Shan Y(5), Chang 
C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, China. George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, 
Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York. (2)George Whipple Lab for Cancer
Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot
Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(3)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York. Department of Urology, Guangdong No. 2 Provincial
People's Hospital, Guangzhou, China. (4)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research,
Departments of Pathology, Urology, Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer
Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York. Department
of Urology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York. chang@urmc.rochester.edu shanyx1002@aliyun.com.
(6)George Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology,
Radiation Oncology, and The Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, New York. Sex Hormone Research Center, China Medical
University/Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. chang@urmc.rochester.edu
shanyx1002@aliyun.com.

The testicular nuclear receptor 4 (TR4) is a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily that mediates various biologic functions with key impacts on
metabolic disorders and tumor progression. Here, we demonstrate that TR4 may play
a positive role in prostate cancer CD133(+) stem/progenitor (S/P) cell invasion. 
Targeting TR4 with lentiviral silencing RNA significantly suppressed prostate
cancer CD133(+) S/P cell invasion both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanism dissection
found that TR4 transcriptionally regulates the oncogene EZH2 via binding to its
5' promoter region. The consequences of targeting TR4 to suppress EZH2 expression
may then suppress the expression of its downstream key metastasis-related genes, 
including NOTCH1, TGFß1, SLUG, and MMP9. Rescue approaches via adding the EZH2
reversed the TR4-mediated prostate cancer S/P cell invasion. Together, these
results suggest that the TR4<U+2192>EZH2 signaling may play a critical role in the
prostate cancer S/P cell invasion and may allow us to develop a better therapy to
battle the prostate cancer metastasis.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4704461 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25833838  [PubMed - in process]


365. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9257-70.

miR-340 suppresses glioblastoma multiforme.

Huang D(1,)(2), Qiu S(1), Ge R(3), He L(1), Li M(1), Li Y(1), Peng Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant
Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the
Ministry of Education and State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Life
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Deregulation of microRNAs (miRs) contributes to tumorigenesis. Down-regulation of
miR-340 is observed in multiple types of cancers. However, the biological
function of miR-340 in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) remains largely unknown. In 
the present study, we demonstrated that expression of miR-340 was downregulated
in both glioma cell lines and tissues. Survival of GBM patients with high levels 
of miR-340 was significantly extended in comparison to patients expressing low
miR-340 levels. Biological functional experiments showed that the restoration of 
miR-340 dramatically inhibited glioma cell proliferation, induced cell-cycle
arrest and apoptosis, suppressed cell motility and promoted autophagy and
terminal differentiation. Mechanistic studies disclosed that, miR-340
over-expression suppressed several oncogenes including p-AKT, EZH2, EGFR, BMI1
and XIAP. Furthermore, ROCK1 was validated as a direct functional target miR-340 
and silencing of ROCK1 phenocopied the anti-tumor effect of mR-340. Our findings 
indicate an important role of miR-340 as a glioma killer, and suggest a potential
prognosis biomarker and therapeutic target for GBM.

PMCID: PMC4496215
PMID: 25831237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):7930-43.

MiR-101 reverses the hypomethylation of the LMO3 promoter in glioma cells.

Liu X(1,)(2), Lei Q(1), Yu Z(1), Xu G(1,)(3), Tang H(2), Wang W(1), Wang Z(1), Li
G(4,)(1), Wu M(4,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital and the Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya
Medical School, Central South University, Changsha 410013, Hunan, China.
(2)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, Guangdong, China. (3)Medical College, University of
South China, Hengyang 421001, Hunan, China. (4)School of Basic Medical Science,
Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Changsha 410078, Hunan, China.

LIM-only protein 3 (LMO3), a member of the LIM-only protein group, is a new DNA
methylation gene that was identified in gliomas via the MeDIP-Chip in our
previous study. In this study, we found that LIM-only protein 3 (LMO3) is
hypomethylated and overexpressed in glioma cells and tissues. The overexpression 
of LMO3 was correlated with a poor prognosis in glioma patients, and LMO3 was
indirectly inhibited by the tumor suppressor miR-101, which is a potential
prognosis marker of gliomas. MiR-101 decreased the expression of LMO3 by
reversing the methylation status of the LMO3 promoter and by inhibiting the
presence of the methylation-related histones H3K4me2 and H3K27me3 and increasing 
the presence of H3K9me3 and H4K20me3 on the promoter. It was determined that
miR-101 decreases the occupancy of H3K27me3 by inhibiting EZH2, DNMT3A and EED
and decreases the H3K9me3 occupancy on the LMO3 promoter via SUV39H1, SUV39H2,
G9a and PHF8. Furthermore, miR-101 suppresses the expression of LMO3 by
decreasing USF and MZF1.

PMCID: PMC4480726
PMID: 25829251  [PubMed - in process]


367. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(6):2425-30.

siRNA silencing EZH2 reverses cisplatin-resistance of human non-small cell lung
and gastric cancer cells.

Zhou W(1), Wang J, Man WY, Zhang QW, Xu WG.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory on Technologies Enabling Development of Clinical
Therapeutics and Diagnostics (Theranostics), School of Pharmacy, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, China E-mail : wengui_xutj@163.com.

Clinical resistance to chemotherapeutic agents is one of the major hindrances in 
the treatment of human cancers. EHZ2 is involved in drug resistance and is
overexpressed in drug-resistant cancer cell lines. In this study, we investigated
the effects of EHZ2 on cisplatin -resistance in A549/DDP and AGS/DDP cells. EHZ2 
mRNA and protein were found to be significantly overexpressed in A549/DDP and
AGS/DDP cells, compared to parental cells. EHZ2 siRNA successfully silenced EHZ2 
mRNA and protein expression. Proliferation was inhibited and drug resistance to
cisplatin was improved. Flow cytometry showed that silencing of EHZ2 arrested
A549/DDP and AGS/DDP cells in the G0/G1 phase, increasing apoptosis, rh-123
fluorescence intensity and caspase-3/8 activities. Silencing of EHZ2 also
significantly reduced the mRNA and protein expression levels of cyclin D1 and
MDR1,while up-regulating p15, p21, p27 and miR-218 in A549/DPP cells.
Furthermore, silencing of EHZ2 also significantly increased the expression level 
of tumor suppressor factor miR-218. We also found down-regulating EHZ2 expression
increased methylation in A549/DDP and AGS/DDP cells. This study demonstrates that
drug resistance can be effectively reversed in human cisplatin-resistant lung and
gastric cancer cells through delivery of siRNAs targeting EHZ2.

PMID: 25824776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Reprod Sci. 2015 Sep;22(9):1134-42. doi: 10.1177/1933719115578924. Epub 2015 Mar 
27.

H3K27me3 is an Epigenetic Mark of Relevance in Endometriosis.

Colón-Caraballo M(1), Monteiro JB(2), Flores I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ponce Health Sciences University-School of
Medicine and Ponce Research Institute, Ponce, PR, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, Ponce Health Sciences University-School of Medicine and Ponce
Research Institute, Ponce, PR, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology, Ponce Health
Sciences University-School of Medicine and Ponce Research Institute, Ponce, PR,
USA Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Ponce Health Sciences
University-School of Medicine and Ponce Research Institute, Ponce, PR, USA
iflores@psm.edu.

Epigenetic mechanisms may play an important role in the etiology of
endometriosis. The modification of histones by methylation of lysine residues has
been shown to regulate gene expression by changing chromatin structure. We have
previously shown that endometriotic lesions had aberrant levels of histone
acetylation (lower) and methylation (higher) than control tissues. We aimed to
determine the levels of trimethylated histone 3 at lysine residue 27 (H3K27me3), 
a well-known repressive mark, by immunoassay of fresh tissues and
immunohistochemistry (IHC) of an endometriosis-focused tissue microarray. Also,
we aimed to determine levels of expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2),
the enzyme responsible for trimethylation of H3K27me3, in cell lines. Average
levels of H3K27me3 measured by immunoassay were not significantly different in
lesions compared to endometrium from patients and controls. However, there was a 
trend of higher levels of H3K27me3 in secretory versus proliferative endometrium.
The results of IHC showed that lesions (ovarian, fallopian, and peritoneal) and
secretory endometrium from controls have higher percentage of H3K27me3-positive
nuclei than eutopic endometrium from patients. Endometriotic epithelial cells
express high levels of EZH2, which is upregulated by progesterone. This study
provides evidence in support of a role of H3K27me3 in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis and for EZH2 as a potential therapeutic target for this disease,
but more studies are necessary to understand the molecular mechanisms at play.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25820690  [PubMed - in process]


369. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 May;26(1):133-8. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.03.023.
Epub 2015 Mar 27.

New polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog (EZH) 2-derived peptide with
the potential to induce cancer-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes in prostate
cancer patients with HLA-A3 supertype alleles.

Minami T(1), Minami T(2), Shimizu N(2), Yamamoto Y(2), De Velasco MA(2), Nozawa
M(2), Yoshimura K(2), Harashima N(3), Harada M(3), Uemura H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
Electronic address: minami@med.kindai.ac.jp. (2)Department of Urology, Kinki
University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Immunology, Shimane
University School of Medicine, Izumo, Shimane, Japan. (4)Department of Urology,
Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address:
huemura@med.kindai.ac.jp.

Analyses on reactivity of anti-cancer cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and clinical
application of peptide-based anti-cancer vaccine have been mainly focused on
patients with HLA-A2 or -A24 alleles. In this study, we identified an enhancer of
zeste homolog (EZH) 2-derived peptide applicable for anti-cancer vaccine for
prostate cancer patients with HLA-A3 supertype alleles. Five EZH2-derived
peptides that were prepared based on the binding motif to the HLA-A3 supertype
alleles (HLA-A11, -A31, and -A33) were functionally screened for their potential 
to induce peptide-specific CTLs from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
of HLA-A3 supertype allele(+) prostate cancer patients. As a result, EZH2733-741 
peptide was found to efficiently induce peptide-specific CTLs. The EZH2733-741
peptide-stimulated and purified CD8(+) T cells from PBMCs of HLA-A3 supertype
allele(+) prostate cancer patients showed higher cytotoxicity against HLA-A3
supertype allele-expressing LNCaP prostate cancer cells than against parental
LNCaP cells. This cytotoxicity against HLA-A3 supertype allele-expressing LNCaP
cells was partially but significantly inhibited by the addition of EZH2733-741
peptide-pulsed competitive cells. These results indicate that the EZH2733-741
peptide could be a promising candidate for peptide-based immunotherapy for HLA-A3
supertype allele(+) prostate cancer patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25819666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0120956. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120956.
eCollection 2015.

Signals of Ezh2, Src, and Akt Involve in myostatin-Pax7 pathways regulating the
myogenic fate determination during the sheep myoblast proliferation and
differentiation.

Wei C(1), Ren H(2), Xu L(1), Li L(3), Liu R(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao F(1), Lu J(1),
Zhang X(1), Du L(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Center for Molecular Genetics and Breeding of Animal, Institute of
Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, China.
(2)Chongqing Academy of Animal Sciences, Rongchang, Chongqing, China.
(3)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.

Myostatin and Pax7 have been well documented individually, however, the mechanism
by which Myostatin regulates Pax7 is seldom reported. Here, based on muscle
transcriptome analysis in Texel (Myostatin mutant) and Ujumqin (wild type) sheep 
across the five fetal stages, we constructed and examined the Myostatin-Pax7
pathways in muscle. Then we validated the signals by RNAi in the proliferating
and differentiating sheep myoblasts in vitro at mRNA, protein, and cell
morphological levels. We reveal that Myostatin signals to Pax7 at least through
Ezh2, Src, and Akt during the sheep myoblast proliferation and differentiation.
Other signals such as p38MAPK, mTOR, Erk1/2, Wnt, Bmp2, Smad, Tgfb1, and p21 are 
most probably involved in the Myostatin-affected myogenic events. Myostatin
knockdown significantly reduces the counts of nucleus and myotube, but not the
fusion index of myoblasts during cell differentiation. In addition, findings also
indicate that Myostatin is required for normal myogenic differentiation of the
sheep myoblasts, which is different from the C2C12 myoblasts. We expand the
regulatory network of Myostatin-Pax7 pathways and first illustrate that Myostatin
as a global regulator participates in the epigenetic events involved in
myogenesis, which contributes to understand the molecular mechanism of Myostatin 
in regulation of myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4374906
PMID: 25811841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Cytopathol. 2015 Jul;123(7):413-20. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21535. Epub 2015 Mar
23.

Multiplex sequencing for EZH2, CD79B, and MYD88 mutations using archival cytospin
preparations from B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma aspirates previously tested for MYC
rearrangement and IGH/BCL2 translocation.

Santos Gda C(1,)(2), Saieg MA(3,)(4), Ko HM(1,)(2), Geddie WR(1,)(2), Boerner
SL(1,)(2), Craddock KJ(2), Crump M(5), Bailey D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (2)Laboratory Medicine Program, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology, Santa Casa Medical School, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil. (4)Fleury Laboratories, Sao Paulo, Brazil. (5)Division of
Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gene rearrangements and specific translocations define some B-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) subtypes. Genome-wide mutational studies have revealed
recurrent point mutations with prognostic implications. The goals of this study
were to evaluate the feasibility of applying a multiplex mutation assay to
archival cytospin preparations (CPs) and to investigate the rate of EZH2, CD79B, 
and MYD88 mutations in B-cell NHL samples previously tested for MYC rearrangement
and/or IGH/BCL-2 translocation.
METHODS: DNA was extracted from archival CPs of B-cell NHL cases with previous
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assays for MYC rearrangement and/or
IGH/BCL-2 translocation. Multiplex sequencing was performed for the detection of 
EZH2 (Y641), CD79B (Y196), and MYD88 (L265) mutations. Sanger sequencing was
applied to samples with positive results and failed assays.
RESULTS: Eighty-eight archival CPs were available from 40 patients. Alterations
detected by FISH were: MYC rearrangement (10 cases), IGH/BCL-2 translocations (21
cases), dual translocations (6 cases), and other abnormalities for IGH/BCL-2 (23 
cases) and for MYC (16 cases). DNA concentration ranged from 1.88 to 62.85 ng/µL 
(mean, 9.46 ng/µL). Successful results were obtained in 88.0% of the specimens
submitted to multiplex sequencing. With Sanger sequencing, 2 additional mutated
cases were found, and all cases with mutations were confirmed. Eight specimens
showed mutations: 6 for EZH2, 1 for CD79B, and 1 for MYD88. Among them, 5 cases
showed concurrent MYC and/or IGH/BCL-2 translocations and 2 revealed abnormal
signals of IGH/BCL-2 and MYC.
CONCLUSIONS: CPs archived for up to 6 years are a reliable source of high-quality
genomic material for multiplex sequencing. Almost all B-cell NHL with point
mutations showed concurrent chromosomal abnormalities.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 25807917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Front Neurol. 2015 Mar 10;6:46. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2015.00046. eCollection 2015.

Transcriptional Response of Polycomb Group Genes to Status Epilepticus in Mice is
Modified by Prior Exposure to Epileptic Preconditioning.

Reynolds JP(1), Miller-Delaney SF(1), Jimenez-Mateos EM(1), Sano T(2), McKiernan 
RC(1), Simon RP(3), Henshall DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland , Dublin , Ireland. (2)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics,
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland , Dublin , Ireland ; Department of
Neurosurgery, Mie University School of Medicine , Tsu, Mie , Japan. (3)Morehouse 
School of Medicine , Atlanta, GA , USA.

Exposure of the brain to brief, non-harmful seizures can activate protective
mechanisms that temporarily generate a damage-refractory state. This process,
termed epileptic tolerance, is associated with large-scale down-regulation of
gene expression. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are master controllers of gene
silencing during development that are re-activated by injury to the brain. Here, 
we explored the transcriptional response of genes associated with polycomb
repressive complex (PRC) 1 (Ring1A, Ring1B, and Bmi1) and PRC2 (Ezh1, Ezh2, and
Suz12), as well as additional transcriptional regulators Sirt1, Yy1, and Yy2, in 
a mouse model of status epilepticus (SE). Findings were contrasted to changes
after SE in mice previously given brief seizures to evoke tolerance. Real-time
quantitative PCR showed SE prompted an early (1<U+2009>h) increase in expression of
several genes in PRC1 and PRC2 in the hippocampus, followed by down-regulation of
many of the same genes at later times points (4, 8, and 24<U+2009>h). Spatio-temporal
differences were found among PRC2 genes in epileptic tolerance, including
increased expression of Ezh2, Suz12, and Yy2 relative to the normal injury
response to SE. In contrast, PRC1 complex genes including Ring 1B and Bmi1
displayed differential down-regulation in epileptic tolerance. The present study 
characterizes PcG gene expression following SE and shows prior seizure exposure
produces select changes to PRC1 and PRC2 composition that may influence
differential gene expression in epileptic tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4354380
PMID: 25806020  [PubMed]


373. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 20;43(7):3591-604. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv238. Epub 2015
Mar 23.

PCAF-primed EZH2 acetylation regulates its stability and promotes lung
adenocarcinoma progression.

Wan J(1), Zhan J(1), Li S(1), Ma J(1), Xu W(1), Liu C(1), Xue X(1), Xie Y(2),
Fang W(3), Chin YE(4), Zhang H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of
Education, and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China Laboratory of Molecular
Cell Biology and Tumor Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embrology,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. (2)School of Life
Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, and State Key
Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing 100191, China Department of Pathology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, China. (4)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. (5)Key Laboratory
of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research, Ministry of Education, and State
Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs, Peking University Health Science 
Center, Beijing 100191, China Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Tumor
Biology, Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embrology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, China Hongquan.Zhang@bjmu.edu.cn.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a key epigenetic regulator that catalyzes
the trimethylation of H3K27 and is modulated by post-translational modifications 
(PTMs). However, the precise regulation of EZH2 PTMs remains elusive. We, herein,
report that EZH2 is acetylated by acetyltransferase P300/CBP-associated factor
(PCAF) and is deacetylated by deacetylase SIRT1. We identified that PCAF
interacts with and acetylates EZH2 mainly at lysine 348 (K348). Mechanistically, 
K348 acetylation decreases EZH2 phosphorylation at T345 and T487 and increases
EZH2 stability without disrupting the formation of polycomb repressive complex 2 
(PRC2). Functionally, EZH2 K348 acetylation enhances its capacity in suppression 
of the target genes and promotes lung cancer cell migration and invasion.
Further, elevated EZH2 K348 acetylation in lung adenocarcinoma patients predicts 
a poor prognosis. Our findings define a new mechanism underlying EZH2 modulation 
by linking EZH2 acetylation to its phosphorylation that stabilizes EZH2 and
promotes lung adenocarcinoma progression.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4402543
PMID: 25800736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cancer Genet. 2015 Mar;208(3):96-100. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.01.010. Epub 
2015 Feb 7.

MYC amplification in multiple marker chromosomes and EZH2 microdeletion in a man 
with acute myeloid leukemia.

Xiang Z(1), Abdallah AO(2), Govindarajan R(3), Mehta P(3), Emanuel PD(2),
Papenhausen P(4), Schichman SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute,
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little
Rock, AR, USA. Electronic address: zxiang@uams.edu. (2)Division of Hematology and
Oncology, Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA. (3)Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Winthrop P. Rockefeller Cancer Institute, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Division of Hematology and Oncology, Central
Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR, USA. (4)Division of
Cytogenetics, LabCorp, Center for Molecular Biology and Pathology, Research
Triangle Park, NC, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA; Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Service, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System, Little Rock, AR, USA.

The role of MYC and EZH2 in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) pathogenesis is poorly
understood. Herein we present a case of AML with MYC amplification in marker
chromosomes and a microdeletion of chromosome 7 below cytogenetic resolution. The
karyotype of the patient's bone marrow aspirate showed three to five marker
chromosomes in all dividing cells without other structural or numerical
chromosomal abnormalities. Analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) 
with a probe specific for the human MYC gene revealed amplification of the
oncogene localized to the marker chromosomes. Using whole genome single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray analysis, an approximately 4.4 Mb
amplicon containing the MYC gene was identified with an estimated amplification
of about 30 copies per leukemic cell and, thus, an average of about 8 copies per 
marker chromosome. A 6.4 Mb hemizygous microdeletion of chromosome 7 within band 
q36.1 was also found by SNP microarray analysis in a cellular-equivalent dosage
of 50%. The microdeletion spans multiple genes, including EZH2, a gene with
well-known cancer association. No mutation was found in the remaining EZH2 allele
by next generation gene sequencing. The combination of MYC amplification and EZH2
deletion, which has not been described previously in AML, may suggest a
synergistic role of the two oncogenes in the pathogenesis of the patient's acute 
leukemia.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25800664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Development. 2015 Apr 15;142(8):1458-69. doi: 10.1242/dev.122077. Epub 2015 Mar
19.

Repression of Igf1 expression by Ezh2 prevents basal cell differentiation in the 
developing lung.

Galvis LA(1), Holik AZ(2), Short KM(3), Pasquet J(1), Lun AT(4), Blewitt ME(5),
Smyth IM(3), Ritchie ME(6), Asselin-Labat ML(7).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (2)ACRF Stem Cells and
Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical Biology, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (3)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria 3052, Australia Bioinformatics Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (5)Department
of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (6)Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(7)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
labat@wehi.edu.au.

Epigenetic mechanisms involved in the establishment of lung epithelial cell
lineage identities during development are largely unknown. Here, we explored the 
role of the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 during lung lineage determination.
Loss of Ezh2 in the lung epithelium leads to defective lung formation and
perinatal mortality. We show that Ezh2 is crucial for airway lineage
specification and alveolarization. Using optical projection tomography imaging,
we found that branching morphogenesis is affected in Ezh2 conditional knockout
mice and the remaining bronchioles are abnormal, lacking terminally
differentiated secretory club cells. Remarkably, RNA-seq analysis revealed the
upregulation of basal genes in Ezh2-deficient epithelium. Three-dimensional
imaging for keratin 5 further showed the unexpected presence of a layer of basal 
cells from the proximal airways to the distal bronchioles in E16.5 embryos.
ChIP-seq analysis indicated the presence of Ezh2-mediated repressive marks on the
genomic loci of some but not all basal genes, suggesting an indirect mechanism of
action of Ezh2. We found that loss of Ezh2 de-represses insulin-like growth
factor 1 (Igf1) expression and that modulation of IGF1 signaling ex vivo in
wild-type lungs could induce basal cell differentiation. Altogether, our work
reveals an unexpected role for Ezh2 in controlling basal cell fate determination 
in the embryonic lung endoderm, mediated in part by repression of Igf1
expression.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4392602
PMID: 25790853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;75(10):1949-58. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2930. Epub 
2015 Mar 18.

A chemical genetics approach for the functional assessment of novel cancer genes.

Zhou Q(1), Derti A(2), Ruddy D(2), Rakiec D(2), Kao I(2), Lira M(1), Gibaja V(1),
Chan H(1), Yang Y(3), Min J(1), Schlabach MR(1), Stegmeier F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (2)Oncology Translational Medicine, Novartis Institutes for
BioMedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (3)Developmental and Molecular
Pathways, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
(4)Oncology Disease Area, Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. frank.stegmeier@novartis.com.

Assessing the functional significance of novel putative oncogenes remains a
significant challenge given the limitations of current loss-of-function tools.
Here, we describe a method that employs TALEN or CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in of
inducible degron tags (Degron-KI) that provides a versatile approach for the
functional characterization of novel cancer genes and addresses many of the
shortcomings of current tools. The Degron-KI system allows for highly specific,
inducible, and allele-targeted inhibition of endogenous protein function, and the
ability to titrate protein depletion with this system is able to better mimic
pharmacologic inhibition compared with RNAi or genetic knockout approaches. The
Degron-KI system was able to faithfully recapitulate the effects of pharmacologic
EZH2 and PI3Ka inhibitors in cancer cell lines. The application of this system to
the study of a poorly understood putative oncogene, SF3B1, provided the first
causal link between SF3B1 hotspot mutations and splicing alterations.
Surprisingly, we found that SF3B1-mutant cells are not dependent upon the mutated
allele for in vitro growth, but instead depend upon the function of the remaining
wild-type alleles. Collectively, these results demonstrate the broad utility of
the Degron-KI system for the functional characterization of cancer genes.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25788694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Hum Genet. 2015 Jun;60(6):339-42. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2015.26. Epub 2015 Mar 19.

A novel mutation in EED associated with overgrowth.

Cohen AS(1), Tuysuz B(2), Shen Y(3), Bhalla SK(4), Jones SJ(5), Gibson WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada [2] Child and Family Research Institute, British Columbia Children's
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Canada's Michael Smith
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Radiology, Surrey Memorial Hospital, Surrey, BC, Canada. (5)1]
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada [2] Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada [3] Department of Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.

In a patient suspected clinically to have Weaver syndrome, we ruled out mutations
in EZH2 and NSD1, then identified a previously undescribed de novo mutation in
EZH2's partner protein EED. Both proteins are members of the Polycomb Repressive 
Complex 2 that maintains gene silencing. On the basis of the similarities of the 
patient's phenotype to Weaver syndrome, which is caused by de novo mutations in
EZH2, and on other lines of evidence including mouse Eed hypomorphs, we
characterize this mutation as probably pathogenic for a Weaver-like overgrowth
syndrome. This is the first report of overgrowth and related phenotypes
associated with a constitutional mutation in human EED.

PMID: 25787343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 19;34(47):5807-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.33. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

MOZ (MYST3, KAT6A) inhibits senescence via the INK4A-ARF pathway.

Sheikh BN(1,)(2), Phipson B(3,)(4), El-Saafin F(1,)(2), Vanyai HK(1,)(2), Downer 
NL(1), Bird MJ(4,)(5), Kueh AJ(1), May RE(1), Smyth GK(3,)(6), Voss AK(1,)(2),
Thomas T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development and Cancer, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Division of 
Bioinformatics, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (6)Department of Mathematics and
Statistics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Cellular senescence is an important mechanism that restricts tumour growth. The
Ink4a-Arf locus (also known as Cdkn2a), which encodes p16(INK4A) and p19(ARF),
has a central role in inducing and maintaining senescence. Given the importance
of cellular senescence in restraining tumour growth, great emphasis is being
placed on the identification of novel factors that can modulate senescence. The
MYST-family histone acetyltransferase MOZ (MYST3, KAT6A), first identified in
recurrent translocations in acute myeloid leukaemia, has been implicated in both 
the promotion and inhibition of senescence. In this study, we investigate the
role of MOZ in cellular senescence and show that MOZ is a potent inhibitor of
senescence via the INK4A-ARF pathway. Primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) 
isolated from Moz-deficient embryos exhibit premature senescence, which was
rescued on the Ink4a-Arf(-/-) background. Importantly, senescence resulting from 
the absence of MOZ was not accompanied by DNA damage, suggesting that MOZ acts
independently of the DNA damage response. Consistent with the importance of
senescence in cancer, expression profiling revealed that genes overexpressed in
aggressive and highly proliferative cancers are expressed at low levels in
Moz-deficient MEFs. We show that MOZ is required to maintain normal levels of
histone 3 lysine 9 (H3K9) and H3K27 acetylation at the transcriptional start
sites of at least four genes, Cdc6, Ezh2, E2f2 and Melk, and normal mRNA levels
of these genes. CDC6, EZH2 and E2F2 are known inhibitors of the INK4A-ARF
pathway. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we show that MOZ occupies the Cdc6,
Ezh2 and Melk loci, thereby providing a direct link between MOZ, H3K9 and H3K27
acetylation, and normal transcriptional levels at these loci. This work
establishes that MOZ is an upstream inhibitor of the INK4A-ARF pathway, and
suggests that inhibiting MOZ may be one way to induce senescence in proliferative
tumour cells.

PMID: 25772242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 31;112(13):3985-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503152112. Epub 2015 Mar 12.

STAT3-driven transcription depends upon the dimethylation of K49 by EZH2.

Dasgupta M(1), Dermawan JK(2), Willard B(3), Stark GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics and 
starkg@ccf.org. (3)Proteomics Core, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH 44195.

Several transcription factors, including p53, NF-<U+03BA>B, and STAT3, are modified by
the same enzymes that also modify histones, with important functional
consequences. We have identified a previously unrecognized dimethylation of K49
of STAT3 that is crucial for the expression of many IL-6-dependent genes,
catalyzed by the histone-modifying enzyme enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2).
Loss of EZH2 is protumorigenic in leukemias, but its overexpression is
protumorigenic in solid cancers. Connecting EZH2 to a functionally important
methylation of STAT3, which is constitutively activated in many tumors, may help 
reveal the basis of the opposing roles of EZH2 in liquid and solid tumors and
also may identify novel therapeutic opportunities.

PMCID: PMC4386339
PMID: 25767098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6797-810.

Snail and Slug collaborate on EMT and tumor metastasis through miR-101-mediated
EZH2 axis in oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma.

Zheng M(1,)(2), Jiang YP(1), Chen W(1,)(3), Li KD(1), Liu X(1), Gao SY(1), Feng
H(1), Wang SS(1), Jiang J(1), Ma XR(1), Cen X(1), Tang YJ(4), Chen Y(1), Lin
YF(1), Tang YL(1,)(5), Liang XH(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases West China Hospital of Stomatology
(Sichuan University), Chengdu Sichuan 610041, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Stomatology, Zhoushan Hospital, Zhoushan, Zhejiang 316000,
People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Tianjin Stomatological Hospital, Tianjin 300041, People's Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei
University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, People's Republic of China. (5)Department
of Oral Pathology, West China Hospital of Stomatology (Sichuan University),
Chengdu Sichuan 610041, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery, West China Hospital of Stomatology (Sichuan University),
Chengdu Sichuan 610041, People's Republic of China.

microRNAs(miRNAs) can regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through
transcription factors, however, little is known whether EMT transcription factors
can modulate miRNAs and further induce EMT and cancer metastasis. Here we show
that overexpression of Snail and Slug leads to a mesenchymal phenotype and
morphology and enhances cell invasion along with stem cell properties in squamous
cell carcinoma of oral tongue (OTSCC) cells. Repression of miR-101 expression by 
Snail and Slug is essential for Snail/Slug-induced malignant phenotypes. The
suppression of miR-101 subsequently activates EZH2, the sole histone
methyltransferase, inducing EMT, migration and invasion of OTSCC cells.
Importantly, co-overexpression of Slug and Snail correlates with poor survival
and elevated EZH2 expression in two independent patient cohorts of OTSCC
specimens. These findings defined a Snail and Slug/miR-101/EZH2 pathway as a
novel regulatory axis of EMT-mediated-microRNA signaling.

PMID: 25762643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16712-24.

Immunohistochemical and genomic profiles of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas:
implications for targeted EZH2 inhibitor therapy?

Dubois S(1), Mareschal S(1), Picquenot JM(1,)(2), Viailly PJ(1), Bohers E(1),
Cornic M(2), Bertrand P(1), Veresezan EL(1,)(2), Ruminy P(1), Maingonnat C(1),
Marchand V(1), Lanic H(1,)(3), Penther D(1), Bastard C(1), Tilly H(1,)(3), Jardin
F(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Université de Rouen, IRIB, Rouen, France.
(2)Department of Pathology, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France. (3)Department 
of Clinical Hematology, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France.

Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) plays an essential epigenetic role in Diffuse 
Large B Cell Lymphoma (DLBCL) development. Recurrent somatic heterozygous
gain-of-function mutations of EZH2 have been identified in DLBCL, most notably
affecting tyrosine 641 (Y641), inducing hyper-trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3).
Novel EZH2 inhibitors are being tested in phase 1 and 2 clinical trials but no
study has examined which patients would most benefit from this treatment. We
evaluated the immunohistochemical (IHC) methylation profiles of 82 patients with 
DLBCL, as well as the mutational profiles of 32 patients with DLBCL using NGS
analysis of a panel of 34 genes involved in lymphomagenesis. A novel IHC score
based on H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 expression was developed, capable of
distinguishing patients with wild-type (WT) EZH2 and patients with EZH2 Y641
mutations (p = 10-5). NGS analysis revealed a subclonal EZH2 mutation pattern in 
EZH2 mutant patients with WT-like IHC methylation profiles, while associated
mutations capable of upregulating EZH2 were detected in WT EZH2 patients with
mutant-like IHC methylation profiles. IHC and mutational profiles highlight in
vivo hyper-H3K27me3 and hypo-H3K27me2 status, pinpoint associated activating
mutations and determine EZH2 mutation clonality, maximizing EZH2 inhibitor
potential by identifying patients most likely to benefit from treatment.

PMCID: PMC4599301
PMID: 25762637  [PubMed - in process]


382. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Apr 13;94:87-101. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.02.057. Epub
2015 Mar 3.

Luotonin-A based quinazolinones cause apoptosis and senescence via HDAC
inhibition and activation of tumor suppressor proteins in HeLa cells.

Venkatesh R(1), Ramaiah MJ(2), Gaikwad HK(1), Janardhan S(3), Bantu R(1),
Nagarapu L(4), Sastry GN(3), Ganesh AR(2), Bhadra M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Organic Chemistry Division II, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500007, India. (2)Centre for Chemical Biology, CSIR-Indian
Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500607, India. (3)Centre for
Molecular Modeling, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka,
Hyderabad 500607, India. (4)Organic Chemistry Division II, CSIR-Indian Institute 
of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500007, India. Electronic address:
lnagarapuiict@yahoo.com.

A series of novel quinazolinone hybrids were synthesized by employing click
chemistry and evaluated for anti-proliferative activities against MCF-7, HeLa and
K562 cell lines. Among these cell lines, HeLa cells were found to respond
effectively to these quinazolinone hybrids with IC50 values ranging from 5.94 to 
16.45 µM. Some of the hybrids (4q, 4r, 4e, 4k, 4t, 4w) with promising anti-cancer
activity were further investigated for their effects on the cell cycle
distribution. FACS analysis revealed the G1 cell cycle arrest nature of these
hybrids. Further to assess the senescence inducing ability of these compounds, a 
senescence associated ß-gal assay was performed. The senescence inducing nature
of these compounds was supported by the effect of hybrid (4q) on p16 promoter
activity, the marker for senescence. Moreover, cells treated with most effective 
compound (4q) show up-regulation of p53, p21 and down-regulation of HDAC-1,
HDAC-2, HDAC-5 and EZH2 mRNA levels. Docking results suggest that, the triazole
nitrogen showed Zn(+2) mediated interactions with the histidine residue of HDACs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25757092  [PubMed - in process]


383. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):743-50. eCollection 2015.

Histological and immunohistochemical markers for progression prediction in
transurethrally resected high-grade non-muscle invasive bladder cancer.

Kim K(1), Cho YM(2), Park BH(3), Lee JL(4), Ro JY(5), Go H(2), Shim JW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine Republic of Korea. (3)Department 
of Pathology, Green Cross Laboratories Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Oncology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine Republic
of Korea. (5)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, Houston Methodist
Hospital, Weill Medical College of Cornell University Houston, Texas; USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital
Republic of Korea.

High-grade non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (Non-MIBC) has a high risk of stage
progression to muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) and could be managed either 
conservatively by transurethral resection of bladder tumor (TURBT) or more
aggressively by radical cystectomy. The selection of patients who may benefit
from early radical intervention is a challenge. To define useful prognostic
markers for progression, we analyzed clinicopathological features and
immunohistochemical expression patterns of E2F1, p27, survivin, p53, EZH2, IMP3, 
TSC1/hamartin, fatty acid synthase, androgen receptor, 14-3-3s, MAGEA4, and
NY-ESO-1 on 118 cases of high-grade Non-MIBC. During the mean follow-up period of
64.3 months, progression occurred in 18 patients (15.3%). Histologically, large
amount of invasive component (> 50%) was noted in 35 cases (29.7%) and was
strongly associated with progression. Among the 12 biomarkers, high expressions
of E2F1 and nuclear p27 were noted in 46 cases (40.0%) and 14 cases (12.7%),
respectively, and were associated with frequent progression. Using multivariate
analysis, the proportion of invasive component and high E2F1 expression were
independent prognostic factors for the prediction of progression. Our results
indicated that large amount of invasive carcinoma component and high expressions 
of p27 and E2F1 were predictive markers for progression in Non-MIBC. Therefore,
we suggest that these parameters, especially proportion of invasive carcinoma
component and E2F1 expression, should be evaluated during pathologic examination 
and considered during selection of the appropriate management strategy for high
grade Non-MIBC patients.

PMCID: PMC4348879
PMID: 25755769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nat Immunol. 2015 May;16(5):505-16. doi: 10.1038/ni.3125. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

The methyltransferase Ezh2 controls cell adhesion and migration through direct
methylation of the extranuclear regulatory protein talin.

Gunawan M(1), Venkatesan N(1), Loh JT(1), Wong JF(1), Berger H(1), Neo WH(1), Li 
LY(2), La Win MK(1), Yau YH(1), Guo T(1), See PC(2), Yamazaki S(3), Chin KC(4),
Gingras AR(5), Shochat SG(1), Ng LG(2), Sze SK(1), Ginhoux F(2), Su IH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Nanyang Technological
University, Republic of Singapore. (2)Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Biopolis, Republic of Singapore. (3)Department 
of immunology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Nagoya, Japan. (4)1] Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Republic of Singapore. [2] Institute of
Molecular &Cell Biology, Agency for Science and Technology Research, Republic of 
Singapore. (5)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 May;16(5):441-3.

A cytosolic role for the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 in regulating lymphocyte 
activation has been suggested, but the molecular mechanisms underpinning this
extranuclear function have remained unclear. Here we found that Ezh2 regulated
the integrin signaling and adhesion dynamics of neutrophils and dendritic cells
(DCs). Ezh2 deficiency impaired the integrin-dependent transendothelial migration
of innate leukocytes and restricted disease progression in an animal model of
multiple sclerosis. Direct methylation of talin, a key regulatory molecule in
cell migration, by Ezh2 disrupted the binding of talin to F-actin and thereby
promoted the turnover of adhesion structures. This regulatory effect was
abolished by targeted disruption of the interactions of Ezh2 with the
cytoskeletal-reorganization effector Vav1. Our studies reveal an unforeseen
extranuclear function for Ezh2 in regulating adhesion dynamics, with implications
for leukocyte migration, immune responses and potentially pathogenic processes.

PMID: 25751747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2015 Apr 1;25(7):1532-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.02.017.
Epub 2015 Feb 17.

SAH derived potent and selective EZH2 inhibitors.

Kung PP(1), Huang B(1), Zehnder L(1), Tatlock J(1), Bingham P(2), Krivacic C(2), 
Gajiwala K(1), Diehl W(1), Yu X(1), Maegley KA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Chemistry, Pfizer Global Research and Development, La Jolla
Laboratories, 10770 Science Center Dr., San Diego, CA 92121, USA. (2)Oncology
Research Unit, Pfizer Global Research and Development, La Jolla Laboratories,
10770 Science Center Dr., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

A series of novel enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) inhibitors was designed
based on the chemical structure of the histone methyltransferase (HMT) inhibitor 
SAH (S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine). These nucleoside-based EZH2 inhibitors blocked
the methylation of nucleosomes at H3K27 in biochemical assays employing both WT
PRC2 complex as well as a Y641N mutant PRC2 complex. The most potent compound,
27, displayed IC50's against both complexes of 270 nM and 70 nM, respectively. To
our knowledge, compound 27 is the most potent SAH-derived inhibitor of the EZH2
PRC2 complex yet identified. This compound also displayed improved potency,
lipophilic efficiency (LipE), and selectivity profile against other lysine
methyltransferases compared with SAH.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25746813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 26;34(48):5869-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.38. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

DNA methylation in small cell lung cancer defines distinct disease subtypes and
correlates with high expression of EZH2.

Poirier JT(1), Gardner EE(1,)(2), Connis N(3), Moreira AL(4), de Stanchina E(5), 
Hann CL(3), Rudin CM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 
USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (3)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (5)Molecular Pharmacology & Chemistry Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy characterized by early 
metastasis, rapid development of resistance to chemotherapy and genetic
instability. This study profiles DNA methylation in SCLC, patient-derived
xenografts (PDX) and cell lines at single-nucleotide resolution. DNA methylation 
patterns of primary samples are distinct from those of cell lines, whereas PDX
maintain a pattern closely consistent with primary samples. Clustering of DNA
methylation and gene expression of primary SCLC revealed distinct disease
subtypes among histologically indistinguishable primary patient samples with
similar genetic alterations. SCLC is notable for dense clustering of high-level
methylation in discrete promoter CpG islands, in a pattern clearly distinct from 
other lung cancers and strongly correlated with high expression of the E2F target
and histone methyltransferase gene EZH2. Pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 in a
SCLC PDX markedly inhibited tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC4564363 [Available on 2016-05-26]
PMID: 25746006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2015 May;42(5):458-64. doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12382.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste 2 is a novel therapeutic target for 
cervical cancer.

Ding M(1), Zhang H, Li Z, Wang C, Chen J, Shi L, Xu D, Gao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
Medical School of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), a polycomb histone methyltransferase, is
overexpressed in various cancers, including cervical cancer. Gene expression
analysis revealed that increased expression of EZH2 is associated with cervical
cancer progression, particularly the progression to invasive squamous cell
carcinoma. Enhancer of zeste 2 is known to trimethylate lysine 27 on histone H3, 
leading to gene silencing that contributes to the progression of tumours into a
more aggressive form of cancer. However, the specific molecular mechanisms by
which EZH2 contributes to the development of cervical cancer remain largely
unknown. Recently, an EZH2 inhibitor was reported to selectively inhibit
trimethylated lysine 27 on histone H3 and to reactivate silenced genes in cancer 
cells. In this study, we found that GSK343 (a specific inhibitor of EZH2
methyltransferase) induces phenotypic reprogramming of cancer cells from
mesenchymal to epithelial cells, reducing proliferation and cell motility and
blocking the invasion of cervical cancer cell lines both in vitro and in vivo.
Treatment with the EZH2 inhibitor led to increased levels of the epithelial
marker E-cadherin and decreased levels of mesenchymal markers such as N-cadherin 
and vimentin. The observed reprogramming is associated with restrained cervical
cancer progression and provides direct evidence in support of EZH2 as a
therapeutic target.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25739318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Oncol Rep. 2015 May;33(5):2384-92. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3816. Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Ribavirin as a tri-targeted antitumor repositioned drug.

De la Cruz-Hernandez E(1), Medina-Franco JL(2), Trujillo J(3), Chavez-Blanco
A(3), Dominguez-Gomez G(3), Perez-Cardenas E(3), Gonzalez-Fierro A(3),
Taja-Chayeb L(3), Dueñas-Gonzalez A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Multidisciplinary Academic Division of Comalcalco, Juarez Autonomous
University of Tabasco, Mexico. (2)Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Pharmacy,
National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico city, Mexico. (3)Division of
Basic Research, National Cancer Institute of Mexico, Mexico city, Mexico.
(4)Biomedical Research Institute, National Autonomous University of
Mexico/National Cancer Institute of Mexico, Mexico city, Mexico.

The aim of the present study was to demonstrate that ribavirin, a known inhibitor
of eIF4E and inosine 5'-phosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH), also inhibits histone
methyltransferase zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). A computational searching revealed that
ribavirin has a high structural similarity to 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep). The
growth inhibitory effects of ribavirin as well as its effects upon epigenetic
enzymes were evaluated in various cancer cell lines. siRNA assays were used to
downregulate eIF4E, EZH2 and IMPDH to determine the contribution of these targets
to the growth inhibitory effects of ribavirin. Ribavirin decreased EZH2
expression, inhibited histone methyltransferase activity and decreased H3K27
trimethylation. Ribavirin induced variable growth inhibition in a number of cell 
lines and downregulation of the targets, EZH2, eIF4E and IMPDH1 and 2 by siRNA
led to comparable growth inhibition while no significant further reduction in
viability was observed when siRNA transfected cells were treated with ribavirin. 
The results showed that ribavirin inhibits these cancer targets and should thus
be studied for cancer therapy.

PMID: 25738706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Curr Top Med Chem. 2015;15(8):714-9.

Inhibition of the histone lysine methyltransferase EZH2 for the treatment of
cancer.

Verma SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 1250 South Collegeville Road,
Collegeville, PA 19426, USA. sharad.k.verma@gsk.com.

In recent years, there has been an increased effort in the development of
therapies which target an epigenetic mode of action. Among thes e efforts include
progress in the development of inhibitors of EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2), 
a key epigenetic target with strong disease implications to cancer. Over the last
3+ years, multiple reports describing small molecule inhibitors of EZH2 have been
described, including those for chemical probes and drug candidates which have
entered the clinic as first-in-class agents. Recent progress in this emerging
area is presented in this review.

PMID: 25732793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Haematologica. 2015 Jun;100(6):768-79. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.118463. Epub
2015 Feb 27.

CD133 marks a stem cell population that drives human primary myelofibrosis.

Triviai I(1), Stübig T(2), Niebuhr B(3), Hussein K(4), Tsiftsoglou A(5), Fehse
B(2), Stocking C(3), Kröger N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for
Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece itriviai@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Stem Cell Transplantation, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany. 
(3)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology,
Hamburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Germany.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Greece.

Primary myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative neoplasm characterized by bone
marrow fibrosis, megakaryocyte atypia, extramedullary hematopoiesis, and
transformation to acute myeloid leukemia. To date the stem cell that undergoes
the spatial and temporal chain of events during the development of this disease
has not been identified. Here we describe a CD133(+) stem cell population that
drives the pathogenesis of primary myelofibrosis. Patient-derived circulating
CD133(+) but not CD34(+)CD133(-) cells, with a variable burden for JAK2 (V617F)
mutation, had multipotent cloning capacity in vitro. CD133(+) cells engrafted for
up to 10 months in immunocompromised mice and differentiated into JAK2-V617F(+)
myeloid but not lymphoid progenitors. We observed the persistence of human,
atypical JAK2-V617F(+) megakaryocytes, the initiation of a prefibrotic state,
bone marrow/splenic fibrosis and transition to acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemic
cells arose from a subset of CD133(+) cells harboring EZH2 (D265H) but lacking a 
secondary JAK2 (V617F) mutation, consistent with the hypothesis that deregulation
of EZH2 activity drives clonal growth and increases the risk of acute myeloid
leukemia. This is the first characterization of a patient-derived stem cell
population that drives disease resembling both chronic and acute phases of
primary myelofibrosis in mice. These results reveal the importance of the CD133
antigen in deciphering the neoplastic clone in primary myelofibrosis and indicate
a new therapeutic target for myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4450622
PMID: 25724578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cancer Discov. 2015 Apr;5(4):341. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-NB2015-026. Epub 2015
Feb 27.

A Potential Epigenetic Therapy for NSCLC.

[No authors listed]

New research shows that inhibiting the histone modifier EZH2 may make non-small
cell lung cancers harboring BRG1 or EGFR mutations more sensitive to etoposide, a
common chemotherapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25724377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Apr;240(4):546-55. doi: 10.1177/1535370215573463.
Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Inhibition of EZH2 expression is associated with the proliferation, apoptosis and
migration of SW620 colorectal cancer cells in vitro.

Song-Bing H, Hao Z, Jian Z, Guo-Qiang Z, Tuo H, Dai-Wei W, Wen G, Lin G, Yi Z,
Xiao-Feng X, Li-Feng Z, Min F, Shui-Qing H, Xiao-Dong Y, Xin-Guo Z, Liang W,
De-Chun L.

Erratum for
    Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Apr;240(4):458-66.

Epigenetic changes have been recently recognized as important in many human
cancers. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) gene has shown overexpression in
various human cancers, consistent with a straightforward role of EZH2 as an
oncogene, but its function in carcinogenesis is partly contradictory. The role of
EZH2 in development of human colorectal cancer (CRC) has not yet been clarified. 
In present study, we observed up-regulation of EZH2 expression in tumor tissues
from CRC patients. The expression of EZH2 in CRC cell lines is consistent with
the trend in cancer tissues using RT-PCR. We showed that TNM stage and lymph node
metastasis in CRC patients are significantly correlated with EZH2 expression
levels. EZH2 level of transcription and protein was inhibited by small
interfering RNA (siRNA). More importantly, EZH2-siRNA inhibited the proliferation
and migration of SW620 cells while promoting their apoptosis, and inducing G0/G1 
cell cycle arrest of CRC cells. Collectively, our results suggest that
up-regulated EZH2 expression may contribute to the progression of the patients
with CRC. A comprehensive study of epigenetic mechanisms and the relevance of
EZH2 in CRC is important for fully understanding this disease and as a basis for 
developing new treatment options in patients with CRC.

© 2015 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 25724194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Endocrine. 2015 Jun;49(2):324-32. doi: 10.1007/s12020-015-0555-4. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

Epigenetic alterations in human parathyroid tumors.

Verdelli C(1), Forno I, Vaira V, Corbetta S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato
Milanese, MI, Italy.

Epigenetics alterations are involved in tumorigenesis and have been identified in
endocrine neoplasia. In particular, DNA methylation, microRNAs deregulations and 
histone methylation impairment are detected in tumors of the parathyroid glands. 
Parathyroid tumors are the second most common endocrine neoplasia following
thyroid cancer in women, and it is associated with primary hyperparathyroidism, a
disease sustained by PTH hypersecretion. Despite the hallmark of global promoter 
hypomethylations was not detectable in parathyroid tumors, increase of
hypermethylation in specific CpG islands was detected in the progression from
benign to malignant parathyroid tumors. Furthermore, deregulation of a panel of
embryonic-related microRNAs (miRNAs) was documented in parathyroid tumors
compared with normal glands. Impaired expression of the histone
methyltransferases EZH2, BMI1, and RIZ1 have been described in parathyroid
tumors. Moreover, histone methyltransferases have been shown to be modulated by
the oncosuppressors HIC1, MEN1, and HRPT2/CDC73 gene products that characterize
tumorigenesis of parathyroid adenomas and carcinomas, respectively. The
epigenetic scenario in parathyroid tumors have just began to be decoded but
emerging data highlight the involvement of an embryonic gene signature in
parathyroid tumor development.

PMID: 25722013  [PubMed - in process]


394. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2014 Dec 5;2014(1):287-96. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2014.1.287. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

The evolving genomic landscape of myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Nangalia J(1), Green TR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Wellcome Trust/MRC Stem Cell
Institute, Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom; and Department of Haematology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

Our understanding of the genetic basis of the Philadelphia chromosome-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) has moved forward at a staggering pace over
the last decade. With the discoveries of underlying mutations in JAK2, MPL, and, 
most recently, calreticulin (CALR), that together account for ~90% of patients
with MPNs, these conditions are now among the best characterized of hematological
malignancies. While JAK-STAT pathway activation has been shown to be central to
the pathogenesis of the MPN phenotype, the mechanism by which mutant CALR alters 
cellular function to result in myeloid proliferation remains unclear. Other
mutations in several epigenetic modifiers, such as ASXL1, DNMT3a, TET2, EZH2,
IDH1, and IDH2, as well as in genes involved in mRNA splicing, such as SF3B1 and 
U2AF2, have also been described in recent years in patients with MPNs, and
evidence is emerging as to how these may be contributing to disease biology. From
a therapeutic perspective, the discovery of aberrations in JAK2 has rapidly
translated into the successful clinical use of JAK inhibitors in MPNs. Mutant
calreticulin has the potential to be a tumor-specific therapeutic target because 
the mutations generate a novel protein C-terminus. In this chapter, we detail the
genomic alterations that underlie MPNs, with a focus on the recent discovery of
mutations in CALR, and explore the clinical and biological relevance of the
altered genomic landscape in MPNs.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25696868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):728-36. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3378. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Regulation of the expression of claudin 23 by the enhancer of zeste 2 polycomb
group protein in colorectal cancer.

Maryan N(1), Statkiewicz M(2), Mikula M(2), Goryca K(2), Paziewska A(1),
Strzalkowska A(2), Dabrowska M(2), Bujko M(3), Ostrowski J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical Center for Postgraduate
Education, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Warsaw 02-781, Poland. (2)Department of Genetics, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw 02-781,
Poland. (3)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw 02-781,
Poland.

Altered epigenetic mechanisms, similar to gene mutations, contribute to the
pathogenesis and molecular heterogeneity of neoplasms, including colorectal
cancer (CRC). Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase, which is
involved in epigenetic gene silencing and is aberrantly expressed in CRC.
Therefore, the identification of the genes regulated by EZH2 in CRC is important 
to improve current understanding of its role in cancer epigenetics. The present
study used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) followed by deep sequencing to
assess genome-wide EZH2-DNA interactions in healthy or CRC mucosa samples. In
total, 86.9/61.6 and 92.5/62.6 million tags were sequenced/mapped in healthy and 
CRC mucosa samples, respectively. The EZH2-binding densities were correlated with
transcriptomic datasets and this demonstrated that the claudin-23 (CLDN23) gene, 
which encodes a component of cell-cell adhesion structures, was occupied by EZH2 
and significantly silenced in CRC tissue. The measurement of DNA methylation at
the CLDN23 promoter using pyrosequencing excluded the possibility that silencing 
of this gene in CRC patient samples was a result of DNA hypermethylation.
Following treatment of the Colo205 and HT-29 CRC cell lines, with the EZH2
inhibitor, GSK126, the level of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3)
was reduced and the mRNA and protein expression levels of CLDN23 were increased. 
ChIP analysis confirmed that the level of H3K27m3 along the CLDN23 gene was
decreased in the GSK126-treated cell lines. Furthermore, ChIP analysis of these
samples detected histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) at the CLDN23
promoter, demonstrating that the balance between H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 may
underlie the regulation of the expression of CLDN23. The present study
demonstrated an epigenetic link between the activity of the EZH2
methyltransferase at the CLDN23 locus and the expression of CLDN23 in CRC tissue.

PMID: 25695204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 18;11(2):e1004873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004873.
eCollection 2015.

Systemic delivery of microRNA-101 potently inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma in
vivo by repressing multiple targets.

Zheng F(1), Liao YJ(2), Cai MY(3), Liu TH(1), Chen SP(2), Wu PH(4), Wu L(5), Bian
XW(6), Guan XY(7), Zeng YX(2), Yuan YF(8), Kung HF(9), Xie D(3).

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
China; Medical Research Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou, China. 
(2)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
China. (3)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine,
Guangzhou, China; Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, China. (4)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou, China; Tumor Interventional Therapy, Sun Yat-Sen University 
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China; Hepatobiliary Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University
Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China. (5)Department of Clinical Oncology, People's
Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (6)Institute of Pathology and Southwest
Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, 
China. (7)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen
University Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine,
Guangzhou, China; Department of Clinical Oncology, the University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. (8)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun
Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou, China; Hepatobiliary Oncology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China. (9)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer 
Medicine, Guangzhou, China; State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, the 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Targeted therapy based on adjustment of microRNA (miRNA)s activity takes great
promise due to the ability of these small RNAs to modulate cellular behavior.
However, the efficacy of miR-101 replacement therapy to hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC) remains unclear. In the current study, we first observed that plasma levels
of miR-101 were significantly lower in distant metastatic HCC patients than in
HCCs without distant metastasis, and down-regulation of plasma miR-101 predicted 
a worse disease-free survival (DFS, P<0.05). In an animal model of HCC, we
demonstrated that systemic delivery of lentivirus-mediated miR-101 abrogated HCC 
growth in the liver, intrahepatic metastasis and distant metastasis to the lung
and to the mediastinum, resulting in a dramatic suppression of HCC development
and metastasis in mice without toxicity and extending life expectancy.
Furthermore, enforced overexpression of miR-101 in HCC cells not only decreased
EZH2, COX2 and STMN1, but also directly down-regulated a novel target ROCK2,
inhibited Rho/Rac GTPase activation, and blocked HCC cells epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and angiogenesis, inducing a strong abrogation of HCC
tumorigenesis and aggressiveness both in vitro and in vivo. These results provide
proof-of-concept support for systemic delivery of lentivirus-mediated miR-101 as 
a powerful anti-HCC therapeutic modality by repressing multiple molecular
targets.

PMCID: PMC4334495
PMID: 25693145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):201-3. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.01.019.

Ezh2 lines up the chromatin in T regulatory cells.

Wu C(1), Chen Z(1), Kuchroo VK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Evergrande Center for Immunologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Evergrande Center for Immunologic
Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. Electronic address: vkuchroo@evergrande.hms.harvard.edu.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):227-38.

Epigenetic modulation is critical for regulating the development and function of 
T cells. In this issue of Immunity, DuPage et al. (2015) show that the
chromatin-modifying enzyme Ezh2 induced by CD28 costimulation is essential for
regulatory T (Treg) cell maintenance during activation and differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25692693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Exp Med. 2015 Mar 9;212(3):297-306. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141499. Epub 2015 Feb
16.

Coupling of T cell receptor specificity to natural killer T cell development by
bivalent histone H3 methylation.

Dobenecker MW(1), Kim JK(2), Marcello J(3), Fang TC(3), Prinjha R(4), Bosselut
R(2), Tarakhovsky A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Epigenetics and Signaling, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10065 dobenem@rockefeller.edu tarakho@rockefeller.edu.
(2)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (3)Laboratory of
Immune Cell Epigenetics and Signaling, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10065. (4)Epinova DPU, Immuno-Inflammation Therapy Area, GlaxoSmithKline R&D,
Medicines Research Centre, Stevenage SG1 2NY, England, UK.

The fidelity of T cell immunity depends greatly on coupling T cell receptor
signaling with specific T cell effector functions. Here, we describe a
chromatin-based mechanism that enables integration of TCR specificity into
definite T cell lineage commitment. Using natural killer T cells (iNKT cell) as a
model of a T cell subset that differentiates in response to specific TCR
signaling, we identified a key role of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) in coupling iNKT cell TCR specificity with the generation of iNKT
cells. We found that the Zbtb16/PLZF gene promoter that drives iNKT cell
differentiation possesses a bivalent chromatin state characterized by the
simultaneous presence of negative and positive H3K27me3 and H3K4me3
modifications. Depletion of H3K27me3 at the Zbtb16/PLZF promoter leads to
uncoupling of iNKT cell development from TCR specificity and is associated with
accumulation of iNKT-like CD4(+) cells that express a non-iNKT cell specific T
cell repertoire. In turn, stabilization of H3K27me3 leads to a drastic reduction 
of the iNKT cell population. Our data suggest that H3K27me3 levels at the
bivalent Zbtb16/PLZF gene define a threshold enabling precise coupling of TCR
specificity to lineage commitment.

© 2015 Dobenecker et al.

PMCID: PMC4354372
PMID: 25687282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nat Med. 2015 Mar;21(3):231-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.3799. Epub 2015 Feb 16.

Synthetic lethality by targeting EZH2 methyltransferase activity in
ARID1A-mutated cancers.

Bitler BG(1), Aird KM(1), Garipov A(1), Li H(1), Amatangelo M(1), Kossenkov
AV(2), Schultz DC(3), Liu Q(4), Shih IeM(5), Conejo-Garcia JR(6), Speicher DW(7),
Zhang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Center for Systems and Computational Biology, The Wistar
Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Center for Chemical Biology and
Translational Medicine, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Molecular and Cellular Oncogenesis Program, The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Oncology, and
Gynecology and Obstetrics, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. (6)Tumor Microenvironment and Metastasis Program, The Wistar
Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (7)1] Center for Systems and
Computational Biology, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. [2]
Molecular and Cellular Oncogenesis Program, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2015 Apr;14(4):236.

The gene encoding ARID1A, a chromatin remodeler, shows one of the highest
mutation rates across many cancer types. Notably, ARID1A is mutated in over 50%
of ovarian clear cell carcinomas, which currently have no effective therapy. To
date, clinically applicable targeted cancer therapy based on ARID1A mutational
status has not been described. Here we show that inhibition of the EZH2
methyltransferase acts in a synthetic lethal manner in ARID1A-mutated ovarian
cancer cells and that ARID1A mutational status correlated with response to the
EZH2 inhibitor. We identified PIK3IP1 as a direct target of ARID1A and EZH2 that 
is upregulated by EZH2 inhibition and contributed to the observed synthetic
lethality by inhibiting PI3K-AKT signaling. Importantly, EZH2 inhibition caused
regression of ARID1A-mutated ovarian tumors in vivo. To our knowledge, this is
the first data set to demonstrate a synthetic lethality between ARID1A mutation
and EZH2 inhibition. Our data indicate that pharmacological inhibition of EZH2
represents a novel treatment strategy for cancers involving ARID1A mutations.

PMCID: PMC4352133
PMID: 25686104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Jun;14(6):1435-46. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.044586. Epub
2015 Feb 13.

Functional Proteomic Analysis of Repressive Histone Methyltransferase Complexes
Reveals ZNF518B as a G9A Regulator.

Maier VK(1), Feeney CM(2), Taylor JE(2), Creech AL(2), Qiao JW(2), Szanto A(1),
Das PP(3), Chevrier N(4), Cifuentes-Rojas C(1), Orkin SH(3), Carr SA(2), Jaffe
JD(2), Mertins P(5), Lee JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02143; (2)§Proteomics Platform, The Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge
Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142; (3)¶Department of Pediatric Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02115; (4)<U+2016>FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138. (5)§Proteomics Platform, The Broad Institute, 7
Cambridge Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142; pmertins@broadinstitute.org
lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Cell-type specific gene silencing by histone H3 lysine 27 and lysine 9
methyltransferase complexes PRC2 and G9A-GLP is crucial both during development
and to maintain cell identity. Although studying their interaction partners has
yielded valuable insight into their functions, how these factors are regulated on
a network level remains incompletely understood. Here, we present a new approach 
that combines quantitative interaction proteomics with global chromatin profiling
to functionally characterize repressive chromatin modifying protein complexes in 
embryonic stem cells. We define binding stoichiometries of 9 new and 12 known
interaction partners of PRC2 and 10 known and 29 new interaction partners of
G9A-GLP, respectively. We demonstrate that PRC2 and G9A-GLP interact physically
and share several interaction partners, including the zinc finger proteins
ZNF518A and ZNF518B. Using global chromatin profiling by targeted mass
spectrometry, we discover that even sub-stoichiometric binding partners such as
ZNF518B can positively regulate global H3K9me2 levels. Biochemical analysis
reveals that ZNF518B directly interacts with EZH2 and G9A. Our systematic
analysis suggests that ZNF518B may mediate the structural association between
PRC2 and G9A-GLP histone methyltransferases and additionally regulates the
activity of G9A-GLP.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4458711 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25680957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):227-38. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.01.007. Epub 2015 
Feb 10.

The chromatin-modifying enzyme Ezh2 is critical for the maintenance of regulatory
T cell identity after activation.

DuPage M(1), Chopra G(1), Quiros J(1), Rosenthal WL(1), Morar MM(1), Holohan
D(1), Zhang R(2), Turka L(2), Marson A(3), Bluestone JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (2)Transplantation Biology Research
Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02129,
USA. (3)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA; Innovative Genomics Initiative (IGI), University of California,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. (4)Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: jeff.bluestone@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2015 Feb 17;42(2):201-3.

Regulatory T cells (Treg cells) are required for immune homeostasis. Chromatin
remodeling is essential for establishing diverse cellular identities, but how the
epigenetic program in Treg cells is maintained throughout the dynamic activation 
process remains unclear. Here we have shown that CD28 co-stimulation, an
extracellular cue intrinsically required for Treg cell maintenance, induced the
chromatin-modifying enzyme, Ezh2. Treg-specific ablation of Ezh2 resulted in
spontaneous autoimmunity with reduced Foxp3(+) cells in non-lymphoid tissues and 
impaired resolution of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Utilizing a
model designed to selectively deplete wild-type Treg cells in adult mice
co-populated with Ezh2-deficient Treg cells, Ezh2-deficient cells were
destabilized and failed to prevent autoimmunity. After activation, the
transcriptome of Ezh2-deficient Treg cells was disrupted, with altered expression
of Treg cell lineage genes in a pattern similar to Foxp3-deficient Treg cells.
These studies reveal a critical role for Ezh2 in the maintenance of Treg cell
identity during cellular activation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4347854
PMID: 25680271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2015 Feb 25;67(1):83-9.

[DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay the invasion and migration of MGC-803 
gastric carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ning XH(1), Guo R(1), Han L(2), Zhang AL(2), Liu X(1), Li ZX(1), Kang CS(2),
Zhang QY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University 
General Hospital and Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Tianjin 300052, China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin
Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China. zhangqy@tijmu.edu.cn.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the regulatory effects of histone
methylation modifications on the expression of miR-200c, as well as invasion and 
migration of gastric carcinoma cells. Gastric carcinoma cell line, MGC-803, were 
treated by 2.5 µmol/L histone methyltransferase inhibitor, DZNep. The expression 
of miR-200c was detected by real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR). The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) indicators (ZEB1/2 and E/N-cadherin),
EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3 expressions were detected by Western blot. Cell
migration and invasion abilities were detected by Transwell and scratch tests.
The result showed that, compared with DMSO (control) group, DZNep significantly
increased the expression of miR-200c to about 2.1 times, inhibited ZEB1, ZEB2,
and N-cadherin expressions, and activated E-cadherin expression; Also, DZNep
decreased the protein expressions of EZH2, EED, SUZ12 and H3K27me3; Moreover,
DZNep could inhibit MGC-803 cell invasive and migrative abilities, as well as
MMP9 expression. These results suggest DZNep raises miR-200c expression to delay 
the invasion and migration of gastric carcinoma cells, and the underlying
mechanisms involve the regulations of EMT-related proteins and polycomb
repressive complex 2.

PMID: 25672630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2928-38.

Epigenetic reprogramming by tumor-derived EZH2 gain-of-function mutations
promotes aggressive 3D cell morphologies and enhances melanoma tumor growth.

Barsotti AM(1), Ryskin M(1), Zhong W(1), Zhang WG(1), Giannakou A(1), Loreth
C(2), Diesl V(2), Follettie M(1,)(2), Golas J(1), Lee M(3), Nichols T(3), Fan
C(4), Li G(4), Dann S(4), Fantin VR(4), Arndt K(1), Verhelle D(4), Rollins RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, Pearl
River, NY 10965, USA. (2)Oncology Research Unit, Pfizer Worldwide Research and
Development, Cambridge, MA 02140, USA. (3)Drug Safety Research and Development,
Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, San Diego, CA 92121, USA. (4)Oncology 
Research Unit, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, San Diego, CA 92121,
USA.

In addition to genetic alterations, cancer cells are characterized by myriad
epigenetic changes. EZH2 is a histone methyltransferase that is over-expressed
and mutated in cancer. The EZH2 gain-of-function (GOF) mutations first identified
in lymphomas have recently been reported in melanoma (~2%) but remain
uncharacterized. We expressed multiple EZH2 GOF mutations in the A375 metastatic 
skin melanoma cell line and observed both increased H3K27me3 and dramatic changes
in 3D culture morphology. In these cells, prominent morphological changes were
accompanied by a decrease in cell contractility and an increase in collective
cell migration. At the molecular level, we observed significant alteration of the
axonal guidance pathway, a pathway intricately involved in the regulation of cell
shape and motility. Furthermore, the aggressive 3D morphology of EZH2
GOF-expressing melanoma cells (both endogenous and ectopic) was attenuated by
EZH2 catalytic inhibition. Finally, A375 cells expressing exogenous EZH2 GOF
mutants formed larger tumors than control cells in mouse xenograft studies. This 
study not only demonstrates the first functional characterization of EZH2 GOF
mutants in non-hematopoietic cells, but also provides a rationale for EZH2
catalytic inhibition in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4413628
PMID: 25671303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 27;290(13):8271-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.637496. Epub 2015
Feb 10.

Tumor-secreted Hsp90 subverts polycomb function to drive prostate tumor growth
and invasion.

Nolan KD(1), Franco OE(2), Hance MW(1), Hayward SW(2), Isaacs JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of 
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425 and. (2)the Department of
Urology and Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232. (3)From the Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425 and
isaacsj@musc.edu.

Prostate cancer remains the second highest contributor to male cancer-related
lethality. The transition of a subset of tumors from indolent to invasive disease
is associated with a poor clinical outcome. Activation of the epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) genetic program is a major risk factor for cancer
progression. We recently reported that secreted extracellular Hsp90 (eHsp90)
initiates EMT in prostate cancer cells, coincident with its enhanced expression
in mesenchymal models. Our current work substantially extended these findings in 
defining a pathway linking eHsp90 signaling to EZH2 function, a methyltransferase
of the Polycomb repressor complex. EZH2 is also implicated in EMT activation, and
its up-regulation represents one of the most frequent epigenetic alterations
during prostate cancer progression. We have now highlighted a novel epigenetic
function for eHsp90 via its modulation of EZH2 expression and activity.
Mechanistically, eHsp90 initiated sustained activation of MEK/ERK, a signal
critical for facilitating EZH2 transcriptional up-regulation and recruitment to
the E-cadherin promoter. We further demonstrated that an eHsp90-EZH2 pathway
orchestrates an expanded repertoire of EMT-related events including Snail and
Twist expression, tumor cell motility, and anoikis resistance. To evaluate the
role of eHsp90 in vivo, eHsp90 secretion was stably enforced in a prostate cancer
cell line resembling indolent disease. Remarkably, eHsp90 was sufficient to
induce tumor growth, suppress E-cadherin, and initiate localized invasion, events
that are exquisitely dependent upon EZH2 function. In summary, our findings
illuminate a hitherto unknown epigenetic function for eHsp90 and support a model 
wherein tumor eHsp90 functions as a rheostat for EZH2 expression and activity to 
orchestrate mesenchymal properties and coincident aggressive behavior.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4375482
PMID: 25670862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Pathol. 2015 May;236(1):1-4. doi: 10.1002/path.4512. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

CUL4B: a novel epigenetic driver in Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis.

Mok MT(1), Cheng AS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong 
SAR, China; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shenzhen, China.

Comment on
    J Pathol. 2015 Apr;235(5):784-95.

Emerging evidence indicates that Cullin 4B (CUL4B), a major component of
ubiquitin ligase complexes, is over-expressed in diverse cancer types with
pro-tumourigenic effects. In this issue of the Journal of Pathology, Yuan and
colleagues [6] elucidated the oncogenic activity of CUL4B in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and delineated its role in driving Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. In
addition to the stabilization of ß-catenin protein against proteasomal
degradation, CUL4B also acts in concert with enhancer of Zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)
to concordantly silence multiple Wnt inhibitors. These findings provide
significant mechanistic insights into the epigenetic activation of the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway in HCC and shed light on the functional importance of
ubiquitination in this intricate regulatory system.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25664533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Can Res Updates. 2014 Jul;3(3):134-140.

lincRNA HOTAIR as a novel promoter of cancer progression.

Loewen G(1), Zhuo Y(2), Zhuang Y(3), Jayawickramarajah J(4), Shan B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Providence Regional Cancer Center, 105 W. 8th Avenue, Spokane, WA 99204 USA.
(2)Medical Oncology Associates, 6001 North Mayfair Street, Spokane, WA 99208 USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane
Avenue, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (4)Department of Chemistry, Tulane
University, 2015 Percival Stern Hall, New Orleans, LA 70118 USA. (5)College of
Medical Sciences, Washington State University Spokane, 412 E. Spokane Falls
Boulevard, Spokane, WA 99202 USA.

Large intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNA) regulate development and disease via
interactions with their protein partners. Expression of the lincRNA HOX
transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR) is elevated in a variety of malignancies and
linked to metastasis and poor prognosis. HOTAIR promotes proliferation, invasion,
and metastasis in the preclinical studies of cancer through modulation of
chromatin modifying complexes. In the current review we discuss the molecular
mechanisms of HOTAIR-mediated aggressive phenotypes of cancer, HOTAIR's potential
in cancer intervention, and challenges in exploration of HOTAIR in cancer
biology.

PMCID: PMC4318250
PMID: 25663954  [PubMed]


407. Oncologist. 2015 Mar;20(3):247-56. doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.2014-0392. Epub
2015 Feb 5.

Immunohistochemical validation of overexpressed genes identified by global
expression microarrays in adrenocortical carcinoma reveals potential predictive
and prognostic biomarkers.

Ip JC(1), Pang TC(1), Glover AR(1), Soon P(1), Zhao JT(1), Clarke S(1), Robinson 
BG(1), Gill AJ(1), Sidhu SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Endocrine and Oncology Surgical Unit,
and Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, Northern Clinical School, and Department of Surgery, Westmead Hospital,
University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)Kolling Institute of Medical Research, Endocrine and Oncology Surgical Unit,
and Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Faculty of
Medicine, Northern Clinical School, and Department of Surgery, Westmead Hospital,
University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; South Western Sydney Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
stansidhu@nebsc.com.au.

BACKGROUND: Adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) is a rare malignancy with a poor
prognosis. The aim of this study was to identify novel protein signatures that
would predict clinical outcomes in a large cohort of patients with ACC based on
data from previous gene expression microarray studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A tissue microarray was generated from the paraffin tissue
blocks of 61 patients with clinical outcomes data. Selected protein biomarkers
based on previous gene expression microarray profiling studies were selected, and
immunohistochemistry staining was performed. Staining patterns were correlated
with clinical outcomes, and a multivariate analysis was undertaken to identify
potential biomarkers of prognosis.
RESULTS: Median overall survival was 45 months, with a 5-year overall survival
rate of 44%. Median disease-free survival was 58 months, with a 5-year
disease-free survival rate of 44%. The proliferation marker Ki-67 and DNA
topoisomerase TOP2A were associated with significantly poorer overall and
disease-free survival. The results also showed strong correlation between the
transcriptional repressor EZH2 and TOP2A expression, suggesting a novel role for 
EZH2 as an additional marker of prognosis. In contrast, increased expression of
the BARD1 protein, with its ubiquitin ligase function, was associated with
significantly improved overall and disease-free survival, which has yet to be
documented for ACC.
CONCLUSION: We present novel biomarkers that assist in determining prognosis for 
patients with ACC. Ki-67, TOP2A, and EZH2 were all significantly associated with 
poorer outcomes, whereas BARD1 was associated with improved overall survival. It 
is hoped that these biomarkers may help tailor additional therapy and be
potential targets for directed therapy.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4350804
PMID: 25657202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Mar;36(3):355-67. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv006. Epub 2015 Feb 
4.

Curcumin mediates chemosensitization to 5-fluorouracil through miRNA-induced
suppression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in chemoresistant colorectal 
cancer.

Toden S(1), Okugawa Y(1), Jascur T(1), Wodarz D(2), Komarova NL(2), Buhrmann
C(3), Shakibaei M(3), Boland CR(1), Goel A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, and Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Sammons Cancer
Center, Baylor University Medical Center, 3500 Gaston Avenue, Suite H-250,
Dallas, TX 75246, USA, Department of Ecology and Evolution and Department of
Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA and Institute of Anatomy, 
Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. (2)Department of Ecology and
Evolution and Department of Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA,
USA and. (3)Institute of Anatomy, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. 
(4)Center for Gastrointestinal Research, and Center for Epigenetics, Cancer
Prevention and Cancer Genomics, Baylor Research Institute and Sammons Cancer
Center, Baylor University Medical Center, 3500 Gaston Avenue, Suite H-250,
Dallas, TX 75246, USA, Department of Ecology and Evolution and Department of
Mathematics, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA and Institute of Anatomy, 
Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany ajay.goel@baylorhealth.edu.

Resistance to cytotoxic chemotherapy is a major cause of mortality in colorectal 
cancer (CRC) patients. Chemoresistance has been linked primarily to a subset of
cancer cells undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Curcumin, a
botanical with antitumorigenic properties, has been shown to enhance sensitivity 
of cancer cells to chemotherapeutic drugs, but the molecular mechanisms
underlying this phenomenon remain unclear. Effects of curcumin and 5-fluorouracil
(5FU) individually, and in combination, were examined in parental and 5FU
resistant (5FUR) cell lines. We performed a series of growth proliferation and
apoptosis assays in 2D and 3D cell cultures. Furthermore, we identified and
analyzed the expression pattern of a subset of putative EMT-suppressive microRNAs
(miRNAs) and their downstream target genes regulated by curcumin.
Chemosensitizing effects of curcumin were validated in a xenograft mouse model.
Combined treatment with curcumin and 5FU enhanced cellular apoptosis and
inhibited proliferation in both parental and 5FUR cells, whereas 5FU alone was
ineffective in 5FUR cells. A group of EMT-suppressive miRNAs were upregulated by 
curcumin treatment in 5FUR cells. Curcumin suppressed EMT in 5FUR cells by
downregulating BMI1, SUZ12 and EZH2 transcripts, key mediators of cancer
stemness-related polycomb repressive complex subunits. Using a xenograft and
mathematical models, we further demonstrated that curcumin sensitized 5FU to
suppress tumor growth. We provide novel mechanistic evidence for
curcumin-mediated sensitization to 5FU-related chemoresistance through
suppression of EMT in 5FUR cells via upregulation of EMT-suppressive miRNAs. This
study highlights the potential therapeutic usefulness of curcumin as an adjunct
in patients with chemoresistant advanced CRC.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4400529
PMID: 25653233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(10):2895-901. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2015.1006220. Epub
2015 Mar 8.

Strong expression of EZH2 and accumulation of trimethylated H3K27 in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma independent of cell of origin and EZH2 codon 641 mutation.

Zhou Z(1), Gao J(2), Popovic R(1), Wolniak K(2), Parimi V(2), Winter JN(1), Licht
JD(1), Chen YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine , Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine , Chicago , IL , USA. (2)b Department of Pathology , Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago , IL , USA.

Gain-of-function EZH2 mutation promotes H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and
lymphoid transformation of germinal center (GC) derived B-cell lymphoma, such as 
GCB diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), but not activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL. 
It is unclear whether expression levels of EZH2 and consequential H3K27me3 vary
by EZH2 mutation and/or cell-of-origin in DLBCL. Ninety lymphoma samples
including 40 DLBCLs were studied by immunohistochemistry. EZH2 Y641 mutations
were detected in three of 20 (15%) GCB and none of 20 ABC types. All 40 DLBCLs
showed strong EZH2, expression with high-level H3K27me3 in 90% GCBs and 95% ABCs.
In 50 other B-cell lymphomas except for follicular lymphoma, strong EZH2
expression correlated with high-grade features. Immunoblot of DLBCL cell lines
and microarray gene expression study of EZH2 in B-cell lymphomas were consistent 
with the immunohistochemistry findings. High-level EZH2 and H3K27me3 were common 
in DLBCL independent of cell-of-origin and EZH2 mutation. High-level EZH2 in
lymphoma of aggressive features suggests additional therapeutic targets.

PMID: 25651430  [PubMed - in process]


410. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 4;5:8229. doi: 10.1038/srep08229.

Ezh2 mediated H3K27me3 activity facilitates somatic transition during human
pluripotent reprogramming.

Rao RA(1), Dhele N(2), Cheemadan S(3), Ketkar A(2), Jayandharan GR(3), Palakodeti
D(2), Rampalli S(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre For Inflammation and Tissue Homeostasis, Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), National Centre for Biological
Sciences, GKVK Campus, Bellary Road, Bangalore 560065, Karnataka, India [2]
Sastra University, Tirumalaisamudram, Thanjavur - 613 401, TamilNadu, India.
(2)Centre For Inflammation and Tissue Homeostasis, Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), National Centre for Biological
Sciences, GKVK Campus, Bellary Road, Bangalore 560065, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Hematology and Centre for Stem Cell Research, Christian Medical 
College, Vellore - 632004, TamilNadu, India.

Factor induced reprogramming of fibroblasts is an orchestrated but inefficient
process. At the epigenetic level, it results in drastic chromatin changes to
erase the existing somatic "memory" and to establish the pluripotent state.
Accordingly, alterations of chromatin regulators including Ezh2 influence iPSC
generation. While the role of individual transcription factors in resetting the
chromatin landscape during iPSC generation is increasingly evident, their
engagement with chromatin modulators remains to be elucidated. In the current
study, we demonstrate that histone methyl transferase activity of Ezh2 is
required for mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) during human iPSC
generation. We show that the H3K27me3 activity favors induction of pluripotency
by transcriptionally targeting the TGF-ß signaling pathway. We also demonstrate
that the Ezh2 negatively regulates the expression of pro-EMT miRNA's such as
miR-23a locus during MET. Unique association of Ezh2 with c-Myc was required to
silence the aforementioned circuitry. Collectively, our findings provide a
mechanistic understanding by which Ezh2 restricts the somatic programme during
early phase of cellular reprogramming and establish the importance of Ezh2
dependent H3K27me3 activity in transcriptional and miRNA modulation during human 
iPSC generation.

PMCID: PMC4316165
PMID: 25648270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(3):313-7. doi: 10.3727/096368915X686823. Epub 2015 Feb
2.

The potential roles of EZH2 in regenerative medicine.

Chou RH(1), Chiu L, Yu YL, Shyu WC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a catalytic component of polycomb repressive 
complex 2, serves as a histone methyltransferase toward histone H3K27
trimethylation and also recruits DNA methyltransferases to regulate gene
expression and chromatin structure. Accumulating evidence indicates the critical 
roles of EZH2 in stem cell maintenance and cell fate decision in differentiation 
into specific cell lineages. In this article, we review the updated progress in
the field and the potential application of EZH2 in regenerative medicine
including nervous system, muscle, pancreas, and dental pulp regeneration.

PMID: 25647295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 3;14:24. doi: 10.1186/s12943-014-0284-y.

SOX4 interacts with EZH2 and HDAC3 to suppress microRNA-31 in invasive esophageal
cancer cells.

Koumangoye RB(1), Andl T(2), Taubenslag KJ(3), Zilberman ST(4), Taylor CJ(5),
Loomans HA(6), Andl CD(5,)(7,)(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, 2213 Garland Ave. 10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN,
37232-6840, USA. rainelli.koumangoye@vanderbilt.edu. (2)Division of Dermatology, 
Department of Medicine, 21st Ave South, A-2310 Medical Center North, Nashville,
TN, 37232-6840, USA. thomas.andl@vanderbilt.edu. (3)Department of Surgery, 2213
Garland Ave. 10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN, 37232-6840, USA.
kenneth.j.taubenslag@Vanderbilt.Edu. (4)Department of Surgery, 2213 Garland Ave. 
10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN, 37232-6840, USA. steven.t.zilberman@Vanderbilt.Edu. 
(5)Department of Surgery, 2213 Garland Ave. 10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN,
37232-6840, USA. claudia.andl@vanderbilt.edu. (6)Department of Cancer Biology,
2213 Garland Ave. 10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN, 37232-6840, USA.
holli.a.loomans@vanderbilt.edu. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, 2213 Garland
Ave. 10445 MRB IV, Nashville, TN, 37232-6840, USA. claudia.andl@vanderbilt.edu.
(8)Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, 37232-6840, USA. claudia.andl@vanderbilt.edu. (9)Vanderbilt
Digestive Disease Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
37232-6840, USA. claudia.andl@vanderbilt.edu.

BACKGROUND: Tumor metastasis is responsible for 90% of cancer-related deaths.
Recently, a strong link between microRNA dysregulation and human cancers has been
established. However, the molecular mechanisms through which microRNAs regulate
metastasis and cancer progression remain unclear.
METHODS: We analyzed the reciprocal expression regulation of miR-31 and SOX4 in
esophageal squamous and adenocarcinoma cell lines by qRT-PCR and Western blotting
using overexpression and shRNA knock-down approaches. Furthermore, methylation
studies were used to assess epigenetic regulation of expression. Functionally, we
determined the cellular consequences using migration and invasion assays, as well
as proliferation assays. Immunoprecipitation and ChIP were used to identify
complex formation of SOX4 and co-repressor components.
RESULTS: Here, we report that SOX4 promotes esophageal tumor cell proliferation
and invasion by silencing miR-31 via activation and stabilization of a
co-repressor complex with EZH2 and HDAC3. We demonstrate that miR-31 is
significantly decreased in invasive esophageal cancer cells, while upregulation
of miR-31 inhibits growth, migration and invasion of esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC) and squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cell lines. miR-31, in turn, targets
SOX4 for degradation by directly binding to its 3'-UTR. Additionally, miR-31
regulates EZH2 and HDAC3 indirectly. SOX4, EZH2 and HDAC3 levels inversely
correlate with miR-31 expression in ESCC cell lines. Ectopic expression of miR-31
in ESCC and EAC cell lines leads to down regulation of SOX4, EZH2 and HDAC3.
Conversely, pharmacologic and genetic inhibition of SOX4 and EZH2 restore miR-31 
expression. We show that SOX4, EZH2 and HDAC3 form a co-repressor complex that
binds to the miR-31 promoter, repressing miR-31 through an epigenetic mark by
H3K27me3 and by histone acetylation. Clinically, when compared to normal adjacent
tissues, esophageal tumor samples show upregulation of SOX4, EZH2, and HDAC3, and
EZH2 expression is significantly increased in metastatic ESCC tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we identified a novel molecular mechanism by which the SOX4,
EZH2 and miR-31 circuit promotes tumor progression and potential therapeutic
targets for invasive esophageal carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4374188
PMID: 25644061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Neurosci. 2015 Mar;18(3):415-22. doi: 10.1038/nn.3932. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Epigenetic basis of opiate suppression of Bdnf gene expression in the ventral
tegmental area.

Koo JW(1), Mazei-Robison MS(2), LaPlant Q(1), Egervari G(3), Braunscheidel KM(4),
Adank DN(4), Ferguson D(1), Feng J(1), Sun H(1), Scobie KN(1), Damez-Werno DM(1),
Ribeiro E(1), Peña CJ(1), Walker D(1), Bagot RC(1), Cahill ME(1), Anderson SA(3),
Labonté B(1), Hodes GE(1), Browne H(1), Chadwick B(3), Robison AJ(2), Vialou
VF(5), Dias C(1), Lorsch Z(1), Mouzon E(1), Lobo MK(6), Dietz DM(7), Russo SJ(1),
Neve RL(8), Hurd YL(3), Nestler EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. (2)1] Fishberg Department of
Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [2] Department of Physiology, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, Michigan, USA. (3)1] Fishberg Department of
Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [2] Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [3] Department of Pharmacology 
and Systems Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, The State University of 
New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, USA. (5)1] Fishberg Department of
Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA. [2] Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, U952, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité
Mixte de Recherche 7224, UPMC, Paris, France. (6)Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (7)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U952, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7224, UPMC,
Paris, France. (8)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015 Apr;16(4):186-7.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has a crucial role in modulating neural 
and behavioral plasticity to drugs of abuse. We found a persistent downregulation
of exon-specific Bdnf expression in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) in response 
to chronic opiate exposure, which was mediated by specific epigenetic
modifications at the corresponding Bdnf gene promoters. Exposure to chronic
morphine increased stalling of RNA polymerase II at these Bdnf promoters in VTA
and altered permissive and repressive histone modifications and occupancy of
their regulatory proteins at the specific promoters. Furthermore, we found that
morphine suppressed binding of phospho-CREB (cAMP response element binding
protein) to Bdnf promoters in VTA, which resulted from enrichment of
trimethylated H3K27 at the promoters, and that decreased NURR1 (nuclear receptor 
related-1) expression also contributed to Bdnf repression and associated
behavioral plasticity to morphine. Our findings suggest previously unknown
epigenetic mechanisms of morphine-induced molecular and behavioral
neuroadaptations.

PMCID: PMC4340719
PMID: 25643298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cancer Lett. 2015 Apr 10;359(2):275-87. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.01.031. Epub
2015 Jan 26.

EZH2 promotes tumor progression via regulating VEGF-A/AKT signaling in non-small 
cell lung cancer.

Geng J(1), Li X(2), Zhou Z(3), Wu CL(4), Dai M(5), Bai X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; Department of Pathology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Department
of Emergency, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China. (3)National Key Lab for Organ Failure Research, Division of
Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. (4)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (5)Health Management Center, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic
address: dm42298@21cn.com. (6)National Key Lab for Organ Failure Research,
Division of Nephrology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, China. Electronic address: xiaoyanb@126.com.

Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2) accounts for aggressiveness and unfavorable 
prognosis of tumor. We investigated the mechanisms and signaling pathways of EZH2
in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) progression. Increased expression of
EZH2, vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and AKT phosphorylation
correlated with differentiation, lymph node metastasis, size and TNM stage in
NSCLC. There was a positive correlation between EZH2 and VEGF-A expression and
high EZH2 expression, as an independent prognostic factor, predicted a shorter
overall survival time for NSCLC patients. The expression of VEGF-A and
phosphorylated Ser(473)-AKT, cell proliferation, migration and metastasis were
enhanced in EZH2-overexpressing A549 cells, but inhibited in parental H2087 cells
with EZH2 silencing or GSK126 treatment. AKT activity was enhanced by recombinant
human VEGF-165 but suppressed by bevacizumab. An AKT inhibitor MK-2206 blocked
VEGF-A expression and AKT phosphorylation in parental H2087 and
EZH2-overexpressing A549 cells. EZH2 activity was not affected by either VEGF-A
stimulation/depletion or MK-2206 inhibition. These results demonstrate that EZH2 
promotes lung cancer progression via the VEGF-A/AKT signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25633838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nature. 2015 Apr 9;520(7546):239-42. doi: 10.1038/nature14122. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

EZH2 inhibition sensitizes BRG1 and EGFR mutant lung tumours to TopoII
inhibitors.

Fillmore CM(1), Xu C(2), Desai PT(3), Berry JM(3), Rowbotham SP(1), Lin YJ(4),
Zhang H(2), Marquez VE(5), Hammerman PS(6), Wong KK(2), Kim CF(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Stem Cell Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA [2] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA [3] Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 
(2)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA [2] Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (3)Stem Cell
Program, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA. (5)Chemical Biology Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA. (6)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Non-small-cell lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related death
worldwide. Chemotherapies such as the topoisomerase II (TopoII) inhibitor
etoposide effectively reduce disease in a minority of patients with this cancer; 
therefore, alternative drug targets, including epigenetic enzymes, are under
consideration for therapeutic intervention. A promising potential epigenetic
target is the methyltransferase EZH2, which in the context of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is well known to tri-methylate histone H3 at lysine
27 (H3K27me3) and elicit gene silencing. Here we demonstrate that EZH2 inhibition
has differential effects on the TopoII inhibitor response of non-small-cell lung 
cancers in vitro and in vivo. EGFR and BRG1 mutations are genetic biomarkers that
predict enhanced sensitivity to TopoII inhibitor in response to EZH2 inhibition. 
BRG1 loss-of-function mutant tumours respond to EZH2 inhibition with increased S 
phase, anaphase bridging, apoptosis and TopoII inhibitor sensitivity. Conversely,
EGFR and BRG1 wild-type tumours upregulate BRG1 in response to EZH2 inhibition
and ultimately become more resistant to TopoII inhibitor. EGFR gain-of-function
mutant tumours are also sensitive to dual EZH2 inhibition and TopoII inhibitor,
because of genetic antagonism between EGFR and BRG1. These findings suggest an
opportunity for precision medicine in the genetically complex disease of
non-small-cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4393352
PMID: 25629630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1613-25. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988048.

Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with 
altered epigenetic regulation of developmental transcription programs.

Svoboda LK(1), Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou E, von Levetzow C,
Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)a Translational Oncology Program and the Departments of Pediatric and
Communicable Diseases; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI USA.

The polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 are highly overexpressed by Ewing sarcoma
(ES), a tumor of stem cell origin that is driven by EWS-ETS fusion oncogenes,
most commonly EWS-FLI1. In the current study we analyzed expression of
transcription programs that are controlled by polycomb proteins during embryonic 
development to determine if they are abnormal in ES. Our results show that
polycomb target gene expression in ES deviates from normal tissues and stem cells
and that, as expected, most targets are relatively repressed. However, we also
discovered a paradoxical up regulation of numerous polycomb targets and these
were highly enriched for homeobox (HOX) genes. Comparison of HOX profiles between
malignant and non-malignant tissues revealed a distinctive HOX profile in ES,
which was characterized by overexpression of posterior HOXD genes. In addition,
ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 during stem cell differentiation led to aberrant
up regulation of posterior HOXD genes. Mechanistically, this up regulation was
associated with altered epigenetic regulation. Specifically, ES and EWS-FLI1+
stem cells displayed a relative loss of polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 and gain of
trithorax-dependent H3K4me3 at the promoters of posterior HOXD genes and also at 
the HOXD11.12 polycomb response element. In addition, a striking correlation was 
evident between HOXD13 and other genes whose regulation is coordinately regulated
during embryonic development by distal enhancer elements. Together, these studies
demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of polycomb target genes, in particular
HOXD genes, is altered in ES and that these changes are mediated downstream of
EWS-FLI1.

PMCID: PMC4622732
PMID: 25625846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nat Immunol. 2015 Mar;16(3):318-25. doi: 10.1038/ni.3093. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

The long intergenic noncoding RNA landscape of human lymphocytes highlights the
regulation of T cell differentiation by linc-MAF-4.

Ranzani V(1), Rossetti G(1), Panzeri I(1), Arrigoni A(1), Bonnal RJ(1), Curti
S(1), Gruarin P(1), Provasi E(1), Sugliano E(1), Marconi M(2), De Francesco R(1),
Geginat J(1), Bodega B(1), Abrignani S(1), Pagani M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale Genetica Molecolare 'Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi', Milano,
Italy. (2)IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2015 Mar;16(3):220-2.

Long noncoding RNAs are emerging as important regulators of cellular functions,
but little is known of their role in the human immune system. Here we
investigated long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) in 13 subsets of T
lymphocytes and B lymphocytes by next-generation sequencing-based RNA sequencing 
(RNA-seq analysis) and de novo transcriptome reconstruction. We identified over
500 previously unknown lincRNAs and described lincRNA signatures. Expression of
linc-MAF-4, a chromatin-associated lincRNA specific to the TH1 subset of helper T
cells, was inversely correlated with expression of MAF, a TH2-associated
transcription factor. Downregulation of linc-MAF-4 skewed T cell differentiation 
toward the TH2 phenotype. We identified a long-distance interaction between the
genomic regions of the gene encoding linc-MAF-4 and MAF, where linc-MAF-4
associated with the chromatin modifiers LSD1 and EZH2; this suggested that
linc-MAF-4 regulated MAF transcription through the recruitment of chromatin
modifiers. Our results demonstrate a key role for lincRNA in T lymphocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4333215
PMID: 25621826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cell. 2015 Mar 5;57(5):769-83. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.020. Epub 2015
Jan 22.

Jarid2 Methylation via the PRC2 Complex Regulates H3K27me3 Deposition during Cell
Differentiation.

Sanulli S(1), Justin N(2), Teissandier A(3), Ancelin K(1), Portoso M(1), Caron
M(1), Michaud A(1), Lombard B(4), da Rocha ST(1), Offer J(2), Loew D(4), Servant 
N(3), Wassef M(1), Burlina F(5), Gamblin SJ(2), Heard E(1), Margueron R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; INSERM U934, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 
75005 Paris, France; CNRS UMR3215, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. (2)MRC
National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London, Mill Hill NW7 1AA,
UK. (3)Institut Curie, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; INSERM U900, 26 Rue
d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; Mines ParisTech, 35 Rue Saint Honoré, 77305
Fontainebleau, France. (4)Institut Curie, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France;
Laboratory of Proteomics and Mass Spectrometry, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris,
France. (5)Sorbonnes Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, ENS, UMR7203 LBM, 4
Place Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France. (6)Institut Curie, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris,
France; INSERM U934, 26 Rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; CNRS UMR3215, 26 Rue
d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France. Electronic address: raphael.margueron@curie.fr.

Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins maintain transcriptional repression throughout
development, mostly by regulating chromatin structure. Polycomb Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2), a component of the Polycomb machinery, is responsible for the
methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me2/3). Jarid2 was previously
identified as a cofactor of PRC2, regulating PRC2 targeting to chromatin and its 
enzymatic activity. Deletion of Jarid2 leads to impaired orchestration of gene
expression during cell lineage commitment. Here, we reveal an unexpected
crosstalk between Jarid2 and PRC2, with Jarid2 being methylated by PRC2. This
modification is recognized by the Eed core component of PRC2 and triggers an
allosteric activation of PRC2's enzymatic activity. We show that Jarid2
methylation is important to promote PRC2 activity at a locus devoid of H3K27me3
and for the correct deposition of this mark during cell differentiation. Our
results uncover a regulation loop where Jarid2 methylation fine-tunes PRC2
activity depending on the chromatin context.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4352895
PMID: 25620564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Development. 2015 Feb 15;142(4):722-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.111997. Epub 2015 Jan
23.

Snail2/Slug cooperates with Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) to regulate
neural crest development.

Tien CL(1), Jones A(2), Wang H(2), Gerigk M(1), Nozell S(1), Chang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, 1720 2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. (3)Department of Cell,
Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1720 
2nd Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA cchang@uab.edu.

Neural crest cells arise from the border of the neural plate and epidermal
ectoderm, migrate extensively and differentiate into diverse cell types during
vertebrate embryogenesis. Although much has been learnt about growth factor
signals and gene regulatory networks that regulate neural crest development,
limited information is available on how epigenetic mechanisms control this
process. In this study, we show that Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
cooperates with the transcription factor Snail2/Slug to modulate neural crest
development in Xenopus. The PRC2 core components Eed, Ezh2 and Suz12 are
expressed in the neural crest cells and are required for neural crest marker
expression. Knockdown of Ezh2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2 for histone H3K27
methylation, results in defects in neural crest specification, migration and
craniofacial cartilage formation. EZH2 interacts directly with Snail2, and Snail2
fails to expand the neural crest domains in the absence of Ezh2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis shows that Snail2 regulates EZH2 occupancy and
histone H3K27 trimethylation levels at the promoter region of the Snail2 target
E-cadherin. Our results indicate that Snail2 cooperates with EZH2 and PRC2 to
control expression of the genes important for neural crest specification and
migration during neural crest development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4325378
PMID: 25617436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Dermatopathol. 2015 Feb;37(2):138-44. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e31828a2d54.

Epigenetic modifications in cutaneous malignant melanoma: EZH2, H3K4me2, and
H3K27me3 immunohistochemical expression is enhanced at the invasion front of the 
tumor.

Kampilafkos P(1), Melachrinou M, Kefalopoulou Z, Lakoumentas J,
Sotiropoulou-Bonikou G.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Anatomy-Histology-Embryology, and Pathology, School of
Medicine, University of Patras, Patras, Rion, Greece; Sobell Department of Motor
Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen, Square,
London; and §Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine, University of
Patras, Rion, Greece.

Cancer stem cells and the misregulation of epigenetic modifications have been
identified to possess a determinative role in carcinogenesis. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the expression profile of EZH2 and H3K4me2 and H3K27me3,
which constitute stem cell-like "bivalent" domains, in cutaneous malignant
melanoma. A comparative analysis of their immunohistochemical expression between 
the invasion front (IF) and the inner tumor mass was also evaluated.
Immunohistochemical methodology was performed on sections of 89 melanoma lesions 
from 79 patients. The 3 markers studied were identified in the cell nuclei of
melanoma cells, nevus cells, and normal epidermal keratinocytes. A specific
distribution pattern of H3K4me2 and H3K27me3 was found, as stronger levels were
localized at the IF of the tumor (P = 0.034 and P < 0.01, respectively). In
general, H3K4me2 and H3K27me3 levels were lower in metastatic with respect to
primary melanoma cases (P = 0.0065 and P = 0.027, respectively). Advanced
melanoma demonstrated significantly lower H3K4 immunohistochemical expression
than did cases of lowest Clark level (I) (P = 0.038) or low Breslow depth (=1 mm;
P < 0.001). Furthermore, EZH2 expression in melanoma cells was higher compared
with that in nevus cells (P = 0.02). A positive correlation between EZH2-H3K27me3
(P = 0.03) and H3K4me2-H3K27me3 (P < 0.01) in melanoma cells was also found. Our 
results suggest the possibility that combined immunohistochemical expression of
EZH2, H3K4me2, and H3K27me3 might identify cancer cells with potential stem cell 
properties, particularly at the IF of this malignancy. This hypothesis should be 
further investigated, as many of the epigenetic changes are reversible via
pharmacologic manipulations and new therapies, overpassing the resistance of
advanced melanoma, may be developed.

PMID: 25614949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Mar;35(3):664-74. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304730. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

Gestational diabetes mellitus impairs fetal endothelial cell functions through a 
mechanism involving microRNA-101 and histone methyltransferase enhancer of zester
homolog-2.

Floris I(1), Descamps B(1), Vardeu A(1), Mitic T(1), Posadino AM(1), Shantikumar 
S(1), Sala-Newby G(1), Capobianco G(1), Mangialardi G(1), Howard L(1), Dessole
S(1), Urrutia R(1), Pintus G(1), Emanueli C(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences, University of
Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom (I.F., B.D., A.V., T.M., S.S., G.S.-N., G.M.,
L.H., C.E.); Laboratory of Vascular Biology, Department of Biomedical Science
(I.F., A.V., M.P., G.P.) and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit (G.C., 
S.D.), University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy; Laboratory of Epigenetics and
Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (R.U.); and National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom (C.E.). (2)From
the Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, 
Bristol, United Kingdom (I.F., B.D., A.V., T.M., S.S., G.S.-N., G.M., L.H.,
C.E.); Laboratory of Vascular Biology, Department of Biomedical Science (I.F.,
A.V., M.P., G.P.) and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Unit (G.C., S.D.), 
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy; Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin
Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (R.U.); and National Heart and Lung
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom (C.E.).
Costanza.Emanueli@bristol.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) produces fetal hyperglycemia with 
increased lifelong risks for the exposed offspring of cardiovascular and other
diseases. Epigenetic mechanisms induce long-term gene expression changes in
response to in utero environmental perturbations. Moreover, microRNAs (miRs)
control the function of endothelial cells (ECs) under physiological and
pathological conditions and can target the epigenetic machinery. We investigated 
the functional and expressional effect of GDM on human fetal ECs of the umbilical
cord vein (HUVECs). We focused on miR-101 and 1 of its targets, enhancer of
zester homolog-2 (EZH2), which trimethylates the lysine 27 of histone 3, thus
repressing gene transcription. EZH2 exists as isoforms a and ß.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: HUVECs were prepared from GDM or healthy pregnancies and
tested in apoptosis, migration, and Matrigel assays. GDM-HUVECs demonstrated
decreased functional capacities, increased miR-101 expression, and reduced EZH2- 
ß and trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 levels. MiR-101 inhibition
increased EZH2 expression and improved GDM-HUVEC function. Healthy HUVECs were
exposed to high or normal d-glucose concentration for 48 hours and then tested
for miR-101 and EZH2 expression. Similar to GDM, high glucose increased miR-101
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation using an antibody for EZH2 followed by 
polymerase chain reaction analyses for miR-101 gene promoter regions showed that 
both GDM and high glucose concentration reduced EZH2 binding to the miR-101 locus
in HUVECs. Moreover, EZH2-ß overexpression inhibited miR-101 promoter activity in
HUVECs.
CONCLUSIONS: GDM impairs HUVEC function via miR-101 upregulation. EZH2 is both a 
transcriptional inhibitor and a target gene of miR-101 in HUVECs, and it
contributes to some of the miR-101-induced defects of GDM-HUVECs.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25614281  [PubMed - in process]


422. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2015 Jan;35(1):99-102.

[Expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
and its prognostic value in postoperative patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HR(1), Wang MH, Lian GY, Wu DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou
510120, China.E-mail: piaozhuimeng@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and its association with the prognosis of
postoperative patients.
METHODS: Surgical specimens were obtained from 102 patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma undergoing radical resection in our hospital from 1996 to
2006. Immunochemistry was employed to examine EZH2 protein expressions in the
specimens, including 102 carcinoma tissue specimens, 30 adjacent tissue specimens
and 30 normal esophageal tissue specimens. The expression levels of EZH2 were
analyzed in relation to the clinicopathological parameters of the patients
including gender, age, tumor differentiation, TNM, and lymph node metastasis. The
postoperative patients were followed up to analyze the association of EZH2
expression with the clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: The esophageal squamous cell carcinoma tissue showed a higher EZH2
expression than the adjacent and normal esophageal tissues. EZH2 expression was
higher in poorly differentiated carcinoma than in well differentiated tissue, and
also higher in cases with lymph node metastasis than those without; the
expression was higher in TNM stage II/III patients than in stage I patients but
lower than in stage IV patients. The patients with low EZH2 expression was found 
to have a longer survival time than those with high EZH2 expression (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 plays an important role in the differentiation and metastasis of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, and a high EZH2 expression is associated with
a poor outcome in the the postoperative patients.

PMID: 25613619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Jan 22;6:e1614. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.556.

Genome-wide mRNA and miRNA expression profiling reveal multiple regulatory
networks in colorectal cancer.

Vishnubalaji R(1), Hamam R(1), Abdulla MH(2), Mohammed MA(2), Kassem M(3),
Al-Obeed O(2), Aldahmash A(4), Alajez NM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Unit, Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, King Saud
University, Riyadh 11461, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (2)Colorectal Research Center,
Department of Surgery, King Khalid University Hospital, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (3)1] Stem Cell Unit,
Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh 11461,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [2] KMEB, Department of Endocrinology, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark [3] Danish Stem Cell Center (DanStem), Panum
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)1] Stem Cell Unit,
Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh 11461,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [2] KMEB, Department of Endocrinology, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

Despite recent advances in cancer management, colorectal cancer (CRC) remains the
third most common cancer and a major health-care problem worldwide. MicroRNAs
have recently emerged as key regulators of cancer development and progression by 
targeting multiple cancer-related genes; however, such regulatory networks are
not well characterized in CRC. Thus, the aim of this study was to perform global 
messenger RNA (mRNA) and microRNA expression profiling in the same CRC samples
and adjacent normal tissues and to identify potential miRNA-mRNA regulatory
networks. Our data revealed 1273 significantly upregulated and 1902 downregulated
genes in CRC. Pathway analysis revealed significant enrichment in cell cycle,
integrated cancer, Wnt (wingless-type MMTV integration site family member),
matrix metalloproteinase, and TGF-ß pathways in CRC. Pharmacological inhibition
of Wnt (using XAV939 or IWP-2) or TGF-ß (using SB-431542) pathways led to dose-
and time-dependent inhibition of CRC cell growth. Similarly, our data revealed
up- (42) and downregulated (61) microRNAs in the same matched samples. Using
target prediction and bioinformatics, ~77% of the upregulated genes were
predicted to be targeted by microRNAs found to be downregulated in CRC. We
subsequently focused on EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2 ), which was found to
be regulated by hsa-miR-26a-5p and several members of the let-7 (lethal-7) family
in CRC. Significant inverse correlation between EZH2 and hsa-miR-26a-5p
(R(2)=0.56, P=0.0001) and hsa-let-7b-5p (R(2)=0.19, P=0.02) expression was
observed in the same samples, corroborating the belief of EZH2 being a bona fide 
target for these two miRNAs in CRC. Pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 led to
significant reduction in trimethylated histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27)
methylation, marked reduction in cell proliferation, and migration in vitro.
Concordantly, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 led to similar
effects on CRC cell growth in vitro. Therefore, our data have revealed several
hundred potential miRNA-mRNA regulatory networks in CRC and suggest targeting
relevant networks as potential therapeutic strategy for CRC.

PMCID: PMC4669754
PMID: 25611389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 22;6:6051. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7051.

The epigenetic modifier EZH2 controls melanoma growth and metastasis through
silencing of distinct tumour suppressors.

Zingg D(1), Debbache J(1), Schaefer SM(1), Tuncer E(1), Frommel SC(2), Cheng
P(3), Arenas-Ramirez N(4), Haeusel J(1), Zhang Y(1), Bonalli M(1), McCabe MT(5), 
Creasy CL(5), Levesque MP(3), Boyman O(4), Santoro R(2), Shakhova O(6), Dummer
R(3), Sommer L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland. (2)Institute of Veterinary
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse
190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital 
Zurich, Gloriastrasse 31, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland. (4)Department of Immunology, 
University Hospital Zurich, Gloriastrasse 30, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland. (5)Cancer
Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology R&D,
GlaxoSmithKline, 1250 South Collegeville Road, Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426, 
USA. (6)1] Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zürich, Switzerland [2] Department of
Oncology, University Hospital Zurich, Rämistrasse 100, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland.

Increased activity of the epigenetic modifier EZH2 has been associated with
different cancers. However, evidence for a functional role of EZH2 in
tumorigenesis in vivo remains poor, in particular in metastasizing solid cancers.
Here we reveal central roles of EZH2 in promoting growth and metastasis of
cutaneous melanoma. In a melanoma mouse model, conditional Ezh2 ablation as much 
as treatment with the preclinical EZH2 inhibitor GSK503 stabilizes the disease
through inhibition of growth and virtually abolishes metastases formation without
affecting normal melanocyte biology. Comparably, in human melanoma cells, EZH2
inactivation impairs proliferation and invasiveness, accompanied by re-expression
of tumour suppressors connected to increased patient survival. These EZH2 target 
genes suppress either melanoma growth or metastasis in vivo, revealing the dual
function of EZH2 in promoting tumour progression. Thus, EZH2-mediated epigenetic 
repression is highly relevant especially during advanced melanoma progression,
which makes EZH2 a promising target for novel melanoma therapies.

PMID: 25609585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):4863-87.

HDAC1,2 inhibition impairs EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DNA repair to overcome
chemoresistance in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Johnson DP(1), Spitz GS(2), Tharkar S(2), Quayle SN(3), Shearstone JR(3), Jones
S(3), McDowell ME(2), Wellman H(2), Tyler JK(4), Cairns BR(1), Chandrasekharan
MB(2), Bhaskara S(2,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt 
Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Acetylon Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Gain-of-function mutations in the catalytic site of EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste
Homologue 2), is observed in about 22% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
cases. Here we show that selective inhibition of histone deacetylase 1,2
(HDAC1,2) activity using a small molecule inhibitor causes cytotoxic or
cytostatic effects in EZH2 gain-of-function mutant (EZH2GOF) DLBCL cells. Our
results show that blocking the activity of HDAC1,2 increases global H3K27ac
without causing a concomitant global decrease in H3K27me3 levels. Our data shows 
that inhibition of HDAC1,2 is sufficient to decrease H3K27me3 present at DSBs,
decrease DSB repair and activate the DNA damage response in these cells. In
addition to increased H3K27me3, we found that the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells overexpress
another chemotherapy resistance factor - B-lymphoma and BAL-associated protein
(BBAP). BBAP monoubiquitinates histone H4K91, a residue that is also subjected to
acetylation. Our results show that selective inhibition of HDAC1,2 increases
H4K91ac, decreases BBAP-mediated H4K91 monoubiquitination, impairs BBAP-dependent
DSB repair and sensitizes the refractory EZH2GOF DLBCL cells to treatment with
doxorubicin, a chemotherapy agent. Hence, selective HDAC1,2 inhibition provides a
novel DNA repair mechanism-based therapeutic approach as it can overcome both
EZH2- and BBAP-mediated DSB repair in the EZH2GOF DLBCL cells.

PMCID: PMC4467121
PMID: 25605023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):3136-46.

Top2a identifies and provides epigenetic rationale for novel combination
therapeutic strategies for aggressive prostate cancer.

Kirk JS(1,)(2), Schaarschuch K(3), Dalimov Z(1,)(2), Lasorsa E(1,)(2), Ku
S(1,)(4), Ramakrishnan S(1,)(2), Hu Q(5), Azabdaftari G(1,)(6), Wang J(5), Pili
R(1,)(7), Ellis L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Program, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, NY, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, University of Szeged, Hungary.
(4)Department of Cancer Prevention and Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, 
Buffalo, NY, USA. (5)Department of Bioinformatics and Statistics, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA. (7)Department of Medicine, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY, USA.

Progression of aggressive prostate cancers (PCa) with androgen receptor splice
variants or neuroendrocrine features is currently untreatable in the clinic.
Therefore novel therapies are urgently required. We conducted RNA-seq using
tumors from a unique murine transplant mouse model which spontaneously progresses
to metastatic disease. Differential gene expression analysis revealed a
significant increase of topoisomerase IIa, Top2a (Top2a) in metastatic tumors.
Interrogation of human data revealed that increased Top2a expression in primary
tumors selected patients with more aggressive disease. Further, significant
positive correlation was observed between Top2a and the histone
methyltransferase, Ezh2. Combination of the Top2 poison etoposide with the Ezh2
inhibitor GSK126 or DZNep significantly increased cell death in vitro in murine
and human prostate cancer cell lines. Additionally, combination therapy extended 
time to progression and increased therapeutic efficacy in vivo. Overall, our
studies demonstrate that patients screened for Top2a and Ezh2 expression would
exhibit significant response to a combinational treatment involving low dose
etoposide combined with Ezh2 inhibition. In addition, our data suggests that this
combination therapeutic strategy is beneficial against aggressive PCa, and
provides strong rationale for continued clinical development.

PMCID: PMC4413643
PMID: 25605014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Feb 10;4(2):226-38. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.006.
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

EZH2 protects glioma stem cells from radiation-induced cell death in a
MELK/FOXM1-dependent manner.

Kim SH(1), Joshi K(1), Ezhilarasan R(2), Myers TR(3), Siu J(1), Gu C(1),
Nakano-Okuno M(1), Taylor D(1), Minata M(1), Sulman EP(2), Lee J(4), Bhat KP(5), 
Salcini AE(3), Nakano I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (3)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, 
Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Neurological
Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM)-derived tumorigenic stem-like cells (GSCs) may play a key role
in therapy resistance. Previously, we reported that the mitotic kinase MELK binds
and phosphorylates the oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 in GSCs. Here, we
demonstrate that the catalytic subunit of Polycomb repressive complex 2, EZH2, is
targeted by the MELK-FOXM1 complex, which in turn promotes resistance to
radiation in GSCs. Clinically, EZH2 and MELK are coexpressed in GBM and
significantly induced in postirradiation recurrent tumors whose expression is
inversely correlated with patient prognosis. Through a gain-and loss-of-function 
study, we show that MELK or FOXM1 contributes to GSC radioresistance by
regulation of EZH2. We further demonstrate that the MELK-EZH2 axis is
evolutionarily conserved in Caenorhabditis elegans. Collectively, these data
suggest that the MELK-FOXM1-EZH2 signaling axis is essential for GSC
radioresistance and therefore raise the possibility that MELK-FOXM1-driven EZH2
signaling can serve as a therapeutic target in irradiation-resistant GBM tumors.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325196
PMID: 25601206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cell Rep. 2015 Jan 14. pii: S2211-1247(14)01057-2. doi:
10.1016/j.celrep.2014.12.028. [Epub ahead of print]

Prolonged Ezh2 Depletion in Glioblastoma Causes a Robust Switch in Cell Fate
Resulting in Tumor Progression.

de Vries NA(1), Hulsman D(1), Akhtar W(1), de Jong J(2), Miles DC(1), Blom M(1), 
van Tellingen O(3), Jonkers J(4), van Lohuizen M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (3)Division of Clinical Chemistry/Preclinical Pharmacology, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (4)Division of Molecular Pathology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Division of
Molecular Genetics, Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: m.v.lohuizen@nki.nl.

EZH2 is frequently overexpressed in glioblastoma (GBM), suggesting an oncogenic
function that could be a target for therapeutic intervention. However, reduced
EZH2 activity can also promote tumorigenesis, leading to concerns about the use
of EZH2 inhibitors. Here, we provide further insight about the effects of
prolonged Ezh2 inhibition in glioblastoma using preclinical mouse models and
primary tumor-derived human GBM cell lines. Using doxycycline-inducible shRNAs
that mimic the effects of a selective EZH2 inhibitor, we demonstrate that
prolonged Ezh2 depletion causes a robust switch in cell fate, including
significantly enhanced proliferation, DNA damage repair, and activation of part
of the pluripotency network, resulting in altered tumor cell identity and tumor
progression. Short-term Ezh2 depletion significantly improved survival without
the tumor progression observed upon prolonged Ezh2 depletion, suggesting that
precise dosing regiments are very important. These results could be of high
clinical relevance with regard to how glioblastomas should be treated with
epigenetic therapies.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25600873  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


429. Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 1;75(7):1322-31. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2931. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

Long Noncoding RNA MALAT1 Promotes Aggressive Renal Cell Carcinoma through Ezh2
and Interacts with miR-205.

Hirata H(1), Hinoda Y(2), Shahryari V(1), Deng G(1), Nakajima K(3), Tabatabai
ZL(4), Ishii N(3), Dahiya R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(2)Department of Oncology and Laboratory Medicine, Yamaguchi University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Yamaguchi, Japan. (3)Department of Urology, Toho University
Faculty of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, San Francisco
Veterans Affairs Medical Center and University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, California. (5)Department of Urology, San Francisco Veterans
Affairs Medical Center and University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California. rdahiya@urology.ucsf.edu.

Recently, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) have emerged as new gene regulators and
prognostic markers in several cancers, including renal cell carcinoma (RCC). In
this study, we investigated the contributions of the lncRNA MALAT1 in RCC with a 
specific focus on its transcriptional regulation and its interactions with Ezh2
and miR-205. We found that MALAT1 expression was higher in human RCC tissues,
where it was associated with reduced patient survival. MALAT1 silencing decreased
RCC cell proliferation and invasion and increased apoptosis. Mechanistic
investigations showed that MALAT1 was transcriptionally activated by c-Fos and
that it interacted with Ezh2. After MALAT1 silencing, E-cadherin expression was
increased, whereas ß-catenin expression was decreased through Ezh2. Reciprocal
interaction between MALAT1 and miR-205 was also observed. Lastly, MALAT1 bound
Ezh2 and oncogenesis facilitated by MALAT1 was inhibited by Ezh2 depletion,
thereby blocking epithelial-mesenchymal transition via E-cadherin recovery and
ß-catenin downregulation. Overall, our findings illuminate how overexpression of 
MALAT1 confers an oncogenic function in RCC that may offer a novel theranostic
marker in this disease.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25600645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. EMBO Rep. 2015 Mar;16(3):370-8. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439264. Epub 2015 Jan 18.

Epigenetic predisposition to reprogramming fates in somatic cells.

Pour M(1), Pilzer I(1), Rosner R(1), Smith ZD(2), Meissner A(2), Nachman I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. (2)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel iftachn@post.tau.ac.il.

Reprogramming to pluripotency is a low-efficiency process at the population
level. Despite notable advances to molecularly characterize key steps, several
fundamental aspects remain poorly understood, including when the potential to
reprogram is first established. Here, we apply live-cell imaging combined with a 
novel statistical approach to infer when somatic cells become fated to generate
downstream pluripotent progeny. By tracing cell lineages from several divisions
before factor induction through to pluripotent colony formation, we find that
pre-induction sister cells acquire similar outcomes. Namely, if one daughter cell
contributes to a lineage that generates induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs),
its paired sibling will as well. This result suggests that the potential to
reprogram is predetermined within a select subpopulation of cells and heritable, 
at least over the short term. We also find that expanding cells over several
divisions prior to factor induction does not increase the per-lineage likelihood 
of successful reprogramming, nor is reprogramming fate correlated to neighboring 
cell identity or cell-specific reprogramming factor levels. By perturbing the
epigenetic state of somatic populations with Ezh2 inhibitors prior to factor
induction, we successfully modulate the fraction of iPSC-forming lineages. Our
results therefore suggest that reprogramming potential may in part reflect
preexisting epigenetic heterogeneity that can be tuned to alter the cellular
response to factor induction.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4364876
PMID: 25600117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2015 Apr;15(4):471-90. doi: 10.1586/14737159.2015.1002772. 
Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Immunohistochemistry-based prognostic biomarkers in NSCLC: novel findings on the 
road to clinical use?

Lindskog C(1), Edlund K, Mattsson JS, Micke P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, 
Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Prognostication of non-small cell lung cancer is principally based on stage, age 
and performance status. This review provides an overview of 342 potential
prognostic biomarkers in non-small cell lung cancer described between January
2008 and June 2013, evaluating the association between immunohistochemical
protein expression and survival endpoint. Numerous studies proposed prognostic
biomarkers, but many were only evaluated in a single patient cohort, and a large 
number of biomarkers revealed inconclusive findings when analyzed in more than
one study. Only 26 proteins first described after 2008 (ALDH1A1, ANXA1, BCAR1,
CLDN1, EIF4E, EZH2, FOLR1, FOXM1, IL7R, IL12RB2, KIAA1524, CRMP1, LOX, MCM7,
MTA1, MTDH, NCOA3, NDRG2, NEDD9, NES, PBK, PPM1D, SIRT1, SLC7A5, SQSTM1 and WNT1)
demonstrated a consistent prognostic association in two or more independent
patient cohorts, thus qualifying as promising candidates for diagnostic use.
Raised quality standards for study design and antibody validation, and
integration of preclinical findings with clinical needs are clearly warranted.

PMID: 25599124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Crit Rev Oncog. 2014;19(6):417-30.

Genetic and epigenetic control of RKIP transcription.

Datar I(1), Tegegne H(1), Qin K(1), Al-Mulla F(2), Bitar MS(3), Trumbly RJ(1),
Yeung KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, University of Toledo, College
of Medicine, Health Science Campus, Toledo, Ohio. (2)Faculty of Medicine,
Department of Pathology, Kuwait University Health Sciences Centre, Safat, Kuwait.
(3)Kuwait University, Faculty of Medicine, Safat, Kuwait.

Raf kinase inhibitory protein (RKIP) is known to modulate key signaling cascades 
and regulate normal physiological processes such as cellular proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis. The expression of RKIP is found to be
downregulated in several cancer metastases and the repressed RKIP expression can 
be reactivated on treatment with chemotherapeutic agents. RKIP is a proven tumor 
metastasis suppressor gene and investigating the mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation of RKIP is therefore of immense clinical importance. In this review,
we discuss the basal expression of RKIP in various tissues and the genetic
aspects of the RKIP chromosomal locus including the structure of the RKIP
promoter as well as gene regulatory elements such as enhancers. We also review
the genetic and epigenetic modulation of RKIP transcription through EZH2, a
component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and sequence specific
transcription factors (TFs) BACH1 and Snail. Emerging experimental evidence
supports a unifying model in which both these TFs repress RKIP transcription in
cancers by recruiting the EZH2 containing repressive complex to the proximal RKIP
promoter. Finally, we review the known mechanisms employed by different types of 
chemotherapeutic agents to activate RKIP expression in cancer cells.

PMID: 25597352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2754-66.

Mutational spectrum of adult T-ALL.

Neumann M(1), Vosberg S(2,)(3), Schlee C(1), Heesch S(1), Schwartz S(1), Gökbuget
N(4), Hoelzer D(4), Graf A(5), Krebs S(5), Bartram I(1), Blum H(5), Brüggemann
M(6), Hecht J(7), Bohlander SK(2,)(8), Greif PA(2,)(3,)(9,)(10), Baldus
CD(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany. (2)Clinical Cooperative Group
'Leukemia', Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental
Health, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Internal Medicine 3,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany. (4)Goethe University
Hospital, Department of Medicine II, Hematology/Oncology, Frankfurt/M., Germany. 
(5)Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis, Gene-Center,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany. (6)University Hospital
Kiel, Department of Hematology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus
Kiel, Germany. (7)Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT),
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (8)Department of Molecular
Medicine and Pathology, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(9)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. (10)German Cancer
Research Centre (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

Novel target discovery is warranted to improve treatment in adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients. We provide a comprehensive study on
mutations to enhance the understanding of therapeutic targets and studied 81
adult T-ALL patients. NOTCH1 exhibitedthe highest mutation rate (53%). Mutation
frequencies of FBXW7 (10%), WT1 (10%), JAK3 (12%), PHF6 (11%), and BCL11B (10%)
were in line with previous reports. We identified recurrent alterations in
transcription factors DNM2, and RELN, the WNT pathway associated cadherin FAT1,
and in epigenetic regulators (MLL2, EZH2). Interestingly, we discovered novel
recurrent mutations in the DNA repair complex member HERC1, in NOTCH2, and in the
splicing factor ZRSR2. A frequently affected pathway was the JAK/STAT pathway
(18%) and a significant proportion of T-ALL patients harboured mutations in
epigenetic regulators (33%), both predominantly found in the unfavourable
subgroup of early T-ALL. Importantly, adult T-ALL patients not only showed a
highly heterogeneous mutational spectrum, but also variable subclonal allele
frequencies implicated in therapy resistance and evolution of relapse. In
conclusion, we provide novel insights in genetic alterations of signalling
pathways (e.g. druggable by <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors, JAK inhibitors or EZH2
inhibitors), present in over 80% of all adult T-ALL patients, that could guide
novel therapeutic approaches.

PMCID: PMC4413615
PMID: 25595890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cancer Lett. 2015 Apr 10;359(2):198-205. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.01.005. Epub 
2015 Jan 13.

DNMT1 and EZH2 mediated methylation silences the microRNA-200b/a/429 gene and
promotes tumor progression.

Ning X(1), Shi Z(2), Liu X(1), Zhang A(3), Han L(3), Jiang K(1), Kang C(4), Zhang
Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General
Hospital, 154 An-Shan Road, Heping District, Tianjin 300052, China; The 3rd
Department of Breast Cancer Prevention, Treatment and Research Center, National
Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Tianjin, China; Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological 
Institute, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-repair and
Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin, China;
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of Nervous
System, Tianjin, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University
General Hospital, 154 An-Shan Road, Heping District, Tianjin 300052, China;
Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin, China; Key
Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous
System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin, China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, 154
An-Shan Road, Heping District, Tianjin 300052, China; Laboratory of
Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin, China; Key Laboratory of
Post-trauma Neuro-repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Ministry of 
Education, Tianjin, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and
Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin, China; Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group 
(CGCG), 6 Tiantanxi Li, Beijing, China. Electronic address: kang97061@gmail.com. 
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin, China. Electronic address: zhangqy@tijmu.edu.cn.

Aberrant expression of the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family has been linked to the
occurrence and development of various types of malignant tumors, including
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), colon cancer and breast cancer. However, little
is known about the precise mechanism by which miR-200 expression is
downregulated. The intricate relationship between DNA methylation and histone
modifications has become a subject of increasing interest. The expression of
miR-200 family members is modified by similar or complementary epigenetic
mechanisms in MGC-803 and BGC-823 gastric cancer cells and U87 MG glioma cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed that DNA methyltransferase 1
(DNMT1) bound to miR-200b/a/429 promoter regions, indicating an interaction
between DNMT1 and the miR-200b/a/429 promoter. Furthermore,
Co-Immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) detection showed that DNMT1, together with the PcG
protein Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone methyltransferase,
contributed to the transcriptional repression of microRNA-200 family members.
Knockdown of EZH2 not only impacted H3K27 trimethylation but also reduced DNMT1
presence on the miR-200b/a/429 promoter. EZH2 appeared to be essential for DNMT1 
recruitment to the promoter region. Silencing EZH2 and DNMT1 using drugs or RNA
interference dramatically reduced the levels of miR-200b/a/429 expression.
Collectively, these results indicated that EZH2 and DNMT1-mediated epigenetic
silencing contributed to the progression of gastric cancer and glioblastoma, and 
therefore represents a novel therapeutic target for malignant tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25595591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cancer Genet. 2015 May;208(5):192-205. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.10.005. Epub
2014 Oct 27.

Disturbing the histone code in leukemia: translocations and mutations affecting
histone methyl transferases.

Chopra M(1), Bohlander SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medical and Health 
Sciences, The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. (2)Department of
Molecular Medicine and Pathology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, The
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. Electronic address:
s.bohlander@auckland.ac.nz.

Leukemia is characterized by increased numbers of blasts originating from
transformed early hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Genetic alterations
are widely recognized as the main drivers of oncogenic transformation. Of
considerable interest are mutations affecting the writers of epigenetic marks. In
this review, we focus on histone methyltransferases--enzymes that catalyze the
methylation of lysine residues in core histones. Histone methylation is a tightly
controlled mechanism that is responsible for both activating as well as
repressing gene expression in a site-specific manner, depending on which lysine
residue is methylated. Histone methyltransferases, including MLL1, DOT1L, EZH2,
and SETD2 are recurrently deregulated in human leukemia, either directly by gene 
mutations or balanced translocations, or indirectly as components of protein
complexes that are disturbed in leukemia due to alterations of the other
components in these complexes. Several small molecule inhibitors of histone
methyltransferases are currently being clinically evaluated for their therapeutic
potential in human leukemia. These drugs reverse some of the adverse effects of
aberrant histone methylation, and can induce differentiation and cell death in
leukemic blasts.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25592767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Epigenetics. 2015;10(2):103-21. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2014.1003746.

Epigenetic regulation in human melanoma: past and future.

Sarkar D(1), Leung EY, Baguley BC, Finlay GJ, Askarian-Amiri ME.

Author information: 
(1)a Auckland Cancer Society Research Center ; University of Auckland ; Auckland 
, New Zealand.

The development and progression of melanoma have been attributed to independent
or combined genetic and epigenetic events. There has been remarkable progress in 
understanding melanoma pathogenesis in terms of genetic alterations. However,
recent studies have revealed a complex involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in
the regulation of gene expression, including methylation, chromatin modification 
and remodeling, and the diverse activities of non-coding RNAs. The roles of gene 
methylation and miRNAs have been relatively well studied in melanoma, but other
studies have shown that changes in chromatin status and in the differential
expression of long non-coding RNAs can lead to altered regulation of key genes.
Taken together, they affect the functioning of signaling pathways that influence 
each other, intersect, and form networks in which local perturbations disturb the
activity of the whole system. Here, we focus on how epigenetic events intertwine 
with these pathways and contribute to the molecular pathogenesis of melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4622872
PMID: 25587943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cancer. 2015 May 1;121(9):1499-507. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29198. Epub 2015 Jan 13.

EZH2 expression is a prognostic factor in childhood intracranial ependymoma: a
Canadian Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium study.

Li AM(1), Dunham C, Tabori U, Carret AS, McNeely PD, Johnston D, Lafay-Cousin L, 
Wilson B, Eisenstat DD, Jabado N, Zelcer S, Silva M, Scheinemann K, Fryer C,
Hendson G, Fotovati A, Hawkins C, Yip S, Dunn SE, Hukin J.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The cure rate for childhood intracranial ependymoma is approximately 
70% in the setting of a gross total resection followed by radiation, but
management remains challenging in patients with residual disease. Therefore,
robust biomarkers are needed to guide the development of new targeted therapy.
The authors evaluated the expression of several biomarkers in pediatric
intracranial ependymoma and observed that the expression of enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2), a polycomb complex protein involved in epigenetic regulation of
gene expression, was independently associated with poor survival.
METHODS: Tissue microarray immunostaining was performed on 180 ependymoma samples
from 12 of 16 Canadian pediatric centers. Expression levels of EZH2, Ki-67, B
lymphoma Moloney-murine leukemia virus insertion region 1 homolog, tumor protein 
16 (P16), Y-box binding protein 1, phosphorylated protein kinase B (pAKT), and
epidermal growth factor receptor were evaluated. Cox regression analyses were
performed, and the Kaplan-Meier method was used to construct survival curves.
RESULTS: EZH2 expressed in 16% of tumors was associated with inferior 5-year
overall survival. Ki-67 and pAKT levels were associated with a poor outcome in
patients with posterior fossa ependymoma, and the absence of P16 was associated
with a poor outcome in patients with supratentorial ependymoma. Multivariate
analysis revealed that younger age and EZH2 expression (95% confidence interval, 
1.1-36.0) were independent markers of a poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 is a novel, independent marker of a poor prognosis in patients 
with ependymoma, especially in those who have tumors located in the posterior
fossa. EZH2, pAKT, and P16 are potential therapeutic targets, particularly for
patients who have tumors in which standard gross total resection plus
fractionated radiotherapy is not feasible.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 25586788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Cell. 2015 Jan 22;57(2):304-16. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.009. Epub 2015 
Jan 8.

Developmental control of polycomb subunit composition by GATA factors mediates a 
switch to non-canonical functions.

Xu J(1), Shao Z(2), Li D(3), Xie H(4), Kim W(4), Huang J(5), Taylor JE(6),
Pinello L(7), Glass K(7), Jaffe JD(6), Yuan GC(7), Orkin SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of 
Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Children's Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's
Hospital and Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Key
Laboratory of Computational Biology, CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (7)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. (8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) plays crucial roles in transcriptional
regulation and stem cell development. However, the context-specific functions
associated with alternative subunits remain largely unexplored. Here we show that
the related enzymatic subunits EZH1 and EZH2 undergo an expression switch during 
blood cell development. An erythroid-specific enhancer mediates transcriptional
activation of EZH1, and a switch from GATA2 to GATA1 controls the developmental
EZH1/2 switch by differential association with EZH1 enhancers. We further examine
the in vivo stoichiometry of the PRC2 complexes by quantitative proteomics and
reveal the existence of an EZH1-SUZ12 subcomplex lacking EED. EZH1 together with 
SUZ12 form a non-canonical PRC2 complex, occupy active chromatin, and positively 
regulate gene expression. Loss of EZH2 expression leads to repositioning of EZH1 
to EZH2 targets. Thus, the lineage- and developmental stage-specific regulation
of PRC2 subunit composition leads to a switch from canonical silencing to
non-canonical functions during blood stem cell specification.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4305004
PMID: 25578878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 9;6:5901. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6901.

Combining gene mutation with gene expression data improves outcome prediction in 
myelodysplastic syndromes.

Gerstung M(1), Pellagatti A(2), Malcovati L(3), Giagounidis A(4), Porta MG(5),
Jädersten M(6), Dolatshad H(2), Verma A(7), Cross NC(8), Vyas P(9), Killick
S(10), Hellström-Lindberg E(6), Cazzola M(3), Papaemmanuil E(1), Campbell PJ(1), 
Boultwood J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK. (2)LLR Molecular
Haematology Unit, NDCLS, RDM, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK. (3)1]
Department of Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 27100
Pavia, Italy [2] Departments of Molecular Medicine and Internal Medicine and
Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (4)Department of
Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care, Marienhospital Düsseldorf, 40479
Düsseldorf, Germany. (5)1] Department of Hematology Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS
Policlinico San Matteo, 27100 Pavia, Italy [2] Department of Internal Medicine
and Medical Therapy, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy. (6)Division of
Hematology, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 76 Stockholm,
Sweden. (7)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.
(8)National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust,
Salisbury SP2 8BJ, UK. (9)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK. (10)Department of
Haematology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth BH7 7DW, UK.

Cancer is a genetic disease, but two patients rarely have identical genotypes.
Similarly, patients differ in their clinicopathological parameters, but how
genotypic and phenotypic heterogeneity are interconnected is not well understood.
Here we build statistical models to disentangle the effect of 12 recurrently
mutated genes and 4 cytogenetic alterations on gene expression, diagnostic
clinical variables and outcome in 124 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
Overall, one or more genetic lesions correlate with expression levels of ~20% of 
all genes, explaining 20-65% of observed expression variability. Differential
expression patterns vary between mutations and reflect the underlying biology,
such as aberrant polycomb repression for ASXL1 and EZH2 mutations or perturbed
gene dosage for copy-number changes. In predicting survival, genomic,
transcriptomic and diagnostic clinical variables all have utility, with the
largest contribution from the transcriptome. Similar observations are made on the
TCGA acute myeloid leukaemia cohort, confirming the general trends reported here.

PMCID: PMC4338540
PMID: 25574665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):600-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10431. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Lineage specific expression of Polycomb Group Proteins in human embryonic stem
cells in vitro.

Pethe P(1), Pursani V, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.

Human embryonic (hES) stem cells are an excellent model to study lineage
specification and differentiation into various cell types. Differentiation
necessitates repression of specific genes not required for a particular lineage. 
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are key histone modifiers, whose primary function
is gene repression. PcG proteins form complexes called Polycomb Repressive
Complexes (PRCs), which catalyze histone modifications such as H2AK119ub1,
H3K27me3, and H3K9me3. PcG proteins play a crucial role during differentiation of
stem cells. The expression of PcG transcripts during differentiation of hES cells
into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineage is yet to be shown. In-house
derived hES cell line KIND1 was differentiated into endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm lineages; followed by characterization using RT-PCR for HNF4A, CDX2,
MEF2C, TBX5, SOX1, and MAP2. qRT-PCR and western blotting was performed to
compare expression of PcG transcripts and proteins across all the three lineages.
We observed that cells differentiated into endoderm showed upregulation of
RING1B, BMI1, EZH2, and EED transcripts. Mesoderm differentiation was
characterized by significant downregulation of all PcG transcripts during later
stages. BMI1 and RING1B were upregulated while EZH2, SUZ12, and EED remained low 
during ectoderm differentiation. Western blotting also showed distinct expression
of BMI1 and EZH2 during differentiation into three germ layers. Our study shows
that hES cells differentiating into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineages
show distinct PcG expression profile at transcript and protein level.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25572667  [PubMed - in process]


441. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3585-92. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3164. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Alterations in enhancer of zeste homolog 2, matrix metalloproteinase-2 and tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 expression are associated with ex vivo and in
vitro bone metastasis in renal cell carcinoma.

Wang J(1), Ren Y(1), Guo X(1), Cheng H(1), Ye Y(1), Qi J(1), Yang C(1), You H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has a high potential for bone metastasis; however, the
molecular mechanisms underlying this metastasis have remained to be elucidated.
The present study aimed to explore the expression levels of enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2), matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-2 (TIMP2) as determinants of RCC-associated bone metastasis.
Their expression was evaluated in a newly generated RCC cell subline that has a
high potential for bone metastasis, in tissue specimens from metastasized bone
tissues from patients with RCC and in RCC tissues without metastasis. A total of 
25 RCC tissue specimens without metastasis and 13 RCC tissue specimens with bone 
metastasis were acquired for immunohistochemical analysis of EZH2, MMP2 and TIMP2
protein expression. The expression levels of EZH2, MMP2 and TIMP2 mRNA and
protein were analyzed in the ACHN and ACHN-BO5 cell lines using western blot and 
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses.
Methylation-specific PCR was also used to analyze TIMP2 promoter methylation.
EZH2 and MMP2 proteins were found to be expressed at higher levels in tissues
from patients where RCC had metastasized to the bone as compared with those in
RCC patients without metastasis, whereas there was no significant difference in
the expression of TIMP2 protein between the two tissues. Furthermore, the
expression of EZH2 protein was correlated with MMP2 expression, but there was no 
significant correlation between the expression of EZH2 and TIMP2 proteins. The in
vitro results using cell lines confirmed the ex vivo findings, indicating that
the expression levels of EZH2 and MMP2 protein and mRNA were higher in ACHN-BO5
cells than those in ACHN cells. By contrast, TIMP2 protein and mRNA expression
levels were lower in ACHN-BO5 cells than those in the parental ACHN cells. The
TIMP2 promoter was highly methylated in ACHN-BO5 cells compared with that in ACHN
cells. Upregulation of EZH2, MMP2 and TIMP2 expression was correlated with
metastasis of RCC to bone tissues ex vivo and in vitro. Further studies are
required in order to elucidate the mechanism underlying the altered expression of
these genes.

PMID: 25571919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Blood. 2015 Feb 19;125(8):1217-25. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-606822. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

Polycomb genes, miRNA, and their deregulation in B-cell malignancies.

Wang GG(1), Konze KD(2), Tao J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, and. (2)Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; and. (3)Departments
of Hematopathology and Laboratory Medicine, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, FL.

Posttranslational modifications of histone proteins represent a fundamental means
to define distinctive epigenetic states and regulate gene expression during
development and differentiation. Aberrations in various chromatin-modulation
pathways are commonly used by tumors to initiate and maintain oncogenesis,
including lymphomagenesis. Recently, increasing evidence has demonstrated that
polycomb group (PcG) proteins, a subset of histone-modifying enzymes known to be 
crucial for B-cell maturation and differentiation, play a central role in
malignant transformation of B cells. PcG hyperactivity in B-cell lymphomas is
caused by overexpression or recurrent mutations of PcG genes and deregulation of 
microRNAs (miRNAs) or transcription factors such as c-MYC, which regulate PcG
expression. Interplays of PcG and miRNA deregulations often establish a vicious
signal-amplification loop in lymphoma associated with adverse clinical outcomes. 
Importantly, aberrant enzymatic activities associated with polycomb deregulation,
notably those caused by EZH2 gain-of-function mutations, have provided a
rationale for developing small-molecule inhibitors as novel therapies. In this
review, we summarize our current understanding of PcG-mediated gene silencing,
interplays of PcG with other epigenetic regulators such as miRNAs during B-cell
differentiation and lymphomagenesis, and recent advancements in targeted
strategies against PcG as promising therapeutics for B-cell malignancies.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4335077
PMID: 25568352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Leukemia. 2015 May;29(5):1115-22. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.4. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Molecular profiling of myeloid progenitor cells in multi-mutated advanced
systemic mastocytosis identifies KIT D816V as a distinct and late event.

Jawhar M(1), Schwaab J(1), Schnittger S(2), Sotlar K(3), Horny HP(3), Metzgeroth 
G(1), Müller N(1), Schneider S(4), Naumann N(1), Walz C(3), Haferlach T(2),
Valent P(5), Hofmann WK(1), Cross NC(6), Fabarius A(1), Reiter A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Mannheim, Mannheim,
Germany. (2)Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of
Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. (4)Department of
Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany. (5)Division 
of Hematology and Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (6)1] Wessex Regional 
Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, UK [2] Faculty of Medicine, University of
Southampton, Southampton, UK.

To explore the molecular profile and its prognostic implication in systemic
mastocytosis (SM), we analyzed the mutation status of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-forming progenitor cells (CFU-GM) in patients with KIT D816V(+) indolent
SM (ISM, n=4), smoldering SM (SSM, n=2), aggressive SM (ASM, n=1), SM with
associated clonal hematologic non-mast cell lineage disorder (SM-AHNMD, n=5) and 
ASM-AHNMD (n=7). All patients with (A)SM-AHNMD (n=12) carried 1-4 (median 3)
additional mutations in 11 genes tested, most frequently TET2, SRSF2, ASXL1, CBL 
and EZH2. In multi-mutated (A)SM-AHNMD, KIT D816V(+) single-cell-derived CFU-GM
colonies were identified in 8/12 patients (median 60%, range 0-95). Additional
mutations were identified in CFU-GM colonies in all patients, and logical
hierarchy analysis indicated that mutations in TET2, SRSF2 and ASXL1 preceded KIT
D816V. In ISM/SSM, no additional mutations were detected and CFU-GM colonies were
exclusively KIT D816V(-). These data indicate that (a) (A)SM-AHNMD is a
multi-mutated neoplasm, (b) mutations in TET2, SRSF2 or ASXL1 precede KIT D816V
in ASM-AHNMD,

(c) KIT D816V is thus a phenotype modifier toward SM and (d) KIT D816V or other
mutations are rare in CFU-GM colonies of ISM/SSM patients, which might explain at
least in part their better prognosis.

PMID: 25567135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Sep;75(9):947-60. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22261. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Roles of histone H3K27 trimethylase Ezh2 in retinal proliferation and
differentiation.

Iida A(1), Iwagawa T(1), Baba Y(1), Satoh S(1), Mochizuki Y(1,)(2), Nakauchi
H(3), Furukawa T(4), Koseki H(5), Murakami A(2), Watanabe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo. (3)Division of Stem Cell Therapy, Center
for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo. (4)Laboratory for Molecular and Developmental
Biology, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka University, Osaka. (5)Laboratory
for Developmental Genetics, RIKEN Center for Allergy and Immunology, Kanagawa.

The histone modification H3K27me3 regulates transcription negatively, and Jmjd3
and Ezh2 demethylate and methylate H3K27me3 and H3K27, respectively. We
demonstrated previously that Jmjd3 plays pivotal roles in the differentiation of 
subsets of bipolar (BP) cells by regulating H3K27me3 levels at the Bhlhb4 and
Vsx1 loci, both of which are transcription factors essential for the maturation
of BP cell subsets. In this study, we examined the role of Ezh2 in retinal
development using retina-specific Ezh2 conditional knockout mice (Ezh2-CKO). The 
eyes of the Ezh2-CKO mice were microphthalemic, and the proliferation of retinal 
cells was diminished postnatally in Ezh2-CKO. Differentiation of all examined
retinal subsets was observed with higher proportion of BP cell subsets, which was
determined by immunostaining using specific retinal markers. The onsets of Müller
glia and rod photoreceptor differentiation were accelerated. The expression of
Bhlhb4 was increased in postnatal retinas, which was accompanied by the loss of
H3K27me3 modifications at these genetic loci. Decreased expression of proneural
genes in postnatal stage was observed. As reported previously in other Ezh2-KO
tissues, increased expression of Arf/Ink4a was observed in the Ezh2-CKO retinas. 
The ectopic expression of Arf or Ink4a in the retina suppressed proliferation and
increased apoptosis. In addition, earlier onset of Müller glia differentiation
was observed in Ink4a-expressing cells. These results support an important role
for histone H3K27me3 modification in regulating the proliferation and maturation 
of certain subsets of interneurons in the retina.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25556712  [PubMed - in process]


445. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Nov 15;7(11):4038-50. eCollection 2014.

Regulation of gene expression in HBV- and HCV-related hepatocellular carcinoma:
integrated GWRS and GWGS analyses.

Zhou X(1), Zhu HQ(1), Lu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University Ji'nan 250014, China.

OBJECTIVES: To explore the molecular mechanism of hepatitis B virus-related and
hepatitis C virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma, samples from hepatitis B
virus and hepatitis C virus infected patients and the normal were compared,
respectively.
METHODS: In both experiments, genes with high value were selected based on a
genome-wide relative significance and genome-wide global significance model.
Co-expression network of the selected genes was constructed, and transcription
factors in the network were identified. Molecular complex detection algorithm was
used to obtain sub-networks.
RESULTS: Based on the new model, the top 300 genes were selected. Co-expression
network was constructed and transcription factors were identified. We obtained
two common genes FCN2 and CXCL14, and two common transcription factors RFX5 and
EZH2. In hepatitis B virus experiment, cluster 1 and 3 had the higher value. In
cluster 1, ten of the 17 genes and one transcription factor were all reported
associated with hepatocellular carcinoma. In cluster 3, transcription factor ESR1
was reported related with hepatocellular carcinoma. In hepatitis C virus
experiment, the value of cluster 3 and 4 was higher. In cluster 3, nine genes
were reported to play a key role in hepatocellular carcinoma. In cluster 4, there
were 5 genes in the 34 genes. To compare the relevance of a node in holding
together communicating nodes, centralities based analysis was performed and we
obtained some genes with high stress value.
CONCLUSION: The analysis above helped us to understand the pathogenesis of
hepatitis B virus and hepatitis C virus associated hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4276171
PMID: 25550913  [PubMed]


446. Blood. 2015 Feb 26;125(9):1367-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-610543. Epub 2014
Dec 30.

Acute myeloid leukemia ontogeny is defined by distinct somatic mutations.

Lindsley RC(1), Mar BG(2), Mazzola E(3), Grauman PV(4), Shareef S(4), Allen
SL(5), Pigneux A(6), Wetzler M(7), Stuart RK(8), Erba HP(9), Damon LE(10), Powell
BL(11), Lindeman N(12), Steensma DP(1), Wadleigh M(1), DeAngelo DJ(1), Neuberg
D(3), Stone RM(1), Ebert BL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Division of Hematological Malignancies.
(2)Department of Pediatric Oncology, and. (3)Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston MA; (4)Division of
Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA;
(5)Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine, Hempstead, NY; (6)Hôpital
Haut-Leveque, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Bordeaux, Pessac, France;
(7)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; (8)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC; (9)Division of Hematology and
Oncology, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; (10)Helen Diller
Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of California, San Francisco, 
CA; (11)Comprehensive Cancer Center of Wake Forest University, Winston Salem, NC;
and. (12)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Feb 26;125(9):1357-8.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) can develop after an antecedent myeloid malignancy
(secondary AML [s-AML]), after leukemogenic therapy (therapy-related AML
[t-AML]), or without an identifiable prodrome or known exposure (de novo AML).
The genetic basis of these distinct pathways of AML development has not been
determined. We performed targeted mutational analysis of 194 patients with
rigorously defined s-AML or t-AML and 105 unselected AML patients. The presence
of a mutation in SRSF2, SF3B1, U2AF1, ZRSR2, ASXL1, EZH2, BCOR, or STAG2 was >95%
specific for the diagnosis of s-AML. Analysis of serial samples from individual
patients revealed that these mutations occur early in leukemogenesis and often
persist in clonal remissions. In t-AML and elderly de novo AML populations, these
alterations define a distinct genetic subtype that shares clinicopathologic
properties with clinically confirmed s-AML and highlights a subset of patients
with worse clinical outcomes, including a lower complete remission rate, more
frequent reinduction, and decreased event-free survival. This trial was
registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00715637.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4342352
PMID: 25550361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 30;9(12):e115276. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115276.
eCollection 2014.

EZH2 regulates cofilin activity and colon cancer cell migration by targeting
ITGA2 gene.

Ferraro A(1), Boni T(1), Pintzas A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Mediated Gene Expression, Institute of Biology, Medicinal
Chemistry and Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research Foundation, 48, Vas.
Constantinou Avenue, 11635, Athens, Greece.

Reorganization of cytoskeleton via actin remodeling is a basic step of cell
locomotion. Although cell migration of normal and cancer cells can be stimulated 
by a variety of intra- and extra-cellular factors, all paths ultimate on the
regulation of cofilin activity. Cofilin is a small actin-binding protein able to 
bind both forms of actin, globular and filament, and is regulated by
phosphorylation at Serine 3. Following phosphorylation at serine 3 cofilin is
inactive, therefore cannot bind actin molecules and cytoskeleton remodeling is
impaired. The histone methyltransferase EZH2 is frequently over expressed in many
tumour types including colorectal cancer (CRC). EZH2 over activity, which results
in epigenetic gene-silencing, has been associated with many tumour properties
including invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis but little is known about the
underneath molecular mechanisms. Herein, we report that EZH2 is able to control
cofilin activity and consequently cell locomotion of CRC cell lines through a
non-conventional novel axis that involves integrin signaling. Indeed, we show how
genetic and pharmacological inhibition (DZNep and GSK343) of EZH2 function
produces hyper phosphorylation of cofilin and reduces cell migration. We
previously demonstrated by chromatin immuno-precipitation that Integrin alpha 2
(ITGa2) expression is regulated by EZH2. In the present study we provide evidence
that in EZH2-silenced cells the signaling activity of the de-repressed ITGa2 is
able to increase cofilin phosphorylation, which in turn reduces cell migration.
This study also proposes novel mechanisms that might provide new anti-metastatic 
strategies for CRC treatment based on the inhibition of the epigenetic factor
EZH2 and/or its target gene.

PMCID: PMC4280133
PMID: 25549357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Genes Dev. 2015 Jan 15;29(2):144-56. doi: 10.1101/gad.249748.114. Epub 2014 Dec
29.

Terminal epidermal differentiation is regulated by the interaction of Fra-2/AP-1 
with Ezh2 and ERK1/2.

Wurm S(1), Zhang J(2), Guinea-Viniegra J(1), García F(3), Muñoz J(3), Bakiri
L(1), Ezhkova E(4), Wagner EF(5).

Author information: 
(1)BBVA Foundation-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid E28029, Spain; (2)Medical Research Center, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province 266500,
China; (3)Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid
E28029, Spain; (4)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell 
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. (5)BBVA
Foundation-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid E28029, Spain; ewagner@cnio.es.

Altered epidermal differentiation characterizes numerous skin diseases affecting 
>25% of the human population. Here we identified Fra-2/AP-1 as a key regulator of
terminal epidermal differentiation. Epithelial-restricted, ectopic expression of 
Fra-2 induced expression of epidermal differentiation genes located within the
epidermal differentiation complex (EDC). Moreover, in a papilloma-prone
background, a reduced tumor burden was observed due to precocious keratinocyte
differentiation by Fra-2 expression. Importantly, loss of Fra-2 in suprabasal
keratinocytes is sufficient to cause skin barrier defects due to reduced
expression of differentiation genes. Mechanistically, Fra-2 binds and
transcriptionally regulates EDC gene promoters, which are co-occupied by the
transcriptional repressor Ezh2. Fra-2 remains transcriptionally inactive in
nondifferentiated keratinocytes, where it was found monomethylated and
dimethylated on Lys104 and interacted with Ezh2. Upon keratinocyte
differentiation, Fra-2 is C-terminally phosphorylated on Ser320 and Thr322 by
ERK1/2, leading to transcriptional activation. Thus, the induction of epidermal
differentiation by Fra-2 is controlled by a dual mechanism involving
Ezh2-dependent methylation and activation by ERK1/2-dependent phosphorylation.

© 2015 Wurm et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4298134
PMID: 25547114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e116109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116109.
eCollection 2014.

Live cell imaging of the nascent inactive X chromosome during the early
differentiation process of naive ES cells towards epiblast stem cells.

Guyochin A(1), Maenner S(2), Chu ET(2), Hentati A(3), Attia M(2), Avner P(4),
Clerc P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Génétique Moléculaire Murine, CNRS URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France;
Université de Technologie de Compiègne, Compiègne, France. (2)Génétique
Moléculaire Murine, CNRS URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. (3)Génétique
Moléculaire Murine, CNRS URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; Université
Blaise Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand, France. (4)Génétique Moléculaire Murine, CNRS
URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; EMBL Monterotondo, Adriano
Buzzati-Traverso Campus, Monterotondo, Italy. (5)Génétique Moléculaire Murine,
CNRS URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France; Epigénétique des Cellules Souches,
Department of Developmental Biology, CNRS URA2578, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Random X-chromosome inactivation ensures dosage compensation in mammals through
the transcriptional silencing of one of the two X chromosomes present in each
female cell. Silencing is initiated in the differentiating epiblast of the mouse 
female embryos through coating of the nascent inactive X chromosome by the
non-coding RNA Xist, which subsequently recruits the Polycomb Complex PRC2
leading to histone H3-K27 methylation. Here we examined in mouse ES cells the
early steps of the transition from naive ES cells towards epiblast stem cells as 
a model for inducing X chromosome inactivation in vitro. We show that these
conditions efficiently induce random XCI. Importantly, in a transient phase of
this differentiation pathway, both X chromosomes are coated with Xist RNA in up
to 15% of the XX cells. In an attempt to determine the dynamics of this process, 
we designed a strategy aimed at visualizing the nascent inactive X-chromosome in 
live cells. We generated transgenic female XX ES cells expressing the PRC2
component Ezh2 fused to the fluorescent protein Venus. The fluorescent fusion
protein was expressed at sub-physiological levels and located in nuclei of ES
cells. Upon differentiation of ES cell towards epiblast stem cell fate,
Venus-fluorescent territories appearing in interphase nuclei were identified as
nascent inactive X chromosomes by their association with Xist RNA. Imaging of
Ezh2-Venus for up to 24 hours during the differentiation process showed survival 
of some cells with two fluorescent domains and a surprising dynamics of the
fluorescent territories across cell division and in the course of the
differentiation process. Our data reveal a strategy for visualizing the nascent
inactive X chromosome and suggests the possibility for a large plasticity of the 
nascent inactive X chromosome.

PMCID: PMC4278889
PMID: 25546018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e116050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116050.
eCollection 2014.

A mathematical model of bimodal epigenetic control of miR-193a in ovarian cancer 
stem cells.

Cheng FH(1), Aguda BD(2), Tsai JC(3), Kochanczyk M(4), Lin JM(1), Chen GC(1), Lai
HC(5), Nephew KP(6), Hwang TW(3), Chan MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China; Institute of Molecular Biology, National
Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung, Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)DiseasePathways LLC, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Mathematics, National Chung Cheng University, Min-Hsiung,
Chia-Yi, Taiwan, Republic of China. (4)Institute of Fundamental Technological
Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China; Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China; Institute of Clinical
Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China;
Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(6)Medical Sciences, Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana, United States of America.

Accumulating data indicate that cancer stem cells contribute to tumor
chemoresistance and their persistence alters clinical outcome. Our previous study
has shown that ovarian cancer may be initiated by ovarian cancer initiating cells
(OCIC) characterized by surface antigen CD44 and c-KIT (CD117). It has been
experimentally demonstrated that a microRNA, namely miR-193a, targets c-KIT mRNA 
for degradation and could play a crucial role in ovarian cancer development. How 
miR-193a is regulated is poorly understood and the emerging picture is complex.
To unravel this complexity, we propose a mathematical model to explore how
estrogen-mediated up-regulation of another target of miR-193a, namely E2F6, can
attenuate the function of miR-193a in two ways, one through a competition of E2F6
and c-KIT transcripts for miR-193a, and second by binding of E2F6 protein, in
association with a polycomb complex, to the promoter of miR-193a to down-regulate
its transcription. Our model predicts that this bimodal control increases the
expression of c-KIT and that the second mode of epigenetic regulation is required
to generate a switching behavior in c-KIT and E2F6 expressions. Additional
analysis of the TCGA ovarian cancer dataset demonstrates that ovarian cancer
patients with low expression of EZH2, a polycomb-group family protein, show
positive correlation between E2F6 and c-KIT. We conjecture that a simultaneous
EZH2 inhibition and anti-estrogen therapy can constitute an effective combined
therapeutic strategy against ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4278842
PMID: 25545504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;22(6):1739-43. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2014.06.044.

[Significance of chromosome 7 abnormalities in myeloid malignancies].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi WH(1), Li X(2), Chang CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiaotong University,Shanghai 200233, China. (2)Department of Hematology,
Shanghai Sixth People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong
University,Shanghai 200233, China. E-mail: lixiao3326@yahoo.com.cn.

Chromosome 7 abnormalities are the most common cytogenetic alterations found in
myeloid malignancies. Myeloid malignancies exhibiting monosomy 7/del (7q) have
been confirmed to associate with high susceptibility to infections, poor response
to chemotherapy, and short survival time, so speculating that chromosome 7 has
important tumor suppressor genes. Commonly deleted segments (such as 7q22) of
chromosome 7 have been identified by FISH and other technologies. Genes (EZH2,
MLL5, DOCK4, SAMD9L/SAMD9) located in commonly deleted segments of 7q have been
cloned and characterized along with the advance of molecular biology.This review 
summaries the current advancement about myeloid malignancies associated with
monosomy7/del(7q).

PMID: 25543507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e115684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115684.
eCollection 2014.

JARID2 is involved in transforming growth factor-beta-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of lung and colon cancer cell lines.

Tange S(1), Oktyabri D(1), Terashima M(1), Ishimura A(1), Suzuki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Histone methylation plays a crucial role in various biological and pathological
processes including cancer development. In this study, we discovered that JARID2,
an interacting component of Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2) that catalyzes
methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27), was involved in Transforming
Growth Factor-beta (TGF-ß)-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
A549 lung cancer cell line and HT29 colon cancer cell line. The expression of
JARID2 was increased during TGF-ß-induced EMT of these cell lines and knockdown
of JARID2 inhibited TGF-ß-induced morphological conversion of the cells
associated with EMT. JARID2 knockdown itself had no effect in the expression of
EMT-related genes but antagonized TGF-ß-dependent expression changes of
EMT-related genes such as CDH1, ZEB family and microRNA-200 family. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that JARID2 was implicated in TGF-ß-induced
transcriptional repression of CDH1 and microRNA-200 family genes through the
regulation of histone H3 methylation and EZH2 occupancies on their regulatory
regions. Our study demonstrated a novel role of JARID2 protein, which may control
PRC2 recruitment and histone methylation during TGF-ß-induced EMT of lung and
colon cancer cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4277293
PMID: 25542019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2263-76.

RUNX1, an androgen- and EZH2-regulated gene, has differential roles in
AR-dependent and -independent prostate cancer.

Takayama K(1,)(2), Suzuki T(3), Tsutsumi S(4), Fujimura T(5), Urano T(1,)(2),
Takahashi S(6), Homma Y(5), Aburatani H(4), Inoue S(1,)(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-Aging Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan. (2)Department of Geriatric Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. (4)Genome Science Division, Research Center for 
Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Urology, Nihon
University School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Division of Gene
Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama, Japan.

Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is essential for the development of prostate
cancer. Here, we report that runt-related transcription factor (RUNX1) could be a
key molecule for the androgen-dependence of prostate cancer. We found RUNX1 is a 
target of AR and regulated positively by androgen. Our RUNX1 ChIP-seq analysis
indicated that RUNX1 is recruited to AR binding sites by interacting with AR. In 
androgen-dependent cancer, loss of RUNX1 impairs AR-dependent transcription and
cell growth. The RUNX1 promoter is bound by enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
and is negatively regulated by histone H3 lysine 27 (K27) trimethylation.
Repression of RUNX1 is important for the growth promotion ability of EZH2 in
AR-independent cells. In clinical prostate cancer samples, the RUNX1 expression
level is negatively associated with EZH2 and that RUNX1 loss correlated with poor
prognosis. These results indicated the significance of RUNX1 for
androgen-dependency and that loss of RUNX1 could be a key step for the
progression of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4385850
PMID: 25537508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(12):1677-87. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.972776.

EZH2 inhibition enhances the efficacy of an EGFR inhibitor in suppressing colon
cancer cells.

Katona BW(1), Liu Y, Ma A, Jin J, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Gastroenterology; University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine ; Philadelphia , PA USA.

Metastatic colon cancer has a 5-year survival of less than 10% despite the use of
aggressive chemotherapeutic regimens. As signaling from epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) is often enhanced and epigenetic regulation is often altered in
colon cancer, it is desirable to enhance the efficacy of EGFR-directed therapy by
co-targeting an epigenetic pathway. We showed that the histone methyltransferase 
EZH2, which catalyzes methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), was
upregulated in colon cancers in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database. Since
co-inhibition of both EGFR and EZH2 has not been studied in colon cancer, we
examined the effects of co-inhibition of EGFR and EZH2 on 2 colon cancer cell
lines, HT-29 and HCT-15. Co-inhibition of EZH2 and EGFR with the small molecules 
UNC1999 and gefitinib, led to a significant decrease in cell number and increased
apoptosis compared to inhibition of either pathway alone, and similar results
were noted after EZH2 shRNA knockdown. Moreover, co-inhibition of EZH2 and EGFR
also significantly induced autophagy, indicating that autophagy may play a role
in the observed synergy. Together, these findings suggest that inhibition of both
EZH2 and EGFR serves as an effective method to increase the efficacy of EGFR
inhibitors in suppressing colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4622469
PMID: 25535899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 23;14:994. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-994.

The association between histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and
prostate cancer: relationship with clinicopathological parameters.

Ngollo M, Lebert A, Dagdemir A, Judes G, Karsli-Ceppioglu S, Daures M, Kemeny JL,
Penault-Llorca F, Boiteux JP, Bignon YJ(1), Guy L, Bernard-Gallon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogenetics, Centre Jean Perrin, CBRV, 28 place Henri Dunant,
BP 38, 63001 Clermont-Ferrand, France. Yves-Jean.BIGNON@cjp.fr.

BACKGROUND: It is well established that genetic and epigenetic alterations are
common events in prostate cancer, which may lead to aberrant expression of
critical genes. The importance of epigenetic mechanisms in prostate cancer
carcinogenesis is increasingly evident. In this study, the focus will be on
histone modifications and the primary objectives are to map H3K27me3 marks and
quantify RAR beta 2, ER alpha, SRC3, RGMA, PGR, and EZH2 gene expressions in
prostate cancer tissues compared to normal tissues. In addition, a data analysis 
was made in connection with the clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: 71 normal specimens and 66 cancer prostate tissues were randomly
selected in order to assess the proportion of the repressive H3K27me3 mark and
gene expression. H3K27me3 level was evaluated by ChIP-qPCR and mRNA expression
using RT-qPCR between prostate cancer and normal tissues. Subsequently,
western-blotting was performed for protein detection. The analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was performed, and Tukey's test was used to correct for multiple
comparisons (p-value threshold of 0.05). The principal component analysis (PCA)
and discriminant factorial analysis (DFA) were used to explore the association
between H3K27me3 level and clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: The study demonstrated that H3K27me3 level was significantly enriched at
the RAR beta 2, ER alpha, PGR, and RGMA promoter regions in prostate cancer
tissues compared to normal tissues. After stratification by clinicopathological
parameters, the H3K27me3 level was positively correlated with Gleason score, PSA 
levels and clinical stages for RAR beta 2, ER alpha, PGR, and RGMA. High H3K27me3
mark was significantly associated with decreased RAR beta 2, ER alpha, PGR and
RGMA gene expressions in prostate cancer sample compared to the normal one.
Moreover, the results showed that mRNA level of EZH2, AR and SRC3 are upregulated
in prostate cancer compared to normal prostate tissues and this correlates
positively with Gleason score, PSA levels and clinical stages. Obviously, these
observations were confirmed by protein level using western-blot.
CONCLUSIONS: This data clearly demonstrated that H3K27me3 level correlated with
aggressive tumor features. Also this study revealed that reverse correlation of
RAR beta 2, ER alpha, PGR, and RGMA expressions with EZH2, SRC3, and AR
expressions in prostate cancer tissues suggests that these genes are the target
of EZH2. Therefore, all therapeutic strategies leading to histone demethylation
with epigenetic drugs such as histone methyltransferase inhibitor may be relevant
treatments against prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4364597
PMID: 25535400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 24;34(39):5012-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.421. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

FOXA1 repression is associated with loss of BRCA1 and increased promoter
methylation and chromatin silencing in breast cancer.

Gong C(1,)(2), Fujino K(1,)(3), Monteiro LJ(1), Gomes AR(1), Drost R(4),
Davidson-Smith H(5), Takeda S(3), Khoo US(2), Jonkers J(4), Sproul D(5), Lam
EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK. (2)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Juntendo University, Bunkyoku,
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Genomics Centre
Netherlands, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)MRC
Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

FOXA1 expression correlates with the breast cancer luminal subtype and patient
survival. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines
revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with the downregulation of FOXA1
expression. Knockdown of BRCA1 resulted in the downregulation of FOXA1 expression
and enhancement of FOXA1 promoter methylation in MCF-7 breast cancer cells,
whereas the reconstitution of BRCA1 in Brca1-deficent mouse mammary epithelial
cells (MMECs) promoted Foxa1 expression and methylation. These data suggest that 
BRCA1 suppresses FOXA1 hypermethylation and silencing. Consistently, the
treatment of MMECs with the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine
induced Foxa1 mRNA expression. Furthermore, treatment with GSK126, an inhibitor
of EZH2 methyltransferase activity, induced FOXA1 expression in BRCA1-deficient
but not in BRCA1-reconstituted MMECs. Likewise, the depletion of EZH2 by small
interfering RNA enhanced FOXA1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNA methyltransferases
(DNMT)1/3a/3b and H3K27me3 are recruited to the endogenous FOXA1 promoter,
further supporting the hypothesis that these proteins interact to modulate FOXA1 
methylation and repression. Further co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP analysis
showed that both BRCA1 and DNMT3b form complexes with EZH2 but not with each
other, consistent with the notion that BRCA1 binds to EZH2 and negatively
regulates its methyltransferase activity. We also found that EZH2 promotes and
BRCA1 impairs the deposit of the gene silencing histone mark H3K27me3 on the
FOXA1 promoter. These associations were validated in a familial breast cancer
patient cohort. Integrated analysis of the global gene methylation and expression
profiles of a set of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXA1 promoter
methylation is inversely correlated with the transcriptional expression of FOXA1 
and that BRCA1 mutation breast cancer is significantly associated with FOXA1
methylation and downregulation of FOXA1 expression, providing physiological
evidence to our findings that FOXA1 expression is regulated by methylation and
chromatin silencing and that BRCA1 maintains FOXA1 expression through suppressing
FOXA1 gene methylation in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4430311
PMID: 25531315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Epigenomics. 2014;6(6):651-64. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.59.

Epigenetic mechanisms of breast cancer: an update of the current knowledge.

Karsli-Ceppioglu S(1), Dagdemir A, Judes G, Ngollo M, Penault-Llorca F, Pajon A, 
Bignon YJ, Bernard-Gallon D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogenetics, Centre Jean Perrin-CBRV, 63000 Clermont-Ferrand,
France.

Epigenetic alterations are heritable changes in gene expression that occur
without causing any change in DNA sequence. They are important key factors for
cancer development and prognosis. Breast cancer is induced by the accumulation of
altered gene regulation. Besides genetic mutations, epigenetics mechanisms have
an important role in breast cancer tumorigenesis. Investigations related with
aberrant epigenetic regulations in breast cancer focus on initiating molecular
mechanisms in cancer development, identification of new biomarkers to predict
breast cancer aggressiveness and the potential of epigenetic therapy. In this
review, we will summarize the recent knowledge about the role of epigenetic
alterations related with DNA methylation and histone modification in breast
cancer. In addition, altered regulation of breast cancer specific genes and the
potential of epigenetic therapy will be discussed according to epigenetic
mechanisms.

PMID: 25531258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mech Dev. 2015 May;136:143-54. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

An epigenetic regulatory element of the Nodal gene in the mouse and human
genomes.

Arai D(1), Hayakawa K(2), Ohgane J(3), Hirosawa M(2), Nakao Y(4), Tanaka S(2),
Shiota K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan; Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda
University, 3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource Sciences/Veterinary Medical 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Genomic Function Engineering, Department of Life Sciences,
School of Agriculture, Meiji University, 1-1-1 Higashi-mita, Tama-ku, Kawasaki
214-8571, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University,
3-4-1 Ohkubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Cellular
Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.
Electronic address: ashiota@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Nodal signaling plays critical roles during embryonic development. The Nodal gene
is not expressed in adult tissues but is frequently activated in cancer cells,
contributing to progression toward malignancy. Although several regulatory
elements of the Nodal gene have been identified, the epigenetic mechanisms by
which Nodal expression is regulated over the long term remain unclear. We found a
region exhibiting dynamic changes in DNA methylation at approximately -3.0<U+2009>kb to 
-0.4<U+2009>kb upstream from the transcriptional start site (TSS) that we termed the
epigenetic regulatory element (ERE). The ERE was unmethylated in mouse embryonic 
stem cells (mESCs) but became increasingly methylated in differentiated cells and
tissues, concomitant with the downregulation of Nodal mRNA expression. In vitro
reporter assays identified an Oct3/4 binding motif within the ERE, indicating
that the ERE is responsible for the activation of Nodal in mESCs. Furthermore,
the ERE was a target of differentiation-associated Polycomb silencing, and the
chromatin condensed when mESCs differentiated to embryoid bodies (EBs).
Pharmacological inhibition of PRC2 led to the reactivation of Nodal expression in
EBs and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The ERE was also targeted by PRC2 in 
normal human cells. In NODAL-expressing human cancer cells, accumulation of EZH2 
and trimethylation of H3K27 at the ERE were diminished. In conclusion, Nodal is
epigenetically controlled through the ERE in the mouse embryo and human cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Arch Toxicol. 2016 Feb;90(2):449-61. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1435-z. Epub 2014
Dec 20.

Epigenetic silencing of microRNA-218 via EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation is
involved in malignant transformation of HBE cells induced by cigarette smoke
extract.

Wang B(1,)(2), Liu Y(1,)(2), Luo F(1,)(2), Xu Y(1,)(2), Qin Y(3), Lu X(1,)(2), Xu
W(1,)(2), Shi L(1,)(2), Liu Q(4,)(5), Xiang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. (2)The Key Laboratory of
Modern Toxicology, Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(3)Jiangsu Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China. (4)Institute of Toxicology, School of Public Health, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
drqzliu@hotmail.com. (5)The Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology, Ministry of
Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, 
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. drqzliu@hotmail.com. (6)Jiangsu Center for
Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China. xiangquanyongcdc@163.com.

Abnormal expression of miRNAs has been implicated in the pathogenesis of human
lung cancers, most of which are attributable to cigarette smoke. The mechanisms
of action, however, remain obscure. Here, we report that there are decreased
expression of miR-218 and increased expression of EZH2 and H3K27me3 during
cigarette smoke extract (CSE)-induced transformation of human bronchial
epithelial (HBE) cells. Depletion of EZH2 by siRNA or by the EZH2 inhibitor,
3-deazaneplanocin A, attenuated CSE-induced decreases of miR-218 levels and
increases of H3K27me3, which epigenetically controls gene transcription, and
BMI1, an oncogene. Furthermore, ChIP assays demonstrated that EZH2 and H3K27me3
are enriched at the miR-218-1 promoter in HBE cells exposed to CSE, indicating
that EZH2 mediates epigenetic silencing of miR-218 via histone methylation. In
addition, miR-218 directly targeted BMI1, through which miR-218 ablates cancer
stem cells (CSCs) self-renewal in transformed HBE cells. In CSE-transformed HBE
cells, the protein level of Oct-4 and mRNA levels of CD133 and CD44, indicators
of the acquisition of CSC-like properties, were reduced by over-expression of
miR-218, and over-expression of miR-218 decreased the malignancy of transformed
HBE cells. Thus, we conclude that epigenetic silencing of miR-218 via
EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation is involved in the acquisition of CSC-like
properties and malignant transformation of HBE cells induced by CSE and thereby
contributes to the carcinogenesis of cigarette smoke.

PMID: 25526925  [PubMed - in process]


460. Br J Haematol. 2015 Apr;169(1):71-6. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13260. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

A compendium of cytogenetic abnormalities in myelofibrosis: molecular and
phenotypic correlates in 826 patients.

Wassie E(1), Finke C, Gangat N, Lasho TL, Pardanani A, Hanson CA, Ketterling RP, 
Tefferi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.

Among 826 patients with primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and analysable metaphases on 
cytogenetic studies, 352 (42·6%) had abnormal karyotype, of which 240 (68·2%)
were sole aberrations and 48 (13·6%) were complex; the most frequent
abnormalities were 20q- (23·3%), 13q- (18·2%), +8 (11·1%), +9 (9·9%), chromosome 
1q+ (9·7%) and -7/7q- (7·1%). Phenotypic correlates included: abnormal karyotype 
with anaemia (P = 0·02), leucopenia (P < 0·01) and thrombocytopenia (P < 0·01);
complex karyotype with younger age (P = 0·04) and thrombocytopenia (P < 0·01);
leucopenia with 20q-, +8 and -7/7q- and thrombocytopenia with 20q- and -7/7q-.
Cytopenias were less likely to occur with 13q-. 476 patients were annotated for
JAK2/CALR/MPL mutations; abnormal karyotype frequencies were 43% in JAK2, 42%
CALR, 33% MPL mutated and 34% triple-negative cases (P = 0·3). A proportion of
patients were also screened for ASXL1, EZH2, IDH1, IDH2, SRSF2, U2AF1 and SF3B1
mutations; in all instances, mutational frequencies were higher in patients with 
normal karyotype, reaching significance for ASXL1 (P = 0·02) and U2AF1
(P = 0·01). 13q- was associated with mutant CALR (P = 0·03), +9 with mutant JAK2 
(P = 0·02) and 20q- with mutant SRSF2 (P = 0·02). The current PMF study provides 
detailed cytogenetic information and correlations with mutations and clinical
phenotype.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25521305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Biomedicine (Taipei). 2014;4:1. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

EZH2: novel therapeutic target for human cancer.

Li LY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung 404, 
Taichung, Taiwan ; Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung 404, Taichung, Taiwan ; Department of Biotechnology, Asia
University, Taichung 404, Taichung, Taiwan.

Enhancer of Zeste homlog 2 (EZH2) is a catalytic subunit of epigenetic regulator 
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which trimethylates Lys 27 of histone H3,
leading to silencing of the target genes that are involved in a variety of
biological processes including tumor progression and stem cell maintenance.
However, in addition to its canonical PRC2-dependent transcriptional repression
function, EZH2 also acts as a gene activator in a noncanonical PRC2-independent
manner. Overexpression of EZH2 has been detected in diverse cancers, and is
associated with tumor malignancy. Moreover, activating mutations and inactivating
mutations of EZH2 are also associated with certain types of cancer. Given EZH2's 
multi-faceted function and role in cancer, context-specific strategy for
targeting EZH2/EZH2-mediated signaling could serve as future targeted
therapy/personalized medicine for human cancer.

PMCID: PMC4264983
PMID: 25520914  [PubMed]


462. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Feb;14(2):513-22. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0208. Epub 
2014 Dec 17.

Sunitinib dose escalation overcomes transient resistance in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma and is associated with epigenetic modifications.

Adelaiye R(1), Ciamporcero E(2), Miles KM(3), Sotomayor P(4), Bard J(5), Tsompana
M(5), Conroy D(3), Shen L(3), Ramakrishnan S(1), Ku SY(1), Orillion A(6), Prey
J(7), Fetterly G(7), Buck M(5), Chintala S(8), Bjarnason GA(9), Pili R(10).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Program, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.
Department of Cancer Pathology and Prevention, Roswell Park Cancer Institute
Division, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York. (2)Genitourinary Program,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York. Department of Medicine and
Experimental Oncology, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. (3)Genitourinary
Program, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York. (4)Genitourinary
Program, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York. Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.
(5)Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York. (7)Pharmacokinetics and
Pharmacodynamics Core Facility, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.
(8)Genitourinary Program, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York.
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Buffalo, New York. (9)Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Center, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Roberto.Pili@RoswellPark.org
georg.bjarnason@utoronto.ca. (10)Genitourinary Program, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, New York. Department of Cancer Pathology and Prevention,
Roswell Park Cancer Institute Division, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York.
Roberto.Pili@RoswellPark.org georg.bjarnason@utoronto.ca.

Sunitinib is considered a first-line therapeutic option for patients with
advanced clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Despite sunitinib's clinical
efficacy, patients eventually develop drug resistance and disease progression.
Herein, we tested the hypothesis whether initial sunitinib resistance may be
transient and could be overcome by dose increase. In selected patients initially 
treated with 50 mg sunitinib and presenting with minimal toxicities, sunitinib
dose was escalated to 62.5 mg and/or 75 mg at the time of tumor progression. Mice
bearing two different patient-derived ccRCC xenografts (PDX) were treated 5 days 
per week with a dose-escalation schema (40-60-80 mg/kg sunitinib). Tumor tissues 
were collected before dose increments for immunohistochemistry analyses and drug 
levels. Selected intrapatient sunitinib dose escalation was safe and several
patients had added progression-free survival. In parallel, our preclinical
results showed that PDXs, although initially responsive to sunitinib at 40 mg/kg,
eventually developed resistance. When the dose was incrementally increased, again
we observed tumor response to sunitinib. A resistant phenotype was associated
with transient increase of tumor vasculature despite intratumor sunitinib
accumulation at higher dose. In addition, we observed associated changes in the
expression of the methyltransferase EZH2 and histone marks at the time of
resistance. Furthermore, specific EZH2 inhibition resulted in increased in vitro 
antitumor effect of sunitinib. Overall, our results suggest that initial
sunitinib-induced resistance may be overcome, in part, by increasing the dose,
and highlight the potential role of epigenetic changes associated with sunitinib 
resistance that can represent new targets for therapeutic intervention.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4326587
PMID: 25519701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):108-17. doi: 10.1242/dev.116947.

Ezh2 represses the basal cell lineage during lung endoderm development.

Snitow ME(1), Li S(2), Morley MP(2), Rathi K(2), Lu MM(2), Kadzik RS(2), Stewart 
KM(2), Morrisey EE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA Cardiovascular Institute, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA emorrise@mail.med.upenn.edu.

The development of the lung epithelium is regulated in a stepwise fashion to
generate numerous differentiated and stem cell lineages in the adult lung. How
these different lineages are generated in a spatially and temporally restricted
fashion remains poorly understood, although epigenetic regulation probably plays 
an important role. We show that the Polycomb repressive complex 2 component Ezh2 
is highly expressed in early lung development but is gradually downregulated by
late gestation. Deletion of Ezh2 in early lung endoderm progenitors leads to the 
ectopic and premature appearance of Trp63+ basal cells that extend the entire
length of the airway. Loss of Ezh2 also leads to reduced secretory cell
differentiation. In their place, morphologically similar cells develop that
express a subset of basal cell genes, including keratin 5, but no longer express 
high levels of either Trp63 or of standard secretory cell markers. This suggests 
that Ezh2 regulates the phenotypic switch between basal cells and secretory
cells. Together, these findings show that Ezh2 restricts the basal cell lineage
during normal lung endoderm development to allow the proper patterning of
epithelial lineages during lung formation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4299135
PMID: 25516972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Toxicology. 2015 Feb 3;328:160-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Effect of perfluorooctane sulfonate on pluripotency and differentiation factors
in mouse embryoid bodies.

Xu B(1), Ji X(2), Chen X(3), Yao M(2), Han X(2), Chen M(2), Tang W(4), Xia Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China; Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China; Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated
Jiangyin People's Hospital of Wuxi Clinical School of Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangyin 214400, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166,
China; Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 
210029, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin People's
Hospital of Wuxi Clinical School of Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Jiangyin 214400, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China; Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. Electronic address:
yankaixia@njmu.edu.cn.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) poses potential risks to early development, but 
the molecular mechanisms how PFOS affects embryonic development are still
unclear. Mouse embryoid bodies (mEBs) provide ideal models for testing safety or 
toxicity of chemicals in vitro. In this study, mEBs were exposed to PFOS up to 6 
days and then their pluripotency and differentiation markers were evaluated. Our 
data showed that the mRNA and protein levels of pluripotency markers (Oct4, Sox2,
Nanog) in mEBs were significantly increased following exposure to PFOS.
Meanwhile, the expressions of miR-134, miR-145, miR-490-3p were decreased
accordingly. PFOS reduced the mRNA levels of endodermal markers (Sox17, FOXA2),
mesodermal markers (SMA, Brachyury) and ectodermal markers (Nestin, Fgf5) in
mEBs. Meanwhile, PFOS increased the mRNA and protein levels of polycomb group
(PcG) family members (Cbx4, Cbx7, Ezh2). Overall, our results showed that PFOS
could increase the expression levels of pluripotency factors and decrease the
differentiation markers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25510869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Genet Mol Biol. 2014 Oct;37(4):716-24. doi: 10.1590/S1415-47572014005000011. Epub
2014 Oct 21.

PCI-24781 down-regulates EZH2 expression and then promotes glioma apoptosis by
suppressing the PIK3K/Akt/mTOR pathway.

Zhang W(1), Lv S(1), Liu J(1), Zang Z(1), Yin J(1), An N(1), Yang H(1), Song
Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery , Xinqiao Hospital , Third Military Medical
University , Chongqing , China . (2)Department of Neurosurgery , Guiyang 300
Hospital , Zunyi Medical College , Guizhou , China .

PCI-24781 is a novel histone deacetylase inhibitor that inhibits tumor
proliferation and promotes cell apoptosis. However, it is unclear whether
PCI-24781 inhibits Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) expression in malignant gliomas. In
this work, three glioma cell lines were incubated with various concentrations of 
PCI-24781 (0, 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2.5 and 5 µM) and analyzed for cell proliferation by 
the MTS
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tet
razolium] assay and colony formation, and cell cycle and apoptosis were assessed 
by flow cytometry. The expression of EZH2 and apoptosis-related proteins was
assessed by western blotting. Malignant glioma cells were also transfected with
EZH2 siRNA to examine how PCI-24781 suppresses tumor cells. EZH2 was highly
expressed in the three glioma cell lines. Incubation with PCI-24781 reduced cell 
proliferation and increased cell apoptosis by down-regulating EZH2 in a
concentration-dependent manner. These effects were simulated by EZH2 siRNA. In
addition, PCI-24781 or EZH2 siRNA accelerated cell apoptosis by down-regulating
the expression of AKT, mTOR, p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70s6k), glycogen
synthase kinase 3A and B (GSK3a/b) and eukaryotic initiation factor 4E binding
protein 1 (4E-BP1). These data suggest that PCI-24781 may be a promising
therapeutic agent for treating gliomas by down-regulating EZH2 which promotes
cell apoptosis by suppressing the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of the rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.

PMCID: PMC4261972
PMID: 25505847  [PubMed]


466. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Feb;14(2):316-28. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.041905. Epub
2014 Dec 11.

Quantitative nuclear proteomics identifies that miR-137-mediated EZH2 reduction
regulates resveratrol-induced apoptosis of neuroblastoma cells.

Ren X(1), Bai X(2), Zhang X(2), Li Z(2), Tang L(2), Zhao X(3), Li Z(2), Ren Y(2),
Wei S(4), Wang Q(5), Liu C(6), Ji J(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of 
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; ¶Center for Biomedical
Materials and Tissue Engineering, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; (2)From the State Key Laboratory of
Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China; (3)From the State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant
Gene Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China; §Institute of System Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, China; (4)¶Center for Biomedical Materials and Tissue
Engineering, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China; <U+2016>Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Laboratory 
of Interdisciplinary Studies, School of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing
100081, China; (5)From the State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene
Research, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China;
wangqingsong@pku.edu.cn jijg@pku.edu.cn lcmicro@yahoo.com. (6)Laboratory of
Genome Stability, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu 610041, China wangqingsong@pku.edu.cn jijg@pku.edu.cn lcmicro@yahoo.com. 
(7)From the State Key Laboratory of Protein and Plant Gene Research, College of 
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; §Institute of System
Biomedicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191,
China; wangqingsong@pku.edu.cn jijg@pku.edu.cn lcmicro@yahoo.com.

Neuroblastoma is the most common pediatric extracranial solid tumor with a broad 
spectrum of clinical behavior and poor prognosis. Despite intensive multimodal
therapy, ongoing clinical trials, and basic science investigations, neuroblastoma
remains a complex medical challenge with a long-term survival rate less than 40%.
In our study, we found that resveratrol (3, 5, 4'-trihydroxystilbene, RSV), a
naturally occurring phytoalexin, possesses an anticancer activity through
blocking cell growth and inducing apoptosis in neuroblastoma cell line Neuro-2a
(N-2a) cells. Using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC) and quantitative proteomic analysis, we found that 395 proteins were
up-regulated and 302 proteins were down-regulated in the nucleus of N-2a cells
treated with RSV. Among these, the polycomb protein histone methyltransferase
EZH2 was reduced significantly, which is aberrantly overexpressed in
neuroblastoma and crucial to maintain the malignant phenotype of neuroblastoma by
epigenetic repression of multiple tumor suppressor genes. EZH2 reduction further 
led to decreased H3K27me3 level and reactivation of neuroblastoma tumor
suppressor genes CLU and NGFR. Disruption EZH2 expression by RNA
interference-mediated knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition with DZNep triggered 
cellular apoptosis in N-2a cells. We found that the up-regulation of miR-137
level was responsible for reduced EZH2 level in tumor suppression induced by RSV.
Inhibition of miR-137 expression rescued the cellular apoptosis phenotypes, EZH2 
reduction, and CLU and NGFR reactivation, associated with RSV treatment. Taken
together, our findings present for the first time, an epigenetic mechanism
involving miR-137-mediated EZH2 repression in RSV-induced apoptosis and tumor
suppression of neuroblastoma, which would provide a key potential therapeutic
target in neuroblastoma treatment.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4350028
PMID: 25505154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Dec 4;13(4):10121-9. doi: 10.4238/2014.December.4.6.

H3K27me3 may be associated with Oct4 and Sox2 in mouse preimplantation embryos.

Wu FR(1), Zhang Y(1), Ding B(1), Lei XH(1), Huang JC(1), Wang CH(1), Liu Y(1),
Wang R(1), Li WY(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Science and Food Engineering, Fuyang Teachers College,
Key Laboratory of Embryo Development and Reproductive Regulation, Anhui Province,
Fuyang, China. (2)School of Biological Science and Food Engineering, Fuyang
Teachers College, Key Laboratory of Embryo Development and Reproductive
Regulation, Anhui Province, Fuyang, China liwenyong@aliyun.com.

As a core member of polycomb repressive complex 2, the transcription and enzyme
activity of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2) is directly involved in the
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3. In this study, the fluorescence
intensity of H3K27me3 in mouse in vivo morulae and blastocysts was compared by
indirect immunofluorescence staining. We found that demethylation of H3K27me3
occurred during the blastocyst stage. Real-time polymerase chain reaction was
performed to investigate Ezh2 expression in oocytes and in preimplantation
embryos. Ezh2 expression peaked during the zygote stage and gradually decreased
from the 2-cell stage, exhibiting an inverse pattern when compared with Oct4 and 
Sox2 mRNA in mouse preimplantation embryos. To understand the role of
development-related genes on the transcription of mouse Ezh2, a promoter assay
was performed in NIH/3T3 cells. Ezh2 expression was markedly suppressed by Oct4
and Sox2 alone in a dose-dependent manner, while Ezh2 promoter activity in
co-transfection with Nanog, Klf-4, and c-Myc groups showed no significant change 
as compared with the control. Our data suggest that the demethylation of H3K27me3
is caused by the degressive expression and activity of Ezh2 in blastocysts,
leading to increased expression of developmentally important transcription
factors. We also observed negative effects of Oct4 and Sox2 on the transcription 
of Ezh2 and identified Oct4 and Sox2 as novel negative regulators of Ezh2 at the 
post-translation level in a mouse preimplantation embryo.

PMID: 25501223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Nov 27;13(4):9939-50. doi: 10.4238/2014.November.27.23.

 Effect of siRNA targeting EZH2 on cell viability and apoptosis of bladder cancer
T24 cells.

Wang HF(1), Yang H(2), Hu LB(3), Lei YH(3), Qin Y(3), Li J(3), Bi CW(3), Wang
JS(1), Huo Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. (2)Department of Urology, Yunnan Provincial
Tumor Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University,
Kunming, Yunnan, China 277578966@qq.com. (3)Department of Urology, Yunnan
Provincial Tumor Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical
University, Kunming, Yunnan, China.

We investigated the effect of siRNA targeting enhancer of EZH2 on cell
proliferation, invasion, migration, and apoptosis of human bladder cancer T24
cells. An siRNA-expressing plasmid targeting the EZH2 gene was transfected into
T24 cells. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis were 
used to detect EZH2 expression at the mRNA and protein levels, respectively.
Proliferation, invasion, and migration of T24 cells were examined in vivo using
MTT, wound healing, and transwell chamber migration assays, respectively. Annexin
V-fluorescein isothiocyanate/propidium iodide flow cytometric analysis was
performed to determine cell apoptosis levels. Expression of EZH2 in T24 cells was
suppressed at the mRNA and protein levels. Following transfection for 48 h,
growth was inhibited by 37.9%, which was markedly lower than that in the negative
control group (P < 0.05). Following a wound-healing assay for 24 h, transfected
cell migration distance was 1.37 ± 0.12, which was markedly less than the
horizontal migration distance of negative control group cells (P < 0.01). In
addition, the cell invasion ability of EZH2- siRNA group cells decreased by 67%
compared with negative control group cells (P < 0.01). Following transfection for
48 h, early- and late-stage apoptosis rates for T24 cells were 22.8 and 3.60%,
respectively, which were higher than in the negative control group (P < 0.01).
EZH2 gene silencing effectively suppressed the proliferation, invasion, and
migration abilities of human bladder cancer cells, promoting apoptosis.

PMID: 25501205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Apr;135(4):960-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.479. Epub 2014
Dec 11.

miR-214 as a key hub that controls cancer networks: small player, multiple
functions.

Penna E(1), Orso F(2), Taverna D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), Torino, Italy [2] Department of
Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Torino, Italy. (2)1] Molecular
Biotechnology Center (MBC), Torino, Italy [2] Department of Molecular
Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Torino, Italy [3] Center for Molecular Systems
Biology, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

MicroRNAs are short regulatory RNAs that are able to post-transcriptionally
modulate gene expression and that have crucial roles in the control of
physiological and pathological processes including cancer onset, growth, and
progression. miR-214, located inside the sequence of the long noncoding Dmn3os
transcript, contributes to the regulation of normal and cancer cell biology, even
if it operates in a context-dependent and sometimes contradictory manner. miR-214
is deregulated in several human tumors including melanoma, breast, ovarian,
gastric, and hepatocellular carcinomas. miR-214's pleiotropic and tumor-specific 
contribution to various cancer formation and progression hallmarks is achieved
via its several target genes. In fact, miR-214 behaves as a key hub by
coordinating fundamental signaling networks such as PTEN/AKT, ß-catenin, and
tyrosine kinase receptor pathways. Interestingly, miR-214 also regulates the
levels of crucial gene expression modulators: the epigenetic repressor Ezh2,
"genome guardian" p53, transcription factors TFAP2, and another microRNA,
miR-148b. Thus, miR-214 seems to have essential roles in coordinating tumor
proliferation, stemness, angiogenesis, invasiveness, extravasation, metastasis,
resistance to chemotherapy, and microenvironment. The sum of current literature
reports suggests that miR-214 is a molecular hub involved in the control of
cancer networks and, as such, could be a potential diagnostic/prognostic
biomarker and target for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 25501033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Hepatol. 2015 May;62(5):1100-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.11.040. Epub 2014 Dec
9.

A CCRK-EZH2 epigenetic circuitry drives hepatocarcinogenesis and associates with 
tumor recurrence and poor survival of patients.

Feng H(1), Yu Z(2), Tian Y(3), Lee YY(3), Li MS(4), Go MY(3), Cheung YS(5), Lai
PB(6), Chan AM(4), To KF(7), Chan HL(8), Sung JJ(2), Cheng AS(9).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China; State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive
Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (3)Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)School of
Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. 
(6)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive Disease, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Department of Surgery, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (7)State Key Laboratory of
Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (8)State Key Laboratory of
Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (9)School of Biomedical Sciences, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory of
Digestive Disease and Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Aberrant chromatin modification is a key feature of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which is characterized by strong sexual
dimorphism. Both enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and cell cycle-related kinase
(CCRK) contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis, yet whether the two oncogenic factors 
have functional crosstalk is unknown.
METHODS: Cellular proliferation and tumorigenicity upon transgenic expression and
RNA interference were determined by colony formation and soft agar assays,
xenograft, orthotopic and diethylnitrosamine-induced HCC models. Gene regulation 
was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, site-directed mutagenesis,
luciferase reporter, co-immunoprecipitation and expression analyses. Protein
levels in clinical specimens were correlated with clinicopathological parameters 
and patient survival rates.
RESULTS: Ectopic CCRK expression in immortalized human liver cells increased EZH2
and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) to stimulate proliferation and
tumor formation. Conversely, knockdown of CCRK reduced EZH2/H3K27me3 levels and
decreased HCC cell growth, which could be rescued by EZH2 over-expression.
Mechanistically, GSK-3ß phosphorylation by CCRK activated a
ß-catenin/TCF/E2F1/EZH2 transcriptional feedback loop to epigenetically enhance
androgen receptor (AR) signaling. Simultaneously, the phosphorylation of AKT/EZH2
by CCRK facilitated the co-occupancy of CCRK promoter by EZH2-AR and its
subsequent transcriptional activation, thus forming a self-reinforcing circuitry.
Lentiviral-mediated knockdown of CCRK, which abrogated the
phosphorylation-transcriptional network, prevented diethylnitrosamine-induced
tumorigenicity. More importantly, the hyperactivation of the CCRK-EZH2 circuitry 
in human HCCs correlated with tumor recurrence and poor survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings uncover an epigenetic vicious cycle in
hepatocarcinogenesis that operates through reciprocal regulation of CCRK and
EZH2, providing novel therapeutic strategy for HCC.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Neoplasia. 2014 Dec;16(12):1059-69. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.011.

The transcriptional repressor ZBTB4 regulates EZH2 through a
MicroRNA-ZBTB4-specificity protein signaling axis.

Yang WS(1), Chadalapaka G(2), Cho SG(3), Lee SO(4), Jin UH(4), Jutooru I(2), Choi
K(5), Leung YK(1), Ho SM(1), Safe S(6), Kim K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45267. (2)Department of Veterinary
Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843. (3)Department of Preventive Medicine, College of
Korean Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi, Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030. (5)Division of
Experimental Biology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229. (6)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, 4466 Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843; Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science
Center, 2121 W. Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030.

ZBTB4 is a transcriptional repressor and examination of publically-available
microarray data sets demonstrated an inverse relationship in the prognostic value
and expression of ZBTB4 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in tumors from
breast cancer patients. The possibility of functional interactions between EZH2
and ZBTB4 was investigated in breast cancer cells and the results showed that
EZH2 is directly suppressed by ZBTB4 which in turn is regulated (suppressed) by
miR-106b and other paralogues from the miR-17-92, miR-106b-25 and miR-106a-363
clusters that are highly expressed in breast and other tumors. ZBTB4 also acts a 
suppressor of specificity protein (Sp) transcription factors Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4,
and RNA interference studies show that Sp proteins are required for EZH2
expression. The prediction analysis results from breast cancer patient array data
sets confirm an association of Sp1-dependent EZH2 gene signature with decreased
survival of breast cancer patients. Disruption of oncogenic miR-ZBTB4 signaling
axis by anticancer agent such as betulinic acid that induce down-regulation of Sp
proteins in breast cancer cells resulted in inhibition of tumor growth and
colonization of breast cancer cells in a mouse model. Thus, EZH2 is reciprocally 
regulated by a novel signaling network consisting of Sp proteins, oncogenic miRs 
and ZBTB4, and modulation of this gene network is a novel therapeutic approach
for treatment of breast cancer and possibly other cancers.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4309261
PMID: 25499219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Adv Biol Regul. 2015 May;58:28-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jbior.2014.11.002. Epub 2014
Nov 20.

Genetic and epigenetic pathways in myelodysplastic syndromes: A brief overview.

Jhanwar SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
Jhanwars@mskcc.org.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a highly heterogenous group of hematopoietic 
tumors, mainly due to variable clinical features and diverse set of cytogenetic, 
molecular genetic and epigenetic lesions. The major clinical features of MDS are 
ineffective hematopoiesis, peripheral cytopenias, and an increased risk of
transformation to acute myeloid leukemias, which in turn is most likely
determined by specific genetic abnormalities and other presenting hematologic
features. The risk of developing MDS is relatively higher in some genetic
syndromes such as Fanconi anemia and receipt of chemotherapy and radiation
treatment. In recent years a significant progress has occurred and a vast
literatures has become available including the spectrum of cytogenetic
abnormalities, gene mutations relating to RNA splicing machinery, epigenetic
regulation of gene expression and signaling pathways associated with MDS
pathogenesis, which have provided opportunities to understand the molecular
mechanisms as well as employ targeted therapeutic approaches to treat MDS. The
cytogenetic abnormalities detected in MDS varies from a single abnormality to
complex karyotype not easily amenable to conventional cytogenetic analysis. In
such cases, array based high resolution genomic analysis detected abnormalities, 
which are diagnostic as well as prognostic. The most common driver gene mutations
detected in patients with MDS include RNA splicing (SF3B1,SRSF2,U2F1,ZRSR2), DNA 
methylation (TET2,DNMT3A,IDH1/IDH2), chromatin modification (ASXL1,EZH2),
transcription regulation (RUNX1,BCOR) and DNA repair control p53. A small subset 
of MDS arise due to deregulation of RAS pathway, mainly due to NRAS/KRAS/NF1
mutations. Identification of these mutations and pathways have provided
opportunities for oncologists to target these patients with specific therapies.
Several drugs which either target the spliceosome, oncogenic RAS signaling, or
hypomethylating agents have been employed to successfully treat MDS patients.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25499150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. BMC Cancer. 2014 Dec 10;14:930. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-930.

MicroRNA in prostate cancer: functional importance and potential as circulating
biomarkers.

Jackson BL(1), Grabowska A, Ratan HL.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Biology, University of Nottingham, Queens Medical Centre, Derby
Road, Nottingham NG7 2UH, England. mrbljackson@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: This non-systematic review article aims to summarise the progress
made in understanding the functional consequences of microRNA (miRNA)
dysregulation in prostate cancer development, and the identification of potential
miRNA targets as serum biomarkers for diagnosis or disease stratification.
RESULTS: A number of miRNAs have been shown to influence key cellular processes
involved in prostate tumourigenesis, including apoptosis-avoidance, cell
proliferation and migration and the androgen signalling pathway. An overlapping
group of miRNAs have shown differential expression in the serum of patients with 
prostate cancer of varying stages compared with unaffected individuals. The
majority of studies thus far however, involve small numbers of patients and have 
shown variable and occasionally conflicting results
CONCLUSION: MiRNAs show promise as potential circulating biomarkers in prostate
cancer, but larger prospective studies are required to validate particular
targets and better define their clinical utility.

PMCID: PMC4295407
PMID: 25496077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Future Med Chem. 2014;6(17):1943-65. doi: 10.4155/fmc.14.123.

Histone methylases as novel drug targets: developing inhibitors of EZH2.

Baugé C(1), Bazille C, Girard N, Lhuissier E, Boumediene K.

Author information: 
(1)Normandie University, France.

Post-translational modifications of histones (so-called epigenetic modifications)
play a major role in transcriptional control and normal development, and are
tightly regulated. Disruption of their control is a frequent event in disease. In
particular, the methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27), induced by the
methylase EZH2, emerges as a key control of gene expression and a major regulator
of cell physiology. The identification of driver mutations in EZH2 has already
led to new prognostic and therapeutic advances, and new classes of potent and
specific inhibitors for EZH2 show promising results in preclinical trials. This
review examines the roles of histone lysine methylases and demethylases in cells 
and focuses on the recent knowledge and developments about EZH2.

PMID: 25495986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2015 Jan;19(1):30-6. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2014.0245.

miR-26a promoted by interferon-alpha inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma
proliferation and migration by blocking EZH2.

Wang G(1), Sun Y, He Y, Ji C, Hu B, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Oncology, Jinan Central Hospital, Shandong University , Jinan,
People's Republic of China .

BACKGROUNDS: Interferon (IFN)-a has been used to treat hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Here, we report that the IFN-a-induced microRNA-26a (miR-26a) can inhibit 
HCC proliferation and invasion by suppressing enhancer of zeste homologue 2
(EZH2) expression in tumor cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: First, the miR-26a transcription level was quantified by
real-time quantitative PCR in the HCC specimens from IFN-a-treated HCC patients. 
Next, we transfected HepG2 cells with miR-26a mimics and miR control, and then we
investigated the influence of miR-26a mimic transfection on HepG2 cell
proliferation and invasion.
RESULTS: It was shown that there was increased miR-26a accompanied with
downregulated EZH2 expression in the HCC specimens, and EZH2 mRNA levels were
inversely correlated with miR-26a expression. There was a dose-response
correlation between the IFN-a dosage and EZH2 expression. In addition, the
miR-26a mimic transfection decreased the EZH2 expression level significantly in
the transfected HepG2 cells and inhibited HepG2 cell proliferation and invasion
effectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that miR-26a exerts growth inhibition in HCC and
that its inhibitory effect is mediated briefly by blocking EZH2 expression.

PMID: 25494962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 10;9(12):e111840. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111840.
eCollection 2014.

Synergistic Anti-Tumor Activity of EZH2 Inhibitors and Glucocorticoid Receptor
Agonists in Models of Germinal Center Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas.

Knutson SK(1), Warholic NM(1), Johnston LD(1), Klaus CR(1), Wigle TJ(1),
Iwanowicz D(1), Littlefield BA(2), Porter-Scott M(1), Smith JJ(1), Moyer MP(1),
Copeland RA(1), Pollock RM(1), Kuntz KW(1), Raimondi A(1), Keilhack H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, Epizyme Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America. (2)Oncology, Eisai Inc., Andover, Massachusetts, United States
of America.

Patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) are treated today with a cocktail of
drugs referred to as CHOP (Cyclophosphamide, Hydroxyldaunorubicin, Oncovin, and
Prednisone). Subsets of patients with NHL of germinal center origin bear
oncogenic mutations in the EZH2 histone methyltransferase. Clinical testing of
the EZH2 inhibitor EPZ-6438 has recently begun in patients. We report here that
combining EPZ-6438 with CHOP in preclinical cell culture and mouse models results
in dramatic synergy for cell killing in EZH2 mutant germinal center NHL cells.
Surprisingly, we observe that much of this synergy is due to Prednisolone - a
glucocorticoid receptor agonist (GRag) component of CHOP. Dramatic synergy was
observed when EPZ-6438 is combined with Prednisolone alone, and a similar effect 
was observed with Dexamethasone, another GRag. Remarkably, the anti-proliferative
effect of the EPZ-6438+GRag combination extends beyond EZH2 mutant-bearing cells 
to more generally impact germinal center NHL. These preclinical data reveal an
unanticipated biological intersection between GR-mediated gene regulation and
EZH2-mediated chromatin remodeling. The data also suggest the possibility of a
significant and practical benefit of combining EZH2 inhibitors and GRag that
warrants further investigation in a clinical setting.

PMCID: PMC4262195
PMID: 25493630  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


477. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 20;34(34):4519-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.386. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Role of bacterial infection in the epigenetic regulation of Wnt antagonist WIF1
by PRC2 protein EZH2.

Roy BC(1), Subramaniam D(1), Ahmed I(1), Jala VR(2), Hester CM(1), Greiner KA(1),
Haribabu B(2), Anant S(1,)(3), Umar S(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Integrative Physiology and Family Medicine
Research Division, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.
(2)James Graham Brown Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA. (3)University of
Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

The enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2) represses gene transcription through
histone H3 lysine-27-trimethylation (H3K27me3). Citrobacter rodentium (CR)
promotes crypt hyperplasia and tumorigenesis by aberrantly regulating
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. We aimed at investigating EZH2's role in epigenetically 
regulating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling following bacterial infection. NIH:Swiss
outbred and Apc(Min/+) mice were infected with CR (10(8)<U+2009>CFU);
BLT1(-/-)Apc(Min/+) mice, azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-treated
mice and de-identified human adenocarcinoma samples were the models of colon
cancer. Following infection with wild-type but not mutant CR, elevated EZH2
levels in the crypt at days 6 and 12 (peak hyperplasia) coincided with increases 
in H3K27me3 and ß-catenin levels, respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed EZH2 and H3K27me3's occupancy on WIF1 (Wnt inhibitory factor 1) promoter
resulting in reduced WIF1 mRNA and protein expression. Following EZH2 knockdown
via small interfering RNA or EZH2-inhibitor deazaneplanocin A (Dznep) either
alone or in combination with histone deacetylase inhibitor suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid, WIF1 promoter activity increased significantly while the
overexpression of EZH2 attenuated WIF1 reporter activity. Ectopic overexpression 
of SET domain mutant (F681Y) almost completely rescued WIF1 reporter activity and
partially rescued WIF1 protein levels, whereas H3K27me3 levels were significantly
attenuated suggesting that an intact methyltransferases activity is required for 
EZH2-dependent effects. Interestingly, although ß-catenin levels were lower in
EZH2-knocked down cells, F681Y mutants exhibited only partial reduction in
ß-catenin levels. Besides EZH2, increases in miR-203 expression in the crypts at 
days 6 and 12 post infection correlated with reduced levels of its target WIF1;
overexpression of miR-203 in primary colonocytes decreased WIF1 mRNA and protein 
levels. Elevated levels of EZH2 and ß-catenin with concomitant decrease in WIF1
expression in the polyps of CR-infected Apc(Min/+) mice paralleled changes
recorded in BLT1(-/-)Apc(Min/+), AOM/DSS and human adenocarcinomas. Thus,
EZH2-induced downregulation of WIF1 expression may partially regulate
Wnt/ß-catenin-dependent crypt hyperplasia in response to CR infection.

PMCID: PMC4459936
PMID: 25486432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Nat Genet. 2015 Jan;47(1):22-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.3165. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

BAZ2A (TIP5) is involved in epigenetic alterations in prostate cancer and its
overexpression predicts disease recurrence.

Gu L(1), Frommel SC(2), Oakes CC(3), Simon R(4), Grupp K(4), Gerig CY(5), Bär
D(5), Robinson MD(6), Baer C(3), Weiss M(3), Gu Z(7), Schapira M(8), Kuner R(9), 
Sültmann H(9), Provenzano M(10); ICGC Project on Early Onset Prostate Cancer,
Yaspo ML(11), Brors B(7), Korbel J(12), Schlomm T(13), Sauter G(4), Eils R(14),
Plass C(3), Santoro R(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. [2] Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)1] Institute of
Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. [2] Molecular Life Science Program, Life Science Zurich Graduate
School, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Division of Epigenomics and
Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, 
Germany. (5)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (6)1] Institute of Molecular Life
Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. [2] Swiss Institute of
Bioinformatics (SIB), University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (7)Division of
Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. (8)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (9)Unit of Cancer Genome Research, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center of Tumour Diseases, Heidelberg,
Germany. (10)Oncology Research Unit, Division of Urology, University Hospital of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (11)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics,
Berlin, Germany. (12)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany. (13)Martini Clinic, Prostate Cancer Center,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (14)1] Division of
Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany. [2] Department for Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics, Institute for
Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology (IPMB) and BioQuant, Heidelberg University, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Prostate cancer is driven by a combination of genetic and/or epigenetic
alterations. Epigenetic alterations are frequently observed in all human cancers,
yet how aberrant epigenetic signatures are established is poorly understood. Here
we show that the gene encoding BAZ2A (TIP5), a factor previously implicated in
epigenetic rRNA gene silencing, is overexpressed in prostate cancer and is
paradoxically involved in maintaining prostate cancer cell growth, a feature
specific to cancer cells. BAZ2A regulates numerous protein-coding genes and
directly interacts with EZH2 to maintain epigenetic silencing at genes repressed 
in metastasis. BAZ2A overexpression is tightly associated with a molecular
subtype displaying a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). Finally, high BAZ2A 
levels serve as an independent predictor of biochemical recurrence in a cohort of
7,682 individuals with prostate cancer. This work identifies a new aberrant role 
for the epigenetic regulator BAZ2A, which can also serve as a useful marker for
metastatic potential in prostate cancer.

PMID: 25485837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Neurooncol. 2015 Feb;121(3):489-97. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1675-z. Epub 2014
Dec 6.

Altered global histone-trimethylation code and H3F3A-ATRX mutation in pediatric
GBM.

Pathak P(1), Jha P, Purkait S, Sharma V, Suri V, Sharma MC, Faruq M, Suri A,
Sarkar C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New 
Delhi, India.

Mutations in H3.3-ATRX-DAXX chromatin remodeling pathway have been reported in
pediatric GBMs. H3.3 (H3F3A) mutations may affect transcriptional regulation by
altered global histone-methylation. Therefore, we analyzed yet partly understood 
global histone code (H3K-4/9/27/36) trimethylation pattern in H3F3A-ATRX mutants 
and wild-type. H3F3A, HIST1H3B, IDH1, ATRX, DAXX and Tp53 mutations were
identified by sequencing/immunohistochemistry in 27 pediatric GBMs. Global
histone-methylation H3K-4/9/27/36me3 and Polycomb-protein EZH2 expression were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. H3F3A-ATRX mutation was observed in 66.7 %
(18/27) of pediatric GBMs. K27M and G34R-H3F3A mutations were found in 37 %
(10/27) and 14.8 % (4/27) patients respectively. G34V-H3F3A, HIST1H3B and IDH1
mutations were absent. Notably, commonest global histone-methylation mark lost
was H3K27me3 (17/25, 68 %) followed by H3K4me3 (45.5 %, 10/22) and H3K9me3 (18.2 
%, 4/22). Global H3K36me3 showed no loss. Most significant observation was loss
of one or more histone-trimethylation mark in 80 % (20/25) pediatric GBMs.
Notably, simultaneous loss of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 were present in 7/22 (31.8 %) 
of pediatric GBMs. Low expression of EZH2 was found in 12/24 (50 %) of cases.
However no significant correlation of loss of histone-marks or EZH2 expression
with H3F3A-ATRX mutants (loss of at least one histone-marks in 87.5 % (14/16)
cases) versus wild-types (loss of at least one histone-marks in 75 % (6/8) cases)
was seen. The present study highlights for the first time combinatorial loss of
one or more histone-trimethylation marks associated with majority of pediatric
GBMs and the finding suggests significant role of histone-code in the molecular
biology that underlies pediatric GBMs. Hence therapies for patients with
particular combinations of histone modifications present opportunity to design
innovative patient-tailored treatment protocols.

PMID: 25479829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Front Immunol. 2014 Nov 19;5:596. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00596. eCollection
2014.

Regulation of germinal center, B-cell memory, and plasma cell formation by
histone modifiers.

Good-Jacobson KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research ,
Parkville, VIC , Australia ; Department of Medical Biology, University of
Melbourne , Parkville, VIC , Australia.

Understanding the regulation of antibody production and B-cell memory formation
and function is core to finding new treatments for B-cell-derived cancers,
antibody-mediated autoimmune disorders, and immunodeficiencies. Progression from 
a small number of antigen-specific B-cells to the production of a large number of
antibody-secreting cells is tightly regulated. Although much progress has been
made in revealing the transcriptional regulation of B-cell differentiation that
occurs during humoral immune responses, there are still many questions that
remain unanswered. Recent work on the expression and roles of histone modifiers
in lymphocytes has begun to shed light on this additional level of regulation.
This review will discuss the recent advancements in understanding how humoral
immune responses, in particular germinal centers and memory cells, are modulated 
by histone modifiers.

PMCID: PMC4237133
PMID: 25477884  [PubMed]



1. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):140-8. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.588. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

Comprehensive validation of published immunohistochemical prognostic biomarkers
of prostate cancer -what has gone wrong? A blueprint for the way forward in
biomarker studies.

Huber F(1), Montani M(2), Sulser T(3), Jaggi R(4), Wild P(1), Moch H(1),
Gevensleben H(5), Schmid M(5), Wyder S(4), Kristiansen G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Urology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. (4)Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland. (5)Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology,
Bonn, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Treatment planning of localised prostate cancer remains challenging. 
Besides conventional parameters, a wealth of prognostic biomarkers has been
proposed so far. None of which, however, have successfully been implemented in a 
routine setting so far. The aim of our study was to systematically verify a set
of published prognostic markers for prostate cancer.
METHODS: Following an in-depth PubMed search, 28 markers were selected that have 
been proposed as multivariate prognostic markers for primary prostate cancer.
Their prognostic validity was examined in a radical prostatectomy cohort of 238
patients with a median follow-up of 60 months and biochemical progression as
endpoint of the analysis. Immunohistochemical evaluation was performed using
previously published cut-off values, but allowing for optimisation if necessary. 
Univariate and multivariate Cox regression were used to determine the prognostic 
value of biomarkers included in this study.
RESULTS: Despite the application of various cut-offs in the analysis, only four
(14%) markers were verified as independently prognostic (AKT1, stromal AR, EZH2, 
and PSMA) for PSA relapse following radical prostatectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Apparently, many immunohistochemistry-based studies on prognostic
markers seem to be over-optimistic. Codes of best practice, such as the REMARK
guidelines, may facilitate the performance of conclusive and transparent future
studies.

PMCID: PMC4453620
PMID: 25422912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1238:677-88. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_35.

Recent progress in the discovery of epigenetic inhibitors for the treatment of
cancer.

Verma SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 1250 South Collegeville Road,
Collegeville, PA, 19426, USA, sharad.k.verma@gsk.com.

Epigenetics investigates heritable changes in gene transcription that do not
involve a change in DNA sequence, and an increased understanding in the role of
epigenetic misregulation as a key contributor to cancer has triggered the
development of epigenetic targeted cancer therapies. Among these include efforts 
around a class of enzymes known as histone methyltransferases (HMTs). The level
of interest in the development of HMT inhibitors as a class of anticancer agents 
has significantly grown beyond academic settings, and in the last 5 years whole
research groups from biotech and big pharma have been dedicated to this area.
There are now multiple reports describing small-molecule HMT inhibitors,
including chemical probes and drug candidates entering the clinic as
first-in-class agents. Recent progress in this emerging area is the topic of this
chapter.

PMID: 25421686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Anticancer Drugs. 2015 Mar;26(3):301-11. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000181.

Analysis of the antiproliferative effects of 3-deazaneoplanocin A in combination 
with standard anticancer agents in rhabdoid tumor cell lines.

Unland R(1), Borchardt C, Clemens D, Kool M, Dirksen U, Frühwald MC.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Münster bDepartment of General and Visceral Surgery, University Hospital
of Münster, Münster cDivision of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research 
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg dSwabian Suabian Children's Cancer Center, Children's
Hospital Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.

Rhabdoid tumors (RTs) are highly aggressive pediatric malignancies with a rather 
poor prognosis. New therapeutic approaches and optimization of already
established treatment protocols are urgently needed. The histone
methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is highly overexpressed in
RTs and associated strongly with epigenetic silencing in cancer. EZH2 is involved
in aggressive cell growth and stem cell maintenance. Thus, EZH2 is an attractive 
therapeutic target in RTs. The aim of the study presented here was to analyze the
effects of a pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 alone and in combination with
other anticancer drugs on RTs cells in vitro. The antitumor activity of the
S-adenosyl-homocysteine-hydrolase inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) alone and
in combination with conventional cytostatic drugs (doxorubicin, etoposide) or
epigenetic active compounds [5-Aza-CdR, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA)]
was assessed by MTT cell proliferation assays on three RT cell lines (A204, BT16,
G401). Combinatorial treatment with DZNep synergistically and significantly
enhanced the antiproliferative activity of etoposide, 5-Aza-CdR, and SAHA. In
functional analyses, pretreatment with DZNep significantly increased the effects 
of 5-Aza-CdR and SAHA on apoptosis, cell cycle progression, and clonogenicity.
Microarray analyses following sequential treatment with DZNep and 5-Aza-CdR or
SAHA showed changes in global gene expression affecting apoptosis, neuronal
development, and metabolic processes. In-vitro analyses presented here show that 
pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 synergistically affects the antitumor activity
of the epigenetic active compounds 5-Aza-CdR and SAHA. Sequential treatment with 
these drugs combined with DZNep may represent a new therapeutic approach in RTs.

PMID: 25415657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mod Pathol. 2015 May;28(5):706-14. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.160. Epub 2014 Nov
21.

Next-generation sequencing of acute myeloid leukemia identifies the significance 
of TP53, U2AF1, ASXL1, and TET2 mutations.

Ohgami RS(1), Ma L(1), Merker JD(1), Gotlib JR(2), Schrijver I(1), Zehnder JL(3),
Arber DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA,
USA. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University
Medical Center, Stanford, CA, USA. (3)1] Department of Pathology, Stanford
University Medical Center, Stanford, CA, USA [2] Division of Hematology,
Department of Medicine, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA, USA.

We assessed the frequency and clinicopathologic significance of 19 genes
currently identified as significantly mutated in myeloid neoplasms, RUNX1, ASXL1,
TET2, CEBPA, IDH1, IDH2, DNMT3A, FLT3, NPM1, TP53, NRAS, EZH2, CBL, U2AF1, SF3B1,
SRSF2, JAK2, CSF3R, and SETBP1, across 93 cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
using capture target enrichment and next-generation sequencing. Of these cases,
79% showed at least one nonsynonymous mutation, and cases of AML with recurrent
genetic abnormalities showed a lower frequency of mutations versus AML with
myelodysplasia-related changes (P<0.001). Mutational analysis further
demonstrated that TP53 mutations are associated with complex karyotype AML,
whereas ASXL1 and U2AF1 mutations are associated with AML with
myelodysplasia-related changes. Furthermore, U2AF1 mutations were specifically
associated with trilineage morphologic dysplasia. Univariate analysis
demonstrated that U2AF1 and TP53 mutations are associated with absence of
clinical remission, poor overall survival (OS), and poor disease-free survival
(DFS; P<0.0001), whereas TET2 and ASXL1 mutations are associated with poor OS
(P<0.03). In multivariate analysis, U2AF1 and TP53 mutations retained independent
prognostic significance in OS and DFS, respectively. Our results demonstrate
unique relationships between mutations in AML, clinicopathologic prognosis,
subtype categorization, and morphologic dysplasia.

PMID: 25412851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biomol Screen. 2015 Feb;20(2):190-201. doi: 10.1177/1087057114559668. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

Quantification of histone H3 Lys27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) by high-throughput
microscopy enables cellular large-scale screening for small-molecule EZH2
inhibitors.

Luense S(1), Denner P(1), Fernández-Montalván A(1), Hartung I(2), Husemann M(1), 
Stresemann C(3), Prechtl S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lead Discovery Berlin-Screening, Global Drug Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG,
Berlin, Germany. (2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry Berlin, Medicinal Chemistry
I, Microbiological Chemistry, Global Drug Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin,
Germany. (3)Department of Oncology, Chromatin Modulation and Oncogenomics, Global
Drug Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany. (4)Lead Discovery
Berlin-Screening, Global Drug Discovery, Bayer Pharma AG, Berlin, Germany
stefan.prechtl@bayer.com.

EZH2 inhibition can decrease global histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) and thereby reactivates silenced tumor suppressor genes. Inhibition of
EZH2 is regarded as an option for therapeutic cancer intervention. To identify
novel small-molecule (SMOL) inhibitors of EZH2 in drug discovery, trustworthy
cellular assays amenable for phenotypic high-throughput screening (HTS) are
crucial. We describe a reliable approach that quantifies changes in global levels
of histone modification marks using high-content analysis (HCA). The approach was
validated in different cell lines by using small interfering RNA and SMOL
inhibitors. By automation and miniaturization from a 384-well to 1536-well plate,
we demonstrated its utility in conducting phenotypic HTS campaigns and assessing 
structure-activity relationships (SAR). This assay enables screening of SMOL EZH2
inhibitors and can advance the mechanistic understanding of H3K27me3 suppression,
which is crucial with regard to epigenetic therapy. We observed that a decrease
in global H3K27me3, induced by EZH2 inhibition, comprises two distinct
mechanisms: (1) inhibition of de novo DNA methylation and (II) inhibition of
dynamic, replication-independent H3K27me3 turnover. This report describes an HCA 
assay for primary HTS to identify, profile, and optimize cellular active SMOL
inhibitors targeting histone methyltransferases, which could benefit epigenetic
drug discovery.

© 2014 Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening.

PMCID: PMC4361481
PMID: 25409661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):1924-5. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.987770. Epub
2015 Feb 14.

EZH2: a potential new target in T-cell lymphoma?

Giulino-Roth L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Weill
Cornell Medical College , New York, NY , USA.

Comment on
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):2087-91.

PMID: 25407652  [PubMed - in process]


7. Curr Opin Oncol. 2015 Jan;27(1):57-63. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000151.

Gain-of-function mutation of chromatin regulators as a tumorigenic mechanism and 
an opportunity for therapeutic intervention.

Shen C(1), Vakoc CR.

Author information: 
(1)aCold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York bMolecular and
Cellular Biology Program, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Somatic gain-of-function mutations that drive cancer
pathogenesis are well established opportunities for therapeutic intervention, as 
demonstrated by the clinical efficacy of kinase inhibitors in kinase-mutant
malignancies. Here, we discuss the recently discovered gain-of-function mutations
in chromatin-regulatory machineries that promote the pathogenesis of cancer. The 
current understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms and the therapeutic 
potential for direct chemical inhibition will be reviewed.
RECENT FINDINGS: Point mutations that increase the catalytic activity of EZH2 and
NSD2 histone methyltransferases are found in distinct subsets of B-cell
neoplasms, which promote cell transformation by elevating the global level of
H3K27 tri-methylation or H3K36 di-methylation, respectively. In addition,
mutations in histone H3 have been identified in certain pediatric cancers which
cause reprogramming of H3K27 and H3K36 methylation by interfering with the
histone methyltransferase activity. Finally, chromosomal translocations involving
chromatin regulator genes can lead to the formation of fusion oncoproteins that
directly modify chromatin as their mechanism of action.
SUMMARY: Although relatively rare in aggregate, gain-of-function mutations in
chromatin regulators represent compelling therapeutic targets in genetically
defined subsets of cancer patients. However, a broader clinical impact for
epigenetic therapies in oncology will require an increased understanding of how
nonmutated chromatin regulators function as cancer-specific dependencies.

PMCID: PMC4355016
PMID: 25402979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6662-70. eCollection 2014.

Inhibition of EZH2 reverses chemotherapeutic drug TMZ chemosensitivity in
glioblastoma.

Fan TY(1), Wang H(2), Xiang P(3), Liu YW(2), Li HZ(2), Lei BX(2), Yu M(2), Qi
ST(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nan-Fang Hospital of Southern Medical University
Guangzhou 510515, P.R. China ; Department of Neurosurgery, Chang-Sha Central
Hospital Changsha 410004, Hunan, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery,
Nan-Fang Hospital of Southern Medical University Guangzhou 510515, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Chang-Sha Central Hospital Changsha 410004, Hunan,
P.R. China.

Glioblastoma remains among the most devastating cancers with a median survival of
less than 15 months and virtually no survival beyond five years. Currently, the
treatment of glioma includes surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and
comprehensive treatment. Intrinsic or acquired resistance to TMZ, is one of the
greatest obstacles in successful GB treatment, and is thought to be influenced by
a variety of mechanisms. The EZH2 gene, which is expressed in various solid
tumors, can regulate gene transcription and promote the generation and
progression of tumors. Our aim was to investigate the relationship between EZH2
and multidrug-resistance of human glioblastoma cells. In this study, we
established TMZ-resistant U251 and U87 clones (U251/TMZ and U87/TMZ cells), which
expressed high level of EZH2. Using RNA interference, we demonstrated that the
downregulation of Ezh2 expression in U251/TMZ and U87/TMZ cells resulted in
apoptosis and a cell cycle arrest in the G1/S phase. Furthermore, the reduced
expression of Ezh2 altered the MDR, MRP and BCRP mRNA and protein levels. These
findings suggest that EZH2 plays an important part in the development of
multidrug resistance and may represent a novel therapeutic target for
multidrug-resistant glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4230130
PMID: 25400745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6543-50. eCollection 2014.

miR-101 suppresses tumor proliferation and migration, and induces apoptosis by
targeting EZH2 in esophageal cancer cells.

Lin C(1), Huang F(2), Li QZ(1), Zhang YJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Basic Medical Sciences, Xinjiang Medical University
Urumqi, China. (2)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital Of
Xinjiang Medical University Urumqi, China. (3)Department of Pathology, The Forth 
Affiliated Hospital Urumqi, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of miR-101 in the regulation of tumor proliferation,
invasion, apoptosis and to its target gene in human ESCC.
METHODS: The expression level of miR-101 in Eca109 cell line was determined by
real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). After transfected with miR-101 mimics 
and inhibitor, proliferation, migration and apoptosis in ESCC cell line (Eca109) 
were detected by MTT, cell wound healing assay and flow cytometry, respectively. 
The expression of EZH2 in Eca109 cell was examined by immunohistochemical
staining.
RESULTS: We found that miR-101 was significantly down-regulated in ESCC cell than
in matched normal esophageal epithelium cell. The expression level of miR-101 was
inversely correlated to EZH2 protein expression in ESCC cell. In Eca109 cells,
over-expression of miR-101 significantly inhibited the migration and invasion of 
ESCC cells, and promotes cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that decreased expression of miR-101 might
promote metastasis of human ESCC by inducing accumulation of EZH2 protein.

PMCID: PMC4230090
PMID: 25400732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):316-26. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-566018. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Mutant WT1 is associated with DNA hypermethylation of PRC2 targets in AML and
responds to EZH2 inhibition.

Sinha S(1), Thomas D(2), Yu L(2), Gentles AJ(3), Jung N(4), Corces-Zimmerman
MR(2), Chan SM(2), Reinisch A(2), Feinberg AP(4), Dill DL(1), Majeti R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; (2)Division
of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Cancer Institute, and Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA; (3)Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; and.
(4)Center for Epigenetics, Institute for Basic Biomedical Science, Johns Hopkins 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is associated with deregulation of DNA methylation; 
however, many cases do not bear mutations in known regulators of cytosine guanine
dinucleotide (CpG) methylation. We found that mutations in WT1, IDH2, and CEBPA
were strongly linked to DNA hypermethylation in AML using a novel integrative
analysis of The Cancer Genome Atlas data based on Boolean implications, if-then
rules that identify all individual CpG sites that are hypermethylated in the
presence of a mutation. Introduction of mutant WT1 (WT1mut) into wild-type AML
cells induced DNA hypermethylation, confirming mutant WT1 to be causally
associated with DNA hypermethylation. Methylated genes in WT1mut primary patient 
samples were highly enriched for polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) targets,
implicating PRC2 dysregulation in WT1mut leukemogenesis. We found that PRC2
target genes were aberrantly repressed in WT1mut AML, and that expression of
mutant WT1 in CD34(+) cord blood cells induced myeloid differentiation block.
Treatment of WT1mut AML cells with short hairpin RNA or pharmacologic
PRC2/enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) inhibitors promoted myeloid
differentiation, suggesting EZH2 inhibitors may be active in this AML subtype.
Our results highlight a strong association between mutant WT1 and DNA
hypermethylation in AML and demonstrate that Boolean implications can be used to 
decipher mutation-specific methylation patterns that may lead to therapeutic
insights.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4287638
PMID: 25398938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Blood. 2015 Jan 8;125(2):346-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-581082. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Selective inhibition of EZH2 and EZH1 enzymatic activity by a small molecule
suppresses MLL-rearranged leukemia.

Xu B(1), On DM(1), Ma A(2), Parton T(3), Konze KD(2), Pattenden SG(4), Allison
DF(1), Cai L(1), Rockowitz S(5), Liu S(6), Liu Y(7), Li F(8), Vedadi M(8), Frye
SV(9), Garcia BA(6), Zheng D(5), Jin J(2), Wang GG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC;
(2)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY; (3)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; (4)Center for Integrative
Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC; (5)Department of Genetics, and Departments of Neurology and
Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; (6)Epigenetics
Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; (7)Ansary Stem Cell Institute and
Department of Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY; and.
(8)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(9)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug
Discovery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC;

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and related EZH1 control gene expression and
promote tumorigenesis via methylating histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27). These
methyltransferases are ideal therapeutic targets due to their frequent
hyperactive mutations and overexpression found in cancer, including hematopoietic
malignancies. Here, we characterized a set of small molecules that allow
pharmacologic manipulation of EZH2 and EZH1, which include UNC1999, a selective
inhibitor of both enzymes, and UNC2400, an inactive analog compound useful for
assessment of off-target effect. UNC1999 suppresses global H3K27
trimethylation/dimethylation (H3K27me3/2) and inhibits growth of mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL)-rearranged leukemia cells. UNC1999-induced transcriptome
alterations overlap those following knockdown of embryonic ectoderm development, 
a common cofactor of EZH2 and EZH1, demonstrating UNC1999's on-target inhibition.
Mechanistically, UNC1999 preferentially affects distal regulatory elements such
as enhancers, leading to derepression of polycomb targets including Cdkn2a. Gene 
derepression correlates with a decrease in H3K27me3 and concurrent gain in H3K27 
acetylation. UNC2400 does not induce such effects. Oral administration of UNC1999
prolongs survival of a well-defined murine leukemia model bearing MLL-AF9.
Collectively, our study provides the detailed profiling for a set of chemicals to
manipulate EZH2 and EZH1 and establishes specific enzymatic inhibition of
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-EZH2 and PRC2-EZH1 by small-molecule
compounds as a novel therapeutics for MLL-rearranged leukemia.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4287641
PMID: 25395428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Oral Sci. 2014 Dec;6(4):205-11. doi: 10.1038/ijos.2014.60. Epub 2014 Nov
14.

Bivalent histone modifications during tooth development.

Zheng LW(1), Zhang BP(2), Xu RS(2), Xu X(2), Ye L(2), Zhou XD(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China [2] Department of Orthopedics, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, USA. (2)1] State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West
China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China [2] West China 
School of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Histone methylation is one of the most widely studied post-transcriptional
modifications. It is thought to be an important epigenetic event that is closely 
associated with cell fate determination and differentiation. To explore the
spatiotemporal expression of histone H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) epigenetic marks and methylation
or demethylation transferases in tooth organ development, we measured the
expression of SET7, EZH2, KDM5B and JMJD3 via immunohistochemistry and
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis in the first molar of
BALB/c mice embryos at E13.5, E15.5, E17.5, P0 and P3, respectively. We also
measured the expression of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 with immunofluorescence staining.
During murine tooth germ development, methylation or demethylation transferases
were expressed in a spatial-temporal manner. The bivalent modification
characterized by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 can be found during the tooth germ
development, as shown by immunofluorescence. The expression of SET7, EZH2 as
methylation transferases and KDM5B and JMJD3 as demethylation transferases
indicated accordingly with the expression of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 respectively to
some extent. The bivalent histone may play a critical role in tooth organ
development via the regulation of cell differentiation.

PMID: 25394593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Childs Nerv Syst. 2015 Jan;31(1):57-65. doi: 10.1007/s00381-014-2575-4. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

The role of resection alone in select children with intracranial ependymoma: the 
Canadian Pediatric Brain Tumour Consortium experience.

Ailon T(1), Dunham C, Carret AS, Tabori U, Mcneely PD, Zelcer S, Wilson B,
Lafay-Cousin L, Johnston D, Eisenstat DD, Silva M, Jabado N, Goddard KJ, Fryer C,
Hendson G, Hawkins C, Dunn S, Yip S, Singhal A, Hukin J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, British Columbia
Children's Hospital, Room K3-147, 4480 Oak Street, Vancouver, BC, V6H3 V4,
Canada.

PURPOSE: Gross total resection (GTR) of intracranial ependymoma is an accepted
goal. More controversial is radiotherapy deferral. This study reports on children
treated with gross total resection who did not receive upfront adjuvant
radiotherapy.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective review of children with intracranial
ependymoma in 12 Canadian centers. Patients who had GTR of their tumor and no
upfront radiotherapy were identified. Immunostaining was performed for Ki-67,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and EZH2 on archived tissue. The
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was performed and compared with those who had GTR 
followed by radiation.
RESULTS: Twenty-six children were identified treated with GTR alone at diagnosis;
12 posterior fossa ependymoma (PFE) WHO grade II, and 14 supratentorial
ependymoma (STE). Progression-free survival (PFS) in ependymoma treated with GTR 
alone at diagnosis was inferior in those with high Ki-67 or positive EZH2
immunostaining. Survival was inferior for patients less than 2 years old at
diagnosis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). Survival was comparable to PFE WHO grade II and STE who
had GTR followed by radiation (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.62). Five-year PFS and overall survival (OS)
of those treated with GTR alone were 60 and 70% respectively for PFE and 45 and
70% respectively for STE (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.2; 0.55).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that there is a subset of children with certain 
biologic features who, in the setting of a prospective clinical trial, might be
candidates for observation following GTR. Good risk factors for this approach
include age of 2 years or older, low Ki-67, and negative EZH2. If relapse occurs,
it may be confined to the primary site, allowing for possible salvage with GTR
followed by XRT.

PMID: 25391979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015;56(8):2408-15. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.983099. Epub 2015
Jan 21.

Epstein-Barr virus-associated T/natural killer-cell lymphoproliferative disorder 
in children and young adults has similar molecular signature to extranodal nasal 
natural killer/T-cell lymphoma but shows distinctive stem cell-like phenotype.

Ng SB(1,)(2,)(3), Ohshima K(4), Selvarajan V(1), Huang G(3), Choo SN(1), Miyoshi 
H(4), Shimizu N(5), Reghunathan R(3), Chua HC(6), Yeoh AE(6), Quah TC(6), Koh
LP(7), Tan PL(6), Chng WJ(2,)(3,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology , National University Cancer Institute of Singapore,
National University Health System , Singapore. (2)b Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine. (3)c Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of
Singapore , Singapore. (4)d Department of Pathology , Kurume University , Kurume 
, Japan. (5)e Department of Virology , Tokyo Medical and Dental University ,
Tokyo , Japan. (6)f Department of Pediatrics , National University Health System 
, Singapore. (7)g Department of Haematology-Oncology , National University Cancer
Institute of Singapore, National University Health System , Singapore.

We performed gene expression profiling in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated
T/natural killer (NK)-cell lymphoproliferative disorder in children and young
adults (TNKLPDC) in order to understand the molecular pathways deregulated in
this disease and compared it with nasal-type NK/T-cell lymphoma (NKTL). The
molecular and phenotypic signature of TNKLPDC is similar to NKTL, with
overexpression of p53, survivin and EZH2. Down-regulation of EZH2 in TNKLPDC cell
lines led to an increase in apoptosis and decrease in tumor viability, suggesting
that EZH2 may be important for the survival of TNKLPDC cells and hence
potentially a useful therapeutic target. Notably, our gene expression profiling
revealed a distinctive enrichment of stem cell related genes in TNKLPDC compared 
to NKTL. This was validated by a significantly higher expression of aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) in TNKLPDC cell lines compared to NKTL cell lines. The
novel discovery of cancer stem cell properties in TNKLPDC has potential
therapeutic implications in this group of disorders.

PMID: 25382618  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 13;34(33):4320-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.362. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Intravital imaging of SRF and Notch signalling identifies a key role for EZH2 in 
invasive melanoma cells.

Manning CS(1), Hooper S(1), Sahai EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Cell Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 
London, UK.

The acquisition of cell motility is an early step in melanoma metastasis. Here we
use intravital imaging of signalling reporter cell-lines combined with
genome-wide transcriptional analysis to define signalling pathways and genes
associated with melanoma metastasis. Intravital imaging revealed heterogeneous
cell behaviour in vivo: <10% of cells were motile and both singly moving cells
and streams of cells were observed. Motile melanoma cells had increased Notch-
and SRF-dependent transcription. Subsequent genome-wide analysis identified an
overlapping set of genes associated with high Notch and SRF activity. We
identified EZH2, a histone methyltransferase in the Polycomb repressive complex
2, as a regulator of these genes. Heterogeneity of EZH2 levels is observed in
melanoma models, and co-ordinated upregulation of genes positively regulated by
EZH2 is associated with melanoma metastasis. EZH2 was also identified as
regulating the amelanotic phenotype of motile cells in vivo by suppressing
expression of the P-glycoprotein Oca2. Analysis of patient samples confirmed an
inverse relationship between EZH2 levels and pigment. EZH2 targeting with siRNA
and chemical inhibition reduced invasion in mouse and human melanoma cell lines. 
The EZH2-regulated genes KIF2C and KIF22 are required for melanoma cell invasion 
and important for lung colonization. We propose that heterogeneity in EZH2 levels
leads to heterogeneous expression of a cohort of genes associated with motile
behaviour including KIF2C and KIF22. EZH2-dependent increased expression of these
genes promotes melanoma cell motility and early steps in metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4349503
PMID: 25381824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Cell Commun Signal. 2015 Mar;9(1):77-9. doi: 10.1007/s12079-014-0256-4. Epub
2014 Nov 9.

EZH2, the moderator in the discussion between methyltransferases at histone H3?

Cho Y(1), Swarnabala S, Lockey RF, Kolliputi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Morsani
College of Medicine, University of South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd.,
Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.

PMCID: PMC4414839
PMID: 25381642  [PubMed]


17. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e112384. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112384.
eCollection 2014.

Mutant MMP-9 and HGF gene transfer enhance resolution of CCl4-induced liver
fibrosis in rats: role of ASH1 and EZH2 methyltransferases repression.

Atta H(1), El-Rehany M(2), Hammam O(3), Abdel-Ghany H(2), Ramzy M(2), Roderfeld
M(4), Roeb E(4), Al-Hendy A(5), Raheim SA(2), Allam H(2), Marey H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, El-Minia, Egypt.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Minia University, El-Minia,
Egypt. (3)Department of Pathology, Theodor Bilharz Research Institute, Giza,
Egypt. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen,
Germany. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, 
Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) gene transfer inhibits liver fibrosis by
regulating aberrant cellular functions, while mutant matrix metalloproteinase-9
(mMMP-9) enhances matrix degradation by neutralizing the elevated tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1). It was shown that ASH1 and EZH2
methyltransferases are involved in development of liver fibrosis; however, their 
role in the resolution phase of liver fibrosis has not been investigated. This
study evaluated the role of ASH1 and EZH2 in two mechanistically different
therapeutic modalities, HGF and mMMP-9 gene transfer in CCl4 induced rat liver
fibrosis. Liver fibrosis was induced in rats with twice a week intraperitoneal
injection of CCl4 for 8 weeks. Adenovirus vectors encoding mMMP-9 or HGF genes
were injected through tail vein at weeks six and seven and were sacrificed one
week after the second injection. A healthy animal group was likewise injected
with saline to serve as a negative control. Rats treated with mMMP-9 showed
significantly lower fibrosis score, less Sirius red stained collagen area,
reduced hydroxyproline and ALT concentration, decreased transforming growth
factor beta 1 (TGF-ß1) mRNA and lower labeling indices of a smooth muscle actin
(a-SMA) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) stained cells compared with
HGF- or saline-treated rats. Furthermore, TIMP-1 protein expression in mMMP-9
group was markedly reduced compared with all fibrotic groups. ASH1 and EZH2
protein expression was significantly elevated in fibrotic liver and significantly
decreased in mMMP-9- and HGF-treated compared to saline-treated fibrotic livers
with further reduction in the mMMP-9 group.CONCLUSION: Gene transfer of mMMP-9
and HGF reduced liver fibrosis in rats. ASH1 and EZH2 methyltransferases are
significantly reduced in mMMP-9 and HGF treated rats which underlines the central
role of these enzymes during fibrogenesis. Future studies should evaluate the
role of selective pharmacologic inhibitors of ASH1 and EZH2 in resolution of
liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4224431
PMID: 25380300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):e7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1079. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Epidaurus: aggregation and integration analysis of prostate cancer epigenome.

Wang L(1), Huang H(2), Dougherty G(1), Zhao Y(2), Hossain A(1), Kocher JP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, MN 
55905, USA. (3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA kocher.jeanpierre@mayo.edu.

Integrative analyses of epigenetic data promise a deeper understanding of the
epigenome. Epidaurus is a bioinformatics tool used to effectively reveal
inter-dataset relevance and differences through data aggregation, integration and
visualization. In this study, we demonstrated the utility of Epidaurus in
validating hypotheses and generating novel biological insights. In particular, we
described the use of Epidaurus to (i) integrate epigenetic data from prostate
cancer cell lines to validate the activation function of EZH2 in
castration-resistant prostate cancer and to (ii) study the mechanism of androgen 
receptor (AR) binding deregulation induced by the knockdown of FOXA1. We found
that EZH2's noncanonical activation function was reaffirmed by its association
with active histone markers and the lack of association with repressive markers. 
More importantly, we revealed that the binding of AR was selectively reprogramed 
to promoter regions, leading to the up-regulation of hundreds of
cancer-associated genes including EGFR. The prebuilt epigenetic dataset from
commonly used cell lines (LNCaP, VCaP, LNCaP-Abl, MCF7, GM12878, K562, HeLa-S3,
A549, HePG2) makes Epidaurus a useful online resource for epigenetic research. As
standalone software, Epidaurus is specifically designed to process user
customized datasets with both efficiency and convenience.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333365
PMID: 25378314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Med Chem. 2014 Nov 26;57(22):9512-21. doi: 10.1021/jm501230c. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Astemizole arrests the proliferation of cancer cells by disrupting the EZH2-EED
interaction of polycomb repressive complex 2.

Kong X(1), Chen L, Jiao L, Jiang X, Lian F, Lu J, Zhu K, Du D, Liu J, Ding H,
Zhang N, Shen J, Zheng M, Chen K, Liu X, Jiang H, Luo C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences , Shanghai 201203 P. R. China.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) modulates the chromatin structure and
transcriptional repression by trimethylation lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3), 
a process that necessitates the protein-protein interaction (PPI) between the
catalytic subunit EZH2 and EED. Deregulated PRC2 is intimately involved in
tumorigenesis and progression, making it an invaluable target for epigenetic
cancer therapy. However, until now, there have been no reported small molecule
compounds targeting the EZH2-EED interactions. In the present study, we
identified astemizole, an FDA-approved drug, as a small molecule inhibitor of the
EZH2-EED interaction of PRC2. The disruption of the EZH2-EED interaction by
astemizole destabilizes the PRC2 complex and inhibits its methyltransferase
activity in cancer cells. Multiple lines of evidence have demonstrated that
astemizole arrests the proliferation of PRC2-driven lymphomas primarily by
disabling the PRC2 complex. Our findings demonstrate the chemical tractability of
the difficult PPI target by a small molecule compound, highlighting the
therapeutic promise for PRC2-driven human cancers via targeted destruction of the
EZH2-EED complex.

PMID: 25369470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2014 Oct 16;2:61. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2014.00061. eCollection
2014.

Cardio-miRNAs and onco-miRNAs: circulating miRNA-based diagnostics for
non-cancerous and cancerous diseases.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Omics Network, National Cancer Center Tokyo, Japan.

Cardiovascular diseases and cancers are the leading causes of morbidity and
mortality in the world. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that
primarily repress target mRNAs. Here, miR-24, miR-125b, miR-195, and miR-214 were
selected as representative cardio-miRs that are upregulated in human heart
failure. To bridge the gap between miRNA studies in cardiology and oncology, the 
targets and functions of these miRNAs in cardiovascular diseases and cancers will
be reviewed. ACVR1B, BCL2, BIM, eNOS, FGFR3, JPH2, MEN1, MYC, p16, and ST7L are
miR-24 targets that have been experimentally validated in human cells. ARID3B,
BAK1, BCL2, BMPR1B, ERBB2, FGFR2, IL6R, MUC1, SITR7, Smoothened, STAT3, TET2, and
TP53 are representative miR-125b targets. ACVR2A, BCL2, CCND1, E2F3, GLUT3, MYB, 
RAF1, VEGF, WEE1, and WNT7A are representative miR-195 targets. BCL2L2,
ß-catenin, BIM, CADM1, EZH2, FGFR1, NRAS, PTEN, TP53, and TWIST1 are
representative miR-214 targets. miR-125b is a good cardio-miR that protects
cardiomyocytes; miR-195 is a bad cardio-miR that elicits cardiomyopathy and heart
failure; miR-24 and miR-214 are bi-functional cardio-miRs. By contrast, miR-24,
miR-125b, miR-195, and miR-214 function as oncogenic or tumor suppressor miRNAs
in a cancer (sub)type-dependent manner. Circulating miR-24 is elevated in
diabetes, breast cancer and lung cancer. Circulating miR-195 is elevated in acute
myocardial infarction, breast cancer, prostate cancer and colorectal adenoma.
Circulating miR-125b and miR-214 are elevated in some cancers. Cardio-miRs and
onco-miRs bear some similarities in functions and circulation profiles. miRNAs
regulate WNT, FGF, Hedgehog and other signaling cascades that are involved in
orchestration of embryogenesis and homeostasis as well as pathogenesis of human
diseases. Because circulating miRNA profiles are modulated by genetic and
environmental factors and are dysregulated by genetic and epigenetic alterations 
in somatic cells, circulating miRNA association studies (CMASs) within several
thousands of cases each for common non-cancerous diseases and major cancers are
necessary for miRNA-based diagnostics.

PMCID: PMC4207049
PMID: 25364765  [PubMed]


21. Transfusion. 2015 Apr;55(4):864-74. doi: 10.1111/trf.12904. Epub 2014 Nov 2.

Ex vivo expansion of human mobilized peripheral blood stem cells using epigenetic
modifiers.

Saraf S(1,)(2), Araki H(1), Petro B(1), Park Y(3), Taioli S(1), Yoshinaga KG(1), 
Koca E(1), Rondelli D(1,)(3,)(2), Mahmud N(1,)(3,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (2)University of Illinois Cancer Center, Chicago, 
Illinois. (3)UI Hospital Stem Cell Laboratory, Blood & Marrow Transplant Program,
Chicago, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic modifications likely control the fate of hematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs). The chromatin-modifying agents (CMAs), 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine 
(5azaD) and trichostatin A (TSA), have previously been shown to expand HSCs from 
cord blood and marrow. Here we assessed whether CMA can also expand HSCs present 
in growth factor-mobilized human peripheral blood (MPB).
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: 5azaD and TSA were sequentially added to CD34+ MPB
cells in the presence of cytokines, and the cells were cultured for 9<U+2009>days.
RESULTS: After culture, a 3.6<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of CD34+CD90+ cells, a
10.1<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of primitive colony-forming unit (CFU)-mix, and a
2.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.5-fold expansion of long-term cobblestone-area-forming cells (CAFCs) was 
observed in 5azaD/TSA-expanded cells. By contrast, cells cultured in cytokines
without 5azaD/TSA displayed no expansion; rather, a reduction in CD34+CD90+ cells
(0.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.1-fold) and CAFCs (0.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.1-fold) from their initial numbers was
observed. Global hypomethylation corresponding with increased transcript levels
of several genes implicated in HSC self-renewal, including HOXB4, GATA2, and
EZH2, was observed in 5azaD/TSA-expanded MPB cells in contrast to controls.
5azaD/TSA-expanded MPB cells retained in vivo hematopoietic engraftment capacity.
CONCLUSION: MPB CD34+ cells from donors can be expanded using 5azaD/TSA, and
these expanded cells retain in vivo hematopoietic reconstitution capacity. This
strategy may prove to be potentially useful to augment HSC numbers for patients
who fail to mobilize.

© 2014 AABB.

PMCID: PMC4417464
PMID: 25363624  [PubMed - in process]


22. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10665-77.

Inhibition of histone H3K79 methylation selectively inhibits proliferation,
self-renewal and metastatic potential of breast cancer.

Zhang L(1), Deng L(1), Chen F(2), Yao Y(1), Wu B(1), Wei L(1), Mo Q(3), Song
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (2)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (3)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Histone lysine methylation regulates gene expression and cancer initiation.
Bioinformatics analysis suggested that DOT1L, a histone H3-lysine79 (H3K79)
methyltransferase, plays a potentially important role in breast cancer. DOT1L
inhibition selectively inhibited proliferation, self-renewal, metastatic
potential of breast cancer cells and induced cell differentiation. In addition,
inhibitors of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH), such as neplanocin and
3-deazaneplanocin, also inhibited both H3K79 methylation and proliferation of
breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. The activity of SAHH inhibitors was
previously attributed to inhibition of H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2. However,
inhibition of EZH2 by a specific inhibitor did not contribute to cell death. SAHH
inhibitors had only weak activity against H3K27 methylation and their activity is
therefore mainly due to DOT1L/H3K79 methylation inhibition. Overall, we showed
that DOT1L is a potential drug target for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4279401
PMID: 25359765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2014 Dec;141(23):4610-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.112607. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Ezh2-mediated repression of a transcriptional pathway upstream of Mmp9 maintains 
integrity of the developing vasculature.

Delgado-Olguín P(1), Dang LT(2), He D(3), Thomas S(3), Chi L(4), Sukonnik T(3),
Khyzha N(2), Dobenecker MW(5), Fish JE(2), Bruneau BG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry Center for Stem
Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Program in
Physiology and Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario M5G0A4, Canada Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of
Excellence, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada paul.delgadoolguin@sickkids.ca
bbruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu. (2)Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of
Excellence, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada Toronto General Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
1A1, Canada. (3)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, 
USA. (4)Program in Physiology and Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G0A4, Canada. (5)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling,
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA. (6)Gladstone Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine
at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Pediatrics,
Cardiovascular Research Institute, and Institute for Regeneration Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
paul.delgadoolguin@sickkids.ca bbruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Maintenance of vascular integrity is required for embryogenesis and organ
homeostasis. However, the gene expression programs that stabilize blood vessels
are poorly understood. Here, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ezh2
maintains integrity of the developing vasculature by repressing a transcriptional
program that activates expression of Mmp9. Inactivation of Ezh2 in developing
mouse endothelium caused embryonic lethality with compromised vascular integrity 
and increased extracellular matrix degradation. Genome-wide approaches showed
that Ezh2 targets Mmp9 and its activators Fosl1 and Klf5. In addition, we
uncovered Creb3l1 as an Ezh2 target that directly activates Mmp9 gene expression 
in the endothelium. Furthermore, genetic inactivation of Mmp9 rescued vascular
integrity defects in Ezh2-deficient embryos. Thus, epigenetic repression of
Creb3l1, Fosl1, Klf5 and Mmp9 by Ezh2 in endothelial cells maintains the
integrity of the developing vasculature, potentially linking this transcriptional
network to diseases with compromised vascular integrity.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302930
PMID: 25359725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Diagn Cytopathol. 2015 Apr;43(4):294-300. doi: 10.1002/dc.23217. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Prognostic value of COX-2, P53, and EZH-2 evaluated by quantitative image
analysis in premalignant and malignant breast lesions.

Nicolopoulou-Stamati P(1), Tsipis A, Chelidonis G, Patsouris E, Athanassiadou P, 
Gonidi M, Athanassiadou AM.

Author information: 
(1)National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, First
Department of Pathology and Cytology Unit, 1st Pathology Laboratory, 11527,
Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Cytological differential diagnosis of atypical hyperplasia and well
differentiated breast carcinoma may be challenging, because sometimes there is an
overlap between the cytomorphological features of these lesions. The aim of the
study was to investigate COX-2, EZH-2, p53 expression in carcinomas and the gray 
zone of breast cytology categories of atypical hyperplastic lesions with regard
to biological behavior of the tumor.
METHODS: FNA speciments from 100 patients with breast hyperplastic lesions and
cancer were investigated by immunocytochemistry and a quantitative analysis for
COX-2, p53, and EZH-2.
RESULTS: Extent of staining for COX-2 correlated with percentage of positive for 
EZH-2 (P < 0.0001) and p53 nuclei (P < 0.001). The intensity of COX-2 was lower
in the carcinoma group (118.57 ± 12.43) than in the hyperplastic (127.16 ± 11.71)
group (P = 0.006). On the contrary the mean value of staining extent was greater 
in the adenocarcinoma cases (15.96 ± 13.03) than in hyperplastic (4.04 ± 1.94)
cases (P < 0.0001). The percentage of EZH-2 and p53 positive cells correlated
with the histological type of the lesions (P = 0.001 and P = 0.011,
respectively). There was also a statistically significant relation between tumor 
size and expression of COX-2 (P = 0.007) and EZH-2 (P = 0.010).
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that the expression of COX-2, EZH-2, and p53 as
determined by immunocytochemistry at quantitative level may be a predictor for
distinguishing cytologically atypical hyperplastic from malignant breast lesions 
and may be regarded as potential prognostic factor in breast cancer patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25355039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Mar;19(3):521-34. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12407. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Establishment of a proteome profile and identification of molecular markers for
mouse spermatogonial stem cells.

Zhou Q(1), Guo Y, Zheng B, Shao B, Jiang M, Wang G, Zhou T, Wang L, Zhou Z, Guo
X, Huang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Histology and
Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) are undifferentiated cells that are required to 
maintain spermatogenesis throughout the reproductive life of mammals. Although
SSC transplantation and culture provide a powerful tool to identify the
mechanisms regulating SSC function, the precise signalling mechanisms governing
SSC self-renewal and specific surface markers for purifying SSCs remain to be
clearly determined. In the present study, we established a steady SSC culture
according to the method described by Shinohara's lab. Fertile progeny was
produced after transplantation of cultured SSCs into infertile mouse testis, and 
the red fluorescence exhibited by the culture cell membranes was stably and
continuously transmitted to the offspring. Next, via advanced mass spectrometry
and an optimized proteomics platform, we constructed the proteome profile, with
682 proteins expressed in SSCs. Furthermore bioinformatics analysis showed that
the list contained several known molecules that are regulated in SSCs. Several
nucleoproteins and membrane proteins were chosen for further exploration using
immunofluorescence and RT-PCR. The results showed that SALL1, EZH2, and RCOR2 are
possibly involved in the self-renewal mechanism of SSCs. Furthermore, the results
of tissue-specific expression analysis showed that Gpat2 and Pld6 were uniquely
and highly expressed in mouse testes and cultured SSCs. The cellular localization
of PLD6 was further explored and the results showed it was primarily expressed in
the spermatogonial membrane of mouse testes and cultured SSCs. The proteins
identified in this study form the basis for further exploring the molecular
mechanism of self-renewal in SSCs and for identifying specific surface markers of
SSCs.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4369810
PMID: 25352495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Psychiatr Genet. 2015 Apr;25(2):71-8. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0000000000000055.

Anxiety is associated with higher levels of global DNA methylation and altered
expression of epigenetic and interleukin-6 genes.

Murphy TM(1), O'Donovan A, Mullins N, O'Farrelly C, McCann A, Malone K.

Author information: 
(1)aMedical School, University of Exeter, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital,
Exeter, UK bDepartment of Psychiatry, San Francisco & San Francisco VA Medical
Center, University of California, USA cDepartment of Psychiatry and Mental Health
Research, Education and Research Centre, St. Vincent's University Hospital dThe
UCD Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College 
Dublin, UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science, Dublin eSchool of
Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVES: Anxiety is associated with elevated levels of the inflammatory
cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) and an increased risk for diseases with an
inflammatory aetiology. In cancer, higher levels of IL-6 have been associated
with increased expression of the epigenetic enzymes DNMT1 and Enhancer of Zeste
Homolog 2 (EZH2). However, the relationship between IL-6 and DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) and EZH2 expression has not previously been examined
in anxious individuals.
METHODS: Global DNA methylation levels were measured using the Methylflash
Methylated DNA Quantification Kit and gene expression levels of the DNMT and EZH2
genes in anxious (n=25) and nonanxious individuals (n=22) were compared using
quantitative real-time PCR. Specifically, we investigated whether global DNA
methylation or aberrant expression of these genes was correlated with IL-6 mRNA
and protein serum levels in anxious individuals.
RESULTS: Anxious participants had significantly higher levels of global DNA
methylation compared with controls (P=0.001). There were no differences in the
mean mRNA expression levels of the DNMT1/3A/3B, EZH2 and IL-6 genes in anxious
individuals compared with controls. However, the expression of DNMT1/3A, EZH2 and
IL-6 genes increases with increasing Hospital Anxiety and Depression
Scale-Anxiety scores in the anxious cohort only. Interestingly, IL-6 gene
expression was correlated strongly with DNMT1/3A/3B and EZH2 expression,
highlighting a potential relationship between IL-6 and important epigenetic
regulatory enzymes.
CONCLUSION: This study provides novel insight into the relationship between
anxiety, epigenetics and IL-6. Moreover, our findings support the hypothesis that
changes in DNA methylation profiles may contribute to the biology of anxiety.

PMID: 25350786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neurol Sci. 2015 Mar;36(3):403-9. doi: 10.1007/s10072-014-1985-0. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Gene expression analyses to explore the biomarkers and therapeutic targets for
gliomas.

Wang L(1), Wei B, Hu G, Wang L, Jin Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
130033, China.

Retraction in
    Neurol Sci. 2015 Oct;36(10):1981.

To improve treatment strategies of glioma, microarray data were applied to screen
target molecules that were regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs). GSE31262 was
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus, including five neural stem cells samples
from normal human and nine stem cells samples from glioma patients.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified with Multtest package and
Limma package of R language, and false discovery rate < 0.05 and |log2FC (fold
change)| >1 were chosen as cut-off criterion. Hierarchical clustering and pathway
enrichment analysis of DEGs were performed using pheatmap package of R language
and KOBAS software, respectively. miRNAs related to up- and down-regulated DEGs
were, respectively, predicted by WebGestalt software and its miRNAs-target DEGs
interaction network were, respectively, constructed by STRING database. Bingo
plug-in in Cytoscape software was applied to analyze Gene Ontology functional
enrichment analysis for up- and down-regulated DEGs in network, respectively. A
total of 428 DEGs were selected, including 331 down-regulated and 97 up-regulated
DEGs. Hierarchical clustering analysis showed that glioma samples and normal
samples were completely separated. Pathway analysis indicated that CDK2 and WEE1 
participated in the cell cycle. miR-124 could simultaneously regulate
up-regulated (ELAVL1 and EZH2) and down-regulated (BACE1) DEGs. The
down-regulated genes (KIF23, WEE1 and CDK2) were associated with cell division,
while the up-regulated genes (PLP1 and MBP) were related to myelination of
neurons. miR-124 might participate in development of glioma by regulating BACE1, 
ELAVL1 and EZH2. The biomarkers (KIF23, WEE1, CDK2, PLP1 and MBP) were considered
as therapeutic targets of glioma.

PMID: 25348135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 23;5:e1486. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.454.

Polycomb protein EZH2 suppresses apoptosis by silencing the proapoptotic miR-31.

Zhang Q(1), Padi SK(1), Tindall DJ(2), Guo B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA. (2)Department of Urology, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 and suppresses gene expression by catalyzing histone H3
methylation on lysine 27. EZH2 is overexpressed in metastatic prostate cancer and
has been shown to promote cell proliferation and metastasis. Here we show that
EZH2 also suppresses prostate cancer apoptosis by coordinating the epigenetic
silencing of two proapoptotic microRNAs (miRNA), miR-205 and miR-31. We
previously reported that miR-205 promotes apoptosis by targeting antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-w and miR-205 is silenced in prostate cancer through promoter
methylation. In this study, we found that EZH2 suppresses miR-31 expression by
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone 3 on the miR-31 promoter. SiRNA knockdown 
of EZH2 increased miR-31 expression and decreased the antiapoptotic protein E2F6 
(E2F transcription factor 6) (a target of miR-31), resulting in the sensitization
of prostate cancer cells to docetaxel-induced apoptosis. Conversely,
overexpression of EZH2 blocked docetaxel-induced apoptosis. We further
demonstrated that miR-205 silencing is linked to miR-31 silencing through EZH2.
Suppression of miR-205 with an miRNA inhibitor caused an increase of EZH2
protein, which in turn inhibited miR-31 expression. Conversely, overexpression of
miR-205 decreased EZH2 protein and increased miR-31 expression. In paired human
prostate cancer specimens and adjacent normal tissues, we observed that the
decrease of miR-205 expression correlated with EZH2 overexpression and miR-31
silencing. Thus, EZH2 integrates the epigenetic silencing of miR-205 and miR-31
to confer resistance to chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4237267
PMID: 25341040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;74(24):7406-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1188. Epub 
2014 Oct 22.

Differentiation and loss of malignant character of spontaneous pulmonary
metastases in patient-derived breast cancer models.

Bockhorn J(1), Prat A(2), Chang YF(3), Liu X(4), Huang S(4), Shang M(5),
Nwachukwu C(6), Gomez-Vega MJ(6), Harrell JC(7), Olopade OI(6), Perou CM(7), Liu 
H(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. Stanford Cancer Institute, Stanford University, Stanford,
California. (2)Translational Genomics Group, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology 
(VHIO), Barcelona, Spain. Department of Medical Oncology, Hospital Clínic,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)The Ben May Department for Cancer 
Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (4)Deparment of
Pathology, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, and National Center for Regenerative
Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. (5)Illinois Institute
of Technology, Chicago, Illinois. (6)Center for Clinical Cancer Genetics,
Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(7)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (8)Deparment of Pathology, Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and National Center for Regenerative Medicine, Case 
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio. hliu@case.edu.

Patient-derived human-in-mouse xenograft models of breast cancer (PDX models)
that exhibit spontaneous lung metastases offer a potentially powerful model of
cancer metastasis. In this study, we evaluated the malignant character of lung
micrometastases that emerge in such models after orthotopic implantation of human
breast tumor cells into the mouse mammary fat pad. Interestingly, relative to the
parental primary breast tumors, the lung metastasis (met)-derived mammary tumors 
exhibited a slower growth rate and a reduced metastatic potential with a more
differentiated epithelial status. Epigenetic correlates were determined by gene
array analyses. Lung met-derived tumors displayed differential expression of
negative regulators of cell proliferation and metabolism and positive regulators 
of mammary epithelial differentiation. Clinically, this signature correlated with
breast tumor subtypes. We identified hsa-miR-138 (miR-138) as a novel regulator
of invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer cells, acting 
by directly targeting the polycomb epigenetic regulator EZH2. Mechanistic
investigations showed that GATA3 transcriptionally controlled miR-138 levels in
lung metastases. Notably, the miR-138 activity signature served as a novel
independent prognostic marker for patient survival beyond traditional pathologic 
variables, intrinsic subtypes, or a proliferation gene signature. Our results
highlight the loss of malignant character in some lung micrometastatic lesions
and the epigenetic regulation of this phenotype.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4310213
PMID: 25339353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. HNO. 2014 Dec;62(12):867-72. doi: 10.1007/s00106-014-2931-4.

[Cancer stem cell phenotypes and miRNA: therapeutic targets in head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in German]

Coordes A(1), Zhifeng S, Sangvatanakul V, Qian X, Lenarz M, Kaufmann AM, Albers
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenklinik, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200, Berlin, Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most
common cancer worldwide. HNSCC is caused by persistent high-risk human
papillomavirus (HR-HPV) infection or excessive consumption of alcohol or tobacco.
The persistently low survival rates result from local recurrences and metastases,
which are probably caused by so-called tumor stem cells (TSCs). The
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) or transformation is a key event in
metastasis initiation and is being increasingly associated with TSCs.
OBJECTIVES: This review describes new therapeutic targets in HNSCC, focusing on
the TSC hypothesis and EMT regulation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS, RESULTS: TSCs and EMT are regulated directly and
indirectly via transcription factors and microRNAs (miRNAs). These miRNAs
regulate multiple cellular processes and may serve as new therapeutic targets,
whose modulation could increase the effectiveness of HNSCC treatments.
Post-transcriptionally, miRNAs regulate transcription factors associated with EMT
(ZEB1/2, EZH2, Bmi-1), tumor suppressors (p53), TSC markers (ALDH, CD44, EpCAM,
p63) and both epithelial (E-cadherin) and mesenchymal markers (vimentin).
CONCLUSION: Alterations in HNSSC TSC miRNA expression before and after
chemotherapy could potentially serve as a therapeutic control. In the long term, 
knowledge of a patient's individual protein expression pattern may permit
application of specific chemotherapy. Such individualized therapy might prohibit 
the development of metastases and potentially unresectable recurrences with a
high resistance to radiation and chemotherapy, thus improving the prognosis in
HNSCC patients.

PMID: 25337967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2279-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.573576. Epub 2014 
Oct 20.

Wilms tumor suppressor, WT1, suppresses epigenetic silencing of the ß-catenin
gene.

Akpa MM(1), Iglesias DM(2), Chu LL(2), Cybulsky M(2), Bravi C(2), Goodyer PR(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A
1B1 and. (2)the Department of Paediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital Research 
Institute, Montréal, Québec H3Z 2Z3, Canada. (3)From the Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A 1B1 and the Department of
Paediatrics, Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, Montréal, Québec
H3Z 2Z3, Canada paul.goodyer@mcgill.ca.

The mammalian kidney is derived from progenitor cells in intermediate mesoderm.
During embryogenesis, progenitor cells expressing the Wilms tumor suppressor
gene, WT1, are induced to differentiate in response to WNT signals from the
ureteric bud. In hereditary Wilms tumors, clonal loss of WT1 precludes the
ß-catenin pathway response and leads to precancerous nephrogenic rests. We
hypothesized that WT1 normally primes progenitor cells for differentiation by
suppressing the enhancer of zeste2 gene (EZH2), involved in epigenetic silencing 
of differentiation genes. In human amniotic fluid-derived mesenchymal stem cells,
we show that exogenous WT1B represses EZH2 transcription. This leads to a
dramatic decrease in the repressive lysine 27 trimethylation mark on histone H3
that silences ß-catenin gene expression. As a result, amniotic fluid mesenchymal 
stem cells acquire responsiveness to WNT9b and increase expression of genes that 
mark the onset of nephron differentiation. Our observations suggest that
biallelic loss of WT1 sustains the inhibitory histone methylation state that
characterizes Wilms tumors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4303678
PMID: 25331950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Gastric Cancer. 2014 Sep;14(3):147-55. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2014.14.3.147. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

The role of gastrokine 1 in gastric cancer.

Yoon JH(1), Choi WS(1), Kim O(1), Park WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Homeostatic imbalance between cell proliferation and death in gastric mucosal
epithelia may lead to gastritis and gastric cancer. Despite abundant gastrokine 1
(GKN1) expression in the normal stomach, the loss of GKN1 expression is
frequently detected in gastric mucosa infected with Helicobacter pylori, as well 
as in intestinal metaplasia and gastric cancer tissues, suggesting that GKN1
plays an important role in gastric mucosal defense, and the gene functions as a
gastric tumor suppressor. In the stomach, GKN1 is involved in gastric mucosal
inflammation by regulating cytokine production, the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling
pathway, and cyclooxygenase-2 expression. GKN1 also inhibits the carcinogenic
potential of H. pylori protein CagA by binding to it, and up-regulates
antioxidant enzymes. In addition, GKN1 reduces cell viability, proliferation, and
colony formation by inhibiting cell cycle progression and epigenetic modification
by down-regulating the expression levels of DNMT1 and EZH2, and DNMT1 activity,
and inducing apoptosis through the death receptor-dependent pathway. Furthermore,
GKN1 also inhibits gastric cancer cell invasion and metastasis via coordinated
regulation of epithelial mesenchymal transition-related protein expression,
reactive oxygen species production, and PI3K/Akt signaling pathway activation.
Although the modes of action of GKN1 have not been clearly described, recent
limited evidence suggests that GKN1 acts as a gastric-specific tumor suppressor. 
This review aims to discuss, comment, and summarize the recent progress in the
understanding of the role of GKN1 in gastric cancer development and progression.

PMCID: PMC4199881
PMID: 25328759  [PubMed]


33. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Dec;54(12):1656-67. doi: 10.1002/mc.22237. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Elevated expression of long intergenic non-coding RNA HOTAIR in a basal-like
variant of MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Zhuang Y(1), Nguyen HT(1), Burow ME(1), Zhuo Y(2), El-Dahr SS(3), Yao X(2), Cao
S(4), Flemington EK(4), Nephew KP(5), Fang F(5), Collins-Burow B(1), Rhodes
LV(1), Yu Q(6), Jayawickramarajah J(7), Shan B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans,
Louisiana. (2)Kadlec Regional Medical Center, Richland, Washington. (3)Department
of Pediatrics, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(4)Department of Pathology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans,
Louisiana. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana. (6)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore. (7)Department of Chemistry, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(8)Washington State University at Spokane, Spokane, Washington.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is critical to phenotypic maintenance
and transition of human breast cancer cells. HOX antisense intergenic RNA
(HOTAIR) is a long intergenic non-coding RNA that epigenetically represses gene
expression via recruitment of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone
methyltransferase. Elevated expression of HOTAIR promotes progression of breast
cancer. In the current study we examined the expression and function of HOTAIR in
MCF-7-TNR cells, a derivative of the luminal-like breast cancer cell line MCF-7
that acquired resistance to TNF-a-induced cell death. The expression of HOTAIR,
markers of the luminal-like and basal-like subtypes, and growth were compared
between MCF-7 and MCF-7-TNR cells. These variables were further assessed upon
inhibition of HOTAIR, EZH2, p38 MAPK, and SRC kinase in MCF-7-TNR cells. When
compared with MCF-7 cells, MCF-7-TNR cells exhibited an increase in the
expression of HOTAIR, which correlated with characteristics of a luminal-like to 
basal-like transition as evidenced by dysregulated gene expression and
accelerated growth. MCF-7-TNR cells exhibited reduced suppressive histone H3
lysine27 trimethylation on the HOTAIR promoter. Inhibition of HOTAIR and EZH2
attenuated the luminal-like to basal-like transition in terms of gene expression 
and growth in MCF-7-TNR cells. Inhibition of p38 and SRC diminished HOTAIR
expression and the basal-like phenotype in MCF-7-TNR cells. HOTAIR was robustly
expressed in the native basal-like breast cancer cells and inhibition of HOTAIR
reduced the basal-like gene expression and growth. Our findings suggest
HOTAIR-mediated regulation of gene expression and growth associated with the
basal-like phenotype of breast cancer cells.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4402121 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 25328122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Apr;141(4):661-9. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1854-5.
Epub 2014 Oct 19.

Expression and clinicopathological significance of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 mRNA in
colorectal cancer.

Liu YL(1), Gao X, Jiang Y, Zhang G, Sun ZC, Cui BB, Yang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, The Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Harbin
Medical University, No. 150, Haping Rd, Nangang District, Harbin, 150081,
Heilongjiang, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), embryonic ectoderm
development (EED), and suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (SUZ12), the key component 
of polycomb repressive complex 2, are of great importance in human cancer
pathogenesis. This study was designed to investigate the clinical and prognostic 
significances of EZH2, EED and SUZ12 in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients.
METHODS: The expression of EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA was evaluated in 82 primary
CRC and paired non-cancerous mucosa samples by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: We found that overall EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA expression in the CRC
tissues was significantly increased than in the non-cancerous tissue (p < 0.05). 
Increased EZH2, EED and SUZ12 mRNA expression was directly correlated with
primary tumor size, regional lymph node metastases, distant metastasis and AJCC
stage. Furthermore, CRC patients with higher level of EED, SUZ12 or EZH2 showed a
worse disease-free survival (DFS) (p < 0.01). In multivariate analysis, the
increased EZH2 expression may be a risk factor for the patients' 3-year DFS (HR
2.517; 95% CI 1.104, 5.736; p = 0.028). Furthermore, the k-means cluster analysis
showed that high mRNA expression of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 was significantly
correlated with the aggressive clinical behavior and poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of EED, SUZ12 and EZH2 might contribute to the CRC
development/progression.

PMID: 25326896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. ChemMedChem. 2015 Jan;10(1):173-82. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201402315. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

3-Deazaneplanocin A and neplanocin A analogues and their effects on apoptotic
cell death.

Tam EK(1), Nguyen TM, Lim CZ, Lee PL, Li Z, Jiang X, Santhanakrishnan S, Tan TW, 
Goh YL, Wong SY, Yang H, Ong EH, Hill J, Yu Q, Chai CL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemical & Engineering Sciences, Agency for Science, Technology &
Research (A*STAR), 8 Biomedical Grove, Neuros #07-01, Singapore 138665
(Singapore).

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DzNep) is a potential epigenetic drug for the treatment of
various cancers. DzNep has been reported to deplete histone methylations,
including oncogenic EZH2 complex, giving rise to epigenetic modifications that
reactivate many silenced tumor suppressors in cancer cells. Despite its promise
as an anticancer drug, little is known about the structure-activity relationships
of DzNep in the context of epigenetic modifications and apoptosis induction. In
this study, a number of analogues of DzNep were examined for DzNep-like ability
to induce synergistic apoptosis in cancer cells in combination with
trichostatin A, a known histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. The
structure-activity relationship data thus obtained provide valuable information
on the structural requirements for biological activity. The studies identified
three compounds that show similar activities to DzNep. Two of these compounds
show good pharmacokinetics and safety profiles. Attempts to correlate the
observed synergistic apoptotic activities with measured S-adenosylhomocysteine
hydrolase (SAHH) inhibitory activities suggest that the apoptotic activity of
DzNep might not be directly due to its inhibition of SAHH.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25319940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):550-64. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0310. Epub 2014
Dec 2.

Epigenetic disruptions of histone signatures for the trophectoderm and inner cell
mass in mouse parthenogenetic embryos.

Chen YH(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Graduate Institute of Aerospace and Undersea Medicine, National Defense
Medical Center , Taipei, Taiwan .

Epigenetic asymmetry has been shown to be associated with the first lineage
allocation event in preimplantation development, that is, the formation of the
trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass (ICM) lineages in the blastocyst. Since
parthenogenesis causes aberrant segregation between the TE and ICM lineages, we
examined several development-associated histone modifications in parthenotes,
including those involved in (i) transcriptional activation [acetylated histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9Ac) and lysine 14 (H3K14Ac), trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4Me3), and dimethylated histone H3 arginine 26 (H3R26Me2)] and (ii)
transcriptional repression [trimethylated histone H3 lysine 9 (H3K9Me3) and
lysine 27 (H3K27Me3), and mono-ubiquitinated histone H2A lysine 119 (H2AK119u1)].
Here, we report that in parthenotes, H3R26Me2 expression decreased from the
morula stage, while expression patterns and levels of H3K9Ac, H3K27Me3, and
H2AK119u1 were unchanged until the blastocyst stage; whereas H3K14Ac, H3K4Me3,
and H3K9Me3 showed normal patterns and levels of expressions. Relative to the
decrease of H3K9Ac in the ICM and increase in the TE of parthenotes, we detected 
reduced expression of TAT-interactive protein 60 acetyltransferase and histone
deacetylase 1 deacetylase in the ICM and TE of parthenotes, respectively.
Relative to the decrease of H3R26Me2, we also observed decreased expression of
coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 1 methyltransferase and
increased expression of the Wnt effector transcription factor 7L2 and miR-181c
microRNA in parthenotes. Furthermore, relative to the decrease in H3K27Me3 and
H2AK119u1, we found increased phosphorylation of Akt1 and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 in parthenogenetic TE. Therefore, our findings that histone signatures 
are impaired in parthenotes provide a mechanistic explanation for aberrant
lineage segregation and TE defects.

PMCID: PMC4333321
PMID: 25315067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Clin Epigenetics. 2014 Oct 1;6(1):19. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-6-19. eCollection
2014.

Epigenetic therapy of acute myeloid leukemia using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(decitabine) in combination with inhibitors of histone methylation and
deacetylation.

Momparler RL(1), Côté S(2), Momparler LF(2), Idaghdour Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie, Université de Montréal, 2900 Édouard-Montpetit, 
Montréal, QC H3T 1J4, Canada ; Centre de recherche, Service
d'hématologie/oncologie, CHU-Saint-Justine, Montréal, Québec H3T 1C5, Canada.
(2)Centre de recherche, Service d'hématologie/oncologie, CHU-Saint-Justine,
Montréal, Québec H3T 1C5, Canada. (3)Department of Biology, New York University, 
Saadiyat Island, PO Box 129188, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: The silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by aberrant DNA
methylation occurs frequently in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This epigenetic
alteration can be reversed by 5-aza-2'-deoxcytidine (decitabine, 5-AZA-CdR).
Although 5-AZA-CdR can induce complete remissions in patients with AML, most
patients relapse. The effectiveness of this therapy may be limited by the
inability of 5-AZA-CdR to reactivate all TSGs due to their silencing by other
epigenetic mechanisms such as histone methylation or chromatin compaction. EZH2, 
a subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2, catalyzes the methylation of
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) to H3K27me3. 3-Deazaneplanocin-A (DZNep), an
inhibitor of methionine metabolism, can reactivate genes silenced by H3K27me3 by 
its inhibition of EZH2. In a previous report, we observed that 5-AZA-CdR, in
combination with DZNep, shows synergistic antineoplastic action against AML
cells. Gene silencing due to chromatin compaction is attributable to the action
of histone deacetylases (HDAC). This mechanism of epigenetic gene silencing can
be reversed by HDAC inhibitors such as trichostatin-A (TSA). Silent TSGs that
cannot be reactivated by 5-AZA-CdR or DZNep have the potential to be reactivated 
by TSA. This provides a rationale for the use of HDAC inhibitors in combination
with 5-AZA-CdR and DZNep to treat AML.
RESULTS: The triple combination of 5-AZA-CdR, DZNep, and TSA induced a remarkable
synergistic antineoplastic effect against human AML cells as demonstrated by an
in vitro colony assay. This triple combination also showed a potent synergistic
activation of several key TSGs as determined by real-time PCR. The triple
combination was more effective than the combination of two agents or a single
agent. Microarray analysis showed that the triple combination generated
remarkable changes in global gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that it may be possible to design a very effective 
therapy for AML using agents that target the reversal of the following three
epigenetic "lock" mechanisms that silence gene expression: DNA methylation,
histone methylation, and histone deacetylation. This approach merits serious
consideration for clinical investigation in patients with advanced AML.

PMCID: PMC4194463
PMID: 25313314  [PubMed]


38. J Proteome Res. 2014 Dec 5;13(12):6135-43. doi: 10.1021/pr500196b. Epub 2014 Oct 
29.

In vivo proximity labeling for the detection of protein-protein and protein-RNA
interactions.

Beck DB(1), Narendra V, Drury WJ 3rd, Casey R, Jansen PW, Yuan ZF, Garcia BA,
Vermeulen M, Bonasio R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, New York
University School of Medicine , 522 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016,
United States.

Accurate and sensitive detection of protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions 
is key to understanding their biological functions. Traditional methods to
identify these interactions require cell lysis and biochemical manipulations that
exclude cellular compartments that cannot be solubilized under mild conditions.
Here, we introduce an in vivo proximity labeling (IPL) technology that employs an
affinity tag combined with a photoactivatable probe to label polypeptides and
RNAs in the vicinity of a protein of interest in vivo. Using quantitative mass
spectrometry and deep sequencing, we show that IPL correctly identifies known
protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions in the nucleus of mammalian cells.
Thus, IPL provides additional temporal and spatial information for the
characterization of biological interactions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4261942
PMID: 25311790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Semin Hematol. 2014 Oct;51(4):282-97. doi: 10.1053/j.seminhematol.2014.08.005.
Epub 2014 Aug 4.

New insights in AML biology from genomic analysis.

Perry AM(1), Attar EC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA. (2)Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA. Electronic address:
eattar@partners.org.

Advancements in sequencing techniques have led to the discovery of numerous genes
not previously implicated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) biology. Further in
vivo studies are necessary to discern the biological impact of these mutations.
Murine models, the most commonly used in vivo system, provide a physiologic
context for the study of specific genes. These systems have provided deep
insights into the role of genetic translocations, mutations, and dysregulated
gene expression on leukemia pathogenesis. This review focuses on the phenotype of
newly identified genes, including NPM1, IDH1/2, TET2, MLL, DNMT3A, EZH2, EED, and
ASXL1, in mouse models and the implications on AML biology.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25311741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Toxicon. 2014 Dec 15;92:54-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2014.09.014. Epub 2014 Oct
6.

Bacillus intermedius ribonuclease (BINASE) induces apoptosis in human ovarian
cancer cells.

Garipov AR(1), Nesmelov AA(1), Cabrera-Fuentes HA(2), Ilinskaya ON(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kazan Federal (Volga-Region) University,
Kremlevskaya str. 18, Kazan 420008, Russia. (2)Department of Microbiology, Kazan 
Federal (Volga-Region) University, Kremlevskaya str. 18, Kazan 420008, Russia;
Institute of Biochemistry, Medical School, Justus-Liebig-University,
Friedrichstrasse, 24, 35390 Giessen, Germany. Electronic address:
Hector.A.Cabrera-Fuentes@biochemie.med.uni-giessen.de.

The cytotoxic effects of Bacillus intermedius RNase (binase) towards ovarian
cancer cells (SKOV3 and OVCAR5) were studied in comparison to normal ovarian
epithelial cells (HOSE1 and HOSE2). Binase decreased viability and induced the
selective apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells. The apoptosis rate was 50% in SKOV3 
and 48% in OVCAR5 cells after 24 h of binase treatment (50 µg/ml). Binase-induced
apoptosis in these cell lines was accompanied by caspase-3 activation and
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase fragmentation. Normal ovarian epithelial cells were
not affected by binase, except for a slight decrease of HOSE2 cell viability and 
the appearance of traces of activated caspase-3, but not the poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 85-kDA fragment. Binase did not induce alteration of EZH2 (enhancer of
zeste-homolog-2) protein expression neither, in tumor nor in normal cells. In
conclusion, selective binase-induced cell death and apoptosis via
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase fragmentation may serve as a new treatment option
against ovarian cancer progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25301481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncol Lett. 2014 Nov;8(5):2049-2054. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is involved in the proliferation of endometrial
carcinoma.

Jia N(1), Li Q(1), Tao X(2), Wang J(1), Hua K(1), Feng W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China ; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female
Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200090, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology,
Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200090, P.R.
China.

Endometrial carcinoma is the second most common gynecological malignancy of the
female genital tract worldwide. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a critical
component of the polycomb repressive complex 2, has been found to be involved in 
multiple biological processes and is overexpressed in several types of cancer.
Previous studies have demonstrated that EZH2 is associated with endometrial
carcinoma. The present study showed that EZH2 was overexpressed in complex
hyperplasia, atypical hyperplasia and endometrial cancer, but not in simple
hyperplasia and normal endometrium. Additionally, by analyzing the correlation
between EZH2 expression and clinicopathological characteristics, the expression
of EZH2 was found to be associated with myometrial invasion and lymph-vascular
space invasion of endometrial cancer. Furthermore, small interfering RNA was
utilized to investigate the role of EZH2 in endometrial carcinoma cell
proliferation, and the results showed that EZH2 knockdown suppressed the
proliferation of endometrial carcinoma cells in vitro. Therefore, these findings 
indicate that EZH2 expression may predict a more aggressive biological behavior
in endometrial carcinoma and it may provide potential therapeutic targets for
treatment of endometrial carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4186594
PMID: 25295088  [PubMed]


42. Med Oncol. 2014 Nov;31(11):252. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0252-9. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste human homolog 2 (EZH2) gene in human
cytomegalovirus positive glioblastoma multiforme tissues.

Ahani N(1), Shirkoohi R, Rokouei M, Alipour Eskandani M, Nikravesh A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, University of Zabol, Zabol, Iran, nargesahani@hotmail.com.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is considered to be one of the most invasive human 
cancers, characterized by a high mortality rate and an average survival is <1
year. These tumors are highly aggressive and insensitive to conventional radio
and chemotherapy. An interesting aspect of glioblastoma is the association of
active human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection, which is evident by the presence
of viral DNA, mRNA and protein level in most glioblastoma tissues. Although the
presence of the HCMV infection in glioblastoma is well established, but the
oncomodulatory role of HCMV is not defined yet. Enhancer of zeste human homolog 2
(EZH2) is a key protein of the polycomb repressive complex 2, epigenetic gene
silencers. There have been several reports that EZH2 activity is essential in GBM
pathogenesis. In our previous research, we have found a high rate of HCMV
infection in a cohort of Iranian glioblastoma patients. In this study, we
investigated the expression of EZH2 in HCMV-negative versus HCMV-positive GBM
tissues in comparison to non-tumor tissues. The level of expression was
determined by real time PCR and the differences were calculated using the Livac
or 2(-<U+0394><U+0394>Ct) and analysis of variance (ANOVA). Relative expression of EZH2 in
HCMV-negative glioblastoma tissues were increased 6.053-fold compared to
non-neoplastic brain tissues, while EZH2 gene expression was increased
41.098-fold in HCMV-positive glioblastoma tissues. ANOVA test showed that there
is a significant difference in EZH2 expression between normal brain tissue,
HCMV-negative and HCMV-positive glioblastoma tumors (p value = 0.0001). Our data 
indicate that EZH2 expression can be considered a risk factor in glioblastoma and
EZH2 inhibitors may serve as potential new treatment in glioblastoma. This would 
be an interesting new field to investigate in more detail.

PMID: 25294424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Histol Histopathol. 2015 Mar;30(3):267-75. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Cellular senescence in biliary pathology. Special emphasis on expression of a
polycomb group protein EZH2 and a senescent marker p16INK4a in bile ductular
tumors and lesions.

Sasaki M(1), Nakanuma Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan. m8sasaki@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Human 
Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

A subgroup of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and combined hepatocellular-
cholangiocarcinoma contain a component of cholangiolocellular carcinoma, which is
composed of small bile ductular cells. Ductular reaction, a reactive lesion at
the portal tract interface comprising increased bile ductules, is frequently seen
in chronic advanced liver diseases. Bile duct adenoma, a benign tumor/tumorous
lesion is also composed of bile ductular cells. Differential diagnosis among
these bile ductular tumors/lesions is sometimes difficult. Given overexpression
of a polycomb group protein EZH2 in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and high
expression of senescence-associated p16INK4a in ductular reactions, we plan to
apply immunostaining for EZH2 and p16INK4a for differential diagnosis of these
bile ductular tumors/lesions. The expression of EZH2 was seen in all cases of
cholangiolocellular carcinomas, while it was not observed in bile duct adenomas
or ductular reactions. In contrast, the expression of p16INK4a was seen in most
bile duct adenomas and all ductular reactions, whereas it was barely seen in
cholangiolocellular carcinomas. A borderline between cholangiolocellular
carcinoma and the surrounding ductular reaction was clearly highlighted by the
reverse expression pattern of EZH2 and p16INK4a. In conclusion, immunostaining
for EZH2 and p16INK4a may be useful for differential diagnosis for bile ductular 
tumors/lesions.

PMID: 25289642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Onco Targets Ther. 2014 Sep 25;7:1705-16. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S67570. eCollection
2014.

Tumor heterogeneity in the recurrence of epithelial ovarian cancer demonstrated
by polycomb group proteins.

Gui T(1), Bai H(1), Zeng J(1), Zhong Z(1), Cao D(1), Cui Q(2), Chen J(2), Yang
J(1), Shen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To investigate tumor heterogeneity in the recurrence of epithelial
ovarian cancer demonstrated by polycomb group (PcG) proteins.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays containing matched primary and recurrent ovarian
tumors from the same patients were constructed for detection of PcG protein
expression. Survival analyses of clinicopathological parameters and expression of
PcG proteins were performed on progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) of patients. Genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity was explored in
aspects of gene copy number and microRNA (miRNA) profiling.
RESULTS: PcG proteins were heterogeneously expressed in primary versus recurrent 
tumors (P<0.05). In univariate survival analysis of the ovarian carcinoma
cohorts, a significant association of intensive expression of BMI1 and EZH2 in
first-onset lymph node metastases with shortened PFS was demonstrated (P=0.010,
P=0.019); and a significant association of intensive expression of BMI1 and EZH2 
in recurrent tumors with shortened OS was demonstrated (P=0.042, P=0.047).
Importantly, BMI1 and EZH2 expression provided significant independent prognostic
parameters in multivariate analyses (P<0.05). Gene amplification did not always
coincide with PcG protein expression. Eight miRNAs were found to be downregulated
in recurrent tumors, among which miR-298 might indirectly regulate the expression
of EZH2 through transcription factor ILF3.
CONCLUSION: Tumor heterogeneity exists in the recurrence of epithelial ovarian
cancer, manifested by PcG protein expression and underlying genetic and
epigenetic alterations. Intensive expression of BMI1 and EZH2 are predictors of
earlier relapse and shorter OS, independent of grade and chemotherapy
sensitivity. EZH2 and miR-298 have great potential to be new targets for
treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4181627
PMID: 25285018  [PubMed]


45. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015 Feb;15(2):181-93. doi: 10.1517/14712598.2015.960838. 
Epub 2014 Oct 6.

Epigenetic approaches to regeneration of bone and cartilage from stem cells.

Im GI(1), Shin KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Department of Orthopaedics , Goyang , Korea
+82 31 961 7315 ; +82 31 961 7314 ; gunil@duih.org.

INTRODUCTION: Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) or adult stem cells, especially
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), have been intensively studied for skeletal tissue 
regeneration including bone and cartilage. Epigenetic mechanisms play essential
roles in stem cell maintenance and differentiation. However, little is known
about the epigenetic regulation of osteogenesis and chondrogenesis of stem cells.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, features of ESCs and adult stem cells, epigenetics
and chromatin structure, as well as epigenetic mechanisms, such as chromatin
remodeling, DNA methylation and histone modifications, polycomb group (PcG)
proteins and microRNAs are described. Epigenetic researches of stem cell are
introduced.
EXPERT OPINION: Epigenetic alterations of stem cell during the in vitro
differentiation can be controlled for clinical applications. MSCs are effective
resources for skeletal tissue regeneration in both undifferentiated and
differentiated states. Understanding epigenetic signatures of MSC is crucial to
maintain the stemness. In addition, investigation of epigenetic changes in the
differentiation of MSCs is very important to develop methods or chemicals to
promote efficient differentiation of MSCs. Inhibition of PcG protein enhancer of 
zeste (Ezh2) a chromatin modifier, could be a promising candidate to improve MSC 
differentiation by decreasing Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3.

PMID: 25283749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Med Oncol. 2014 Nov;31(11):271. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0271-6. Epub 2014 Oct 4.

EZH2 elevates the proliferation of human cholangiocarcinoma cells through the
downregulation of RUNX3.

Tang B(1), Du J, Li Y, Tang F, Wang Z, He S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Guilin Medical University, Affiliated
Hospital, Guilin, 541001, Guangxi, People's Republic of China.

To investigate the impact of histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 
2 (EZH2) on the proliferation and apoptosis of human cholangiocarcinoma cells as 
well as its related mechanisms. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot analyses
were used to examine the expression of EZH2 in 40 cases of human
cholangiocarcinoma tissues and four strains of human cholangiocarcinoma cells.
The influence of EZH2 on cell growth and apoptosis were assessed by knockdown
experiments, and a xenograft experiment in nude mice was performed to evaluate
the impact of siEZH2 on the tumorigenicity of tumor cells. The correlation of
EZH2, clinic pathological features and overall survival rates was also analyzed. 
EZH2 was highly expressed in human cholangiocarcinoma tissues and cells.
Silencing of EZH2 could significantly reduce the methylation level of RUNX3 DNA
in human cholangiocarcinoma cells and improve its protein expression as well as
inhibit cell proliferation, induce apoptosis and slow down the growth of tumor in
nude mice. In addition, the expression of EZH2 was associated with the tumor
stage, lymph node positivity and poor prognoses. Overexpression of EZH2 can
promote the proliferation of cholangiocarcinoma cells and inhibit their
apoptosis. It is associated with poor prognoses in patients with
cholangiocarcinoma. Therefore, EZH2 could be a potential clinical therapeutic
target for the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 25280519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2014 Nov;24(9):1653-8. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000000273.

Analyzing simultaneous positive expression of EZH2 and P53 protein to improve
predictive value in cervical squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen SQ(1), Zhang HM, Li JB, Jiang HY, Fan L, Kong LZ, Yao SZ.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China; and Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, The People's Hospital of Guizhou Province, Guizhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: The current study was undertaken to investigate the predictive value
of simultaneous enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and P53 expression in lesions 
of patients with cervical squamous cell carcinoma.
METHODS: Quantum dot double fluorescence staining was applied to detect EZH2 and 
P53 protein in biopsy tissue of 168 patients with cervical squamous cell
carcinoma. The expression was classified into double positive (EZH2 and P53 were 
positively expressed), single positive (either EZH2 or P53 was positively
expressed), and double negative (neither was positively expressed). The EZH2 and 
P53 expression, clinical stages of cervical cancer, lymph node metastasis,
progression-free survival, and overall survival were analyzed.
RESULTS: A relationship of EZH2 and P53 expression with the clinical stage of
cervical cancer and lymph node metastasis was indicated. Simultaneous detection
of both proteins could partly predict prognosis, consistent with previous
studies' results. The current study demonstrated that the expression levels of
EZH2 and P53 in tumor tissue and the proportion of cases with double-positive
expression significantly increased with increasing clinical stages of cancer,
also confirming up-regulated expression of EZH2 and P53 with increasing stages.
These findings may suggest that the 2 proteins were involved in the development
of cervical cancer, but the nature of their interaction is undefined. The
increase of EZH2 and P53 expression in patients with lymph node metastasis
indicated that they may be involved in metastasis of cervical cancer.
CONCLUSION: Simultaneous positive EZH2 and P53 expression could improve the
predictive value of a poor prognosis in cervical cancer.

PMID: 25275664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Anticancer Res. 2014 Oct;34(10):5503-7.

Activating mutations affecting the NF-kappa B pathway and EZH2-mediated
epigenetic regulation are rare events in primary mediastinal large B-cell
lymphoma.

Gebauer N(1), Hardel TT(2), Gebauer J(2), Bernard V(3), Merz H(3), Feller AC(3), 
Rades D(4), Biersack H(2), Lehnert H(2), Thorns C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, 
Campus Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany niklas.gebauer@medizin.uni-luebeck.de.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, 
Campus Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. (3)Department of Pathology-Reference Centre for
Lymph Node Pathology and Hematopathology, University Hospital of
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. (4)Department of Radiation 
Oncology, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Luebeck, Luebeck,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma (PMBL) is a distinct
subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) frequently observed in young
patients. High-dose immunochemotherapy constitutes the current therapeutic
gold-standard, despite significant toxicity and serious late effects. Several
hotspots harboring oncogenic gain-of-function mutations were recently shown to
pose vital hallmarks in activated B-cell like (ABC-) (CD79B, CARD11 and MYD88)
and germinal center like (GCB-) DLBCL (EZH2), respectively. Several promising
targeted-therapy approaches, derived from these findings, are currently under
development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We thoroughly characterized a cohort of 25 untreated
patients with de novo PMBL by immunohistochemical and cytogenetic means and
assessed the prevalence of activating mutations affecting EZH2, CD79B and CARD11 
utilizing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based capillary sequencing approach. 
Moreover, the MYD88 p. L265P status was assessed by employing a pyrosequencing
approach.
RESULTS: PMBLs included in this study did not harbor any of the reported hotspot 
mutations activating the nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B signaling cascade or the
EZH2-mediated epigenetic deregulation of gene expression. Immunohistochemical
characterization revealed an ABC phenotype in 44% (n=11) of cases.
CONCLUSION: We report that genetic alterations of these genes are rare events in 
PMBL unlike other subtypes of DLBCL. Our findings suggest that a substantial
subset of PMBL patients may benefit from treatment approaches targeting
BCR-mediated activation of NF-kappa B.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25275047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biol Reprod. 2014 Nov;91(5):113. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.121988. Epub 2014
Oct 1.

Functional analysis of miR-34c as a putative tumor suppressor in high-grade
serous ovarian cancer.

Yu Z(1), Kim J(2), He L(3), Creighton CJ(4), Gunaratne PH(5), Hawkins SM(6),
Matzuk MM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas zhifengy@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California. (4)Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Pathology and
Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Department of Human Genome
Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Department of
Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Department 
of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (7)Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Department
of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas Dan 
L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
mmatzuk@bcm.edu.

Altered microRNA expression patterns are implicated in the formation of many
human diseases, including ovarian cancer. Our laboratory previously created
Dicer(fl/fl)/Pten(fl/fl)/Amhr2(cre/+) mice, which developed high-grade serous
carcinomas originating from mouse fallopian tubes, while neither
Dicer(fl/fl)/Amhr2(cre/+) nor Pten(fl/fl)/Amhr2(cre/+) mice developed tumors. To 
explore miRNAs involved in the tumorigenesis in the double-knockout (DKO) mice,
tumor cell lines were established from mouse primary tumors, and the most
abundant miRNAs present in mouse normal fallopian tubes, let-7b and miR-34c, were
expressed in these cell lines. We found that miR-34c had a more dramatic effect
on inhibiting tumor cell viability than let-7b. The action of miR-34c induced
tumor cell cycle arrest in G1 phase and apoptosis, and was accompanied with the
regulation of key genes involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle G1/S
transition. miR-34c suppressed the expression of Ezh2 and Mybl2, which may
transcriptionally and functionally activate Cdkn1c. Furthermore, miR-34c levels
are extremely low in human serous adenocarcinomas compared with human normal
fallopian tubes. Expression of miR-34c in human ovarian cancer cells phenocopied 
its effects in DKO mouse tumor cells. However,
miR-34b/c(-/-)/Pten(fl/fl)/Amhr2(cre/+) mice failed to develop high-grade serous 
carcinomas, implicating a combination of miRNAs in the tumorigenesis process.
Thus, while miR-34c is a putative tumor suppressor in high-grade serous ovarian
carcinoma with potential therapeutic advantages, screening of additional miRNAs
for their effects alone and in combination with miR-34c is highly warranted to
uncover miRNAs that synergize with miR-34c against cancer.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25273528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 14;289(46):31693-707. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.574517. Epub
2014 Sep 29.

c-Rel regulates Ezh2 expression in activated lymphocytes and malignant lymphoid
cells.

Neo WH(1), Lim JF(1), Grumont R(2), Gerondakis S(2), Su IH(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the School of Biological Sciences, College of Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 637551, Republic of Singapore and. (2)the
Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria
3004, Australia. (3)From the School of Biological Sciences, College of Science,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551, Republic of Singapore and
ihsu@ntu.edu.sg.

The polycomb group protein Ezh2 is a histone methyltransferase that modifies
chromatin structure to alter gene expression during embryonic development,
lymphocyte activation, and tumorigenesis. The mechanism by which Ezh2 expression 
is regulated is not well defined. In the current study, we report that c-Rel is a
critical activator of Ezh2 transcription in lymphoid cells. In activated primary 
murine B and T cells, plus human leukemia and multiple myeloma cell lines,
recruitment of c-Rel to the first intron of the Ezh2 locus promoted Ezh2 mRNA
expression. This up-regulation was abolished in activated c-Rel-deficient
lymphocytes and by c-Rel knockdown in Jurkat T cells. Treatment of malignant
cells with the c-Rel inhibitor pentoxifylline not only reduced c-Rel nuclear
translocation and Ezh2 expression, but also enhanced their sensitivity to the
Ezh2-specific drug, GSK126 through increased growth inhibition and cell death. In
summary, our demonstration that c-Rel regulates Ezh2 expression in lymphocytes
and malignant lymphoid cells reveals a novel transcriptional network in
transformed lymphoid cells expressing high levels of Ezh2 that provides a
molecular justification for combinatorial drug therapy.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4231650
PMID: 25266721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 10;453(1):172-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.092. Epub 2014 Sep 27.

FOXA1 antagonizes EZH2-mediated CDKN2A repression in carcinogenesis.

Zhang Y(1), Tong T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center on Aging, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: zhang_yu@bjmu.edu.cn. (2)Research Center on Aging,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
ttj@bjmu.edu.cn.

CDKN2A (p16(INK4a)) is a crucial tumor suppressor involved in many cancers. Our
recent investigations revealed that FOXA1 as a forkhead transcription factor
mediates CDKN2A activation in cellular senescence. However, the contribution of
this axis in carcinogenesis remains unclear. Here, using a comprehensive
collection of cancer microarray data, we found FOXA1 is down-regulated in many
cancers compared to their normal counterparts and the positive correlation
between FOXA1 and CDKN2A could be observed in prostate and breast cancers with
lower EZH2 (epigenetic repressor for CDKN2A) expression. Experimentally,
epistasis analysis in prostate and breast cancer cells indicated that higher
expression of FOXA1 opposes EZH2-mediated CDKN2A repression, as further depletion
of FOXA1 reverts the de-silencing of CDKN2A caused by EZH2 inhibition.
Concomitantly, EZH2-depletion suppresses cancer cell cycle progression and this
regulation is optimized in the presence of FOXA1 and CDKN2A. A further oncogenic 
transformation assay suggested that overexpression of EZH2 is insufficient to
block RAS-induced CDKN2A activation and loss of FOXA1 is mandatory to potentiate 
EZH2-mediated CDKN2A silencing and to bypass the senescence barrier. Importantly,
using an in vitro histone methyltransferase (HMTase) system, we found FOXA1
directly inhibits EZH2's histone methyltransferase activity through its
C-terminal histone binding motif. These data support that positive regulation of 
CDKN2A by FOXA1 counteracts its tumorigenic repression of by EZH2 in cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25264199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 10;453(1):124-30. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.082. Epub 2014 Sep 26.

EED regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition of cancer cells induced by TGF-ß.

Oktyabri D(1), Tange S(1), Terashima M(1), Ishimura A(1), Suzuki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa
University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Ishikawa, Japan. (2)Division of Functional
Genomics, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192,
Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address: suzuki-t@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

Histone methylation is involved in various biological and pathological processes 
including cancer development. In this study, we found that EED, a component of
Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2) that catalyzes methylation of lysine 27 of
histone H3 (H3K27), was involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
cancer cells induced by Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-ß). The expression
of EED was increased during TGF-ß-induced EMT and knockdown of EED inhibited
TGF-ß-induced morphological conversion of the cells associated with EMT. EED
knockdown antagonized TGF-ß-dependent expression changes of EMT-related genes
such as CDH1, ZEB1, ZEB2 and microRNA-200 (miR-200) family. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that EED was implicated in TGF-ß-induced
transcriptional repression of CDH1 and miR-200 family genes through the
regulation of histone H3 methylation and EZH2 occupancies on their regulatory
regions. Our study demonstrated a novel role of EED, which regulates PRC2
activity and histone methylation during TGF-ß-induced EMT of cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25264103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):2087-91. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.968780. Epub
2014 Oct 30.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is widely expressed in T-cell neoplasms, is
associated with high proliferation rate and correlates with MYC and pSTAT3
expression in a subset of cases.

Shi M(1), Shahsafaei A, Liu C, Yu H, Dorfman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School , Boston, MA , USA.

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Jul;56(7):1924-5.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), an epigenetic regulator and H3k27-specific
histone methyltransferase, is important for transcriptional regulation. EZH2 has 
been found to be overexpressed in B-cell lymphomas, as well as some T-cell
lymphomas. Here we investigated the expression of EZH2 by immunohistochemical
staining in a wide range of T-cell neoplasms. We found that EZH2 is highly
expressed in all categories of T-cell neoplasia studied, and its expression
strongly correlates with a high proliferation rate. Although up-regulation of
EZH2 has been reported to be modulated by the pSTAT3-MYC pathway, our data
indicate that EZH2 expression is correlated with MYC and/or pSTAT3 expression in 
only a subset of T-cell lymphomas, and that other mechanisms may control the
overexpression of EZH2 in many T-cell lymphomas. The high level of EZH2
expression in T cell lymphomas suggest that these neoplasms may benefit from
targeted treatment with a small molecule inhibitor of EZH2 currently in use in
clinical trials.

PMID: 25263318  [PubMed - in process]


54. Lung Cancer. 2014 Nov;86(2):268-73. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2014.09.010. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Expression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in biopsy specimen predicts
chemoresistance and survival in advanced non-small cell lung cancer receiving
first-line platinum-based chemotherapy.

Xu C(1), Hao K(1), Hu H(2), Sheng Z(3), Yan J(4), Wang Q(5), Yu L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210029, China; Clinical Center of Nanjing Respiratory Diseases and Imaging,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Chest
Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (3)Center of Laboratory, Nanjing Chest 
Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (4)MOE Key Laboratory, Model Animal
Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210061, China.
(5)Department of Geriatrics Medicine, Nanjing Second Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu
210003, China. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital,
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China; Clinical Center of Nanjing Respiratory Diseases
and Imaging, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. Electronic address:
yulike_doctor@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays a key role in tumorigenesis 
and cancer progression through epigenetic gene silencing and chromatin
remodeling. The objective of this study was to investigate the correlation
between EZH2 expression and platinum-based chemotherapy response as well as
survival of patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We identified 360 consecutive stage IIIB and IV NSCLC
patients who underwent first-line platinum-based chemotherapy.
Immunohistochemical analysis of EZH2 on the paraffin-embedded pre-treatment tumor
samples was performed and correlated with chemotherapy response and survival.
RESULTS: EZH2 was positive in 204 of 360 patients (56.7%). Of the 204 positive
EZH2 patients, 72 (35.3%) responded to chemotherapy with either complete
response, or partial remission. Of 156 negative EZH2 patients, 90 (57.7%)
exhibited a response to chemotherapy. The difference in response to therapy
between positive and negative EZH2 patients was statistically significant
(p<0.01). Univariate survival analysis indicated that patients with positive EZH2
had a significantly lower disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS)
than those patients with negative EZH2 expression. Multivariate Cox regression
analysis demonstrated that positive EZH2 expression was an independent prognostic
factor for both DFS and OS. Kaplan-Meier survival curves further confirmed that
positive EZH2 expression correlates with poor survival in NSCLC patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that advanced NSCLC patients with positive
expression of EZH2 exhibited resistance to cisplatin-based chemotherapy. EZH2 may
be a predictive and prognostic factor for cisplatin-based therapy response and
disease survival in advanced NSCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25262426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gene. 2014 Dec 1;552(2):255-64. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.09.052. Epub 2014 Sep
26.

MiR-15/16 complex targets p70S6 kinase 1 and controls cell proliferation in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells.

Janaki Ramaiah M(1), Lavanya A(2), Honarpisheh M(3), Zarea M(4), Bhadra U(5),
Bhadra MP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT),
Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India; School of Chemical and Biotechnology, SASTRA
University, Tirumalaisamudram, Thanjavur, India. Electronic address:
janaki7777@gmail.com. (2)Centre for Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology (IICT), Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India. Electronic address:
lavanyaiict@gmail.com. (3)Centre for Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology (IICT), Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India. Electronic address:
mohsen.honarpisheh@gmail.com. (4)Centre for Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of
Chemical Technology (IICT), Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India. Electronic address:
moj.zarea@gmail.com. (5)Centre For Cellular and Molecular Biology (CCMB), Uppal
Road, Hyderabad, India. Electronic address: Utpal@ccmb.res.in. (6)Centre for
Chemical Biology, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Tarnaka,
Hyderabad, India. Electronic address: manikapb@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that regulate
post-transcriptional mRNA expression by binding to 3' untranslated region
(3'-UTR) of the complementary mRNA sequence resulting in translational repression
and gene silencing. They act as negative regulators of gene expression and play a
pivotal role in regulating apoptosis and cell proliferation. Studies have shown
that miRNAs interact with p53 by regulating the activity and function of p53
through direct repression or its regulators. Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
is an evolutionary conserved check point protein kinase that plays a major effect
in the control of cell division via protein synthesis regulation. mTOR regulates 
protein synthesis through phosphorylation and inactivation of 4E-BP1 and through 
phosphorylation and activation of S6 kinase 1 (S6K1). These two downstream
effectors of mTOR control cell growth and metabolism. In mammals, mTOR protein
kinase is the central node in the nutrient and growth factor signaling and p53
plays a critical role in sensing genotoxic stress. Activation of p53 inhibits
mTOR activity, which in turn regulates its downstream targets providing a cross
talk among both the signaling machinery. MicroRNA-15 and 16 belong to a common
precursor family and are highly conserved. Deletion or downregulation of these
two microRNAs has been shown to accelerate cell division by modulating the
expression of the genes involved in controlling cell cycle progression. These
microRNAs may function as tumor suppressors and act on the downstream targets of 
p53 signaling pathway. To have a better insight of the role of miR-15/16 in
regulating the cross talk of p53 and mTOR, we performed an in depth study in
MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells by performing a gain-of-function analysis with
lentiviral plasmids expressing microRNA-15 and 16.
METHODS: The effect of individual microRNAs on RPS6KB1 was examined by using
3'-UTR clones via luciferase based assays. The cell cycle effects were observed
by flow-cytometric analysis. Reverse transcription PCR was used to explore the
expression of mTOR and RPS6KB1 in cells transfected with miR-15/16.
RESULTS: Overexpression of miR-15/16 led to inhibition of cell proliferation
causing G1 cell cycle arrest as well as caspase-3 dependent apoptosis. Forced
expression of miR-15/16 might lead to decrease in mRNA level of RPS6KB1, mTOR.
The effect was a complete reversal after treatment with anti-miRs against
miR-15/16 proving the specificity of the expression. In addition, the dual
luciferase reporter assays indicated a clear decrease in luciferase gene
expression in cells transfected with lentiviral based miR-15 and 16 plasmids
indicating that miR-15/16 directly targets RPS6KB1 through its 3'-UTR binding.
Further, these microRNAs also inhibit epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
by targeting key proteins such as Twist1 and EZH2 clearly demonstrating its
crucial role in controlling cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that exogenous microRNA-15/16 can target RPS6KB1,
control cell proliferation and cause apoptosis in caspase-dependent manner even
in the absence of functional p53.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncotarget. 2014 Sep 30;5(18):8123-35.

Identification of a DNA methylation signature to predict disease-free survival in
locally advanced rectal cancer.

Gaedcke J(1), Leha A(2), Claus R(3), Weichenhan D(4), Jung K(5), Kitz J(6), Grade
M(7), Wolff HA(8), Jo P(7), Doyen J(9), Gérard JP(9), Johnsen SA(7), Plass C(4), 
Beißbarth T(5), Ghadimi M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. Both authors contributed equally. (2)Department 
of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
Both authors contributed equally. (3)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Dept. of
Medicine, Div. Hematology/Oncology, University of Freiburg Medical Center,
Freiburg, Germany (present address). (4)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk
Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department
of Medical Statistics, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen,
Germany. (7)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology, University 
Medical Center Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. (9)Radiotherapy Department,
Cyclotron Biomédical, Centre Antoine-Lacassagne Nice, France.

In locally advanced rectal cancer a preoperative predictive biomarker is
necessary to adjust treatment specifically for those patients expected to suffer 
relapse. We applied whole genome methylation CpG island array analyses to an
initial set of patients (n=11) to identify differentially methylated regions
(DMRs) that separate a good from a bad prognosis group. Using a quantitative
high-resolution approach, candidate DMRs were first validated in a set of 61
patients (test set) and then confirmed DMRs were further validated in additional 
independent patient cohorts (n=71, n=42). We identified twenty highly
discriminative DMRs and validated them in the test set using the MassARRAY
technique. Ten DMRs could be confirmed which allowed separation into prognosis
groups (p=0.0207, HR=4.09). The classifier was validated in two additional
cohorts (n=71, p=0.0345, HR=3.57 and n=42, p=0.0113, HR=3.78). Interestingly, six
of the ten DMRs represented regions close to the transcriptional start sites of
genes which are also marked by the Polycomb Repressor Complex component EZH2. In 
conclusion we present a classifier comprising 10 DMRs which predicts patient
prognosis with a high degree of accuracy. These data may now help to discriminate
between patients that may respond better to standard treatments from those that
may require alternative modalities.

PMCID: PMC4226671
PMID: 25261372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Tumour Biol. 2014 Dec;35(12):12619-26. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2585-6. Epub 2014 
Sep 27.

miR-101 regulates expression of EZH2 and contributes to progression of and
cisplatin resistance in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Liu L(1), Guo J, Yu L, Cai J, Gui T, Tang H, Song L, Wang J, Han F, Yang C, Chen 
C, Marks A, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

In order to determine the expression pattern of miR-101 in epithelial ovarian
neoplasms and assess the functions and mechanism of miR-101 in tumorigenesis, we 
detected the expression of miR-101 and zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in normal, benign, 
and malignant ovarian tissues and used miR-101 lentivirus infection to increase
miR-101 expression in ovarian cancer cells and drug-resistant cancer cells. We
found that miR-101 was underexpressed in epithelial ovarian cancer tissues, which
significantly correlated with poor cell differentiation, advanced International
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stages, and ovarian cancer cell
cisplatin resistance. miR-101 overexpression decreased the expression of EZH2,
reduced proliferation and migration of ovarian cancer cells, and resensitized
drug-resistant cancer cells to cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity, suggesting the
important role miR-101 plays in ovarian cancer that may be associated with its
function as a regulator targeting EZH2. Our findings show the potential of
miR-101 as a diagnostic marker and new therapeutic target for patients with
epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMID: 25260883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Appl Clin Genet. 2014 Sep 10;7:159-67. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S35759. eCollection
2014.

Ataxia-telangiectasia: future prospects.

Chaudhary MW(1), Al-Baradie RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology, Neurosciences Centre, King Fahad Specialist Hospital,
Dammam, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is an autosomal recessive multi-system disorder
caused by mutation in the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM). ATM is a
large serine/threonine protein kinase, a member of the phosphoinositide
3-kinase-related protein kinase (PIKK) family whose best-studied function is as
master controller of signal transduction for the DNA damage response (DDR) in the
event of double strand breaks (DSBs). The DDR rapidly recognizes DNA lesions and 
initiates the appropriate cellular programs to maintain genome integrity. This
includes the coordination of cell-cycle checkpoints, transcription, translation, 
DNA repair, metabolism, and cell fate decisions, such as apoptosis or senescence.
DSBs can be generated by exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) or various chemical 
compounds, such as topoisomerase inhibitors, or can be part of programmed
generation and repair of DSBs via cellular enzymes needed for the generation of
the antibody repertoire as well as the maturation of germ cells. AT patients have
immunodeficiency, and are sterile with gonadal dysgenesis as a result of defect
in meiotic recombination. In the cells of nervous system ATM has additional role 
in vesicle dynamics as well as in the maintenance of the epigenetic code of
histone modifications. Moderate levels of ATM are associated with prolonged
lifespan through resistance to oxidative stress. ATM inhibitors are being viewed 
as potential radiosensitizers as part of cancer radiotherapy. Though there is no 
cure for the disease at present, glucocorticoids have been shown to induce
alternate splicing site in the gene for ATM partly restoring its activity, but
their most effective timing in the disease natural history is not yet known. Gene
therapy is promising but large size of the gene makes it technically difficult to
be delivered across the blood-brain barrier at present. As of now, apart from
glucocorticoids, use of histone deacetylase inhibitors/EZH2 to minimize effect of
the absence of ATM, looks more promising.

PMCID: PMC4173637
PMID: 25258552  [PubMed]


59. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004642.
eCollection 2014.

Regulation of p53 and Rb links the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway to EZH2 expression
and cell senescence.

Iannetti A(1), Ledoux AC(1), Tudhope SJ(2), Sellier H(1), Zhao B(3), Mowla S(4), 
Moore A(1), Hummerich H(4), Gewurz BE(3), Cockell SJ(5), Jat PS(4), Willmore
E(2), Perkins ND(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (2)Northern Institute 
for Cancer Research, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle
Upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (3)Division of Infectious Disease, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of
Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle
University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

There are two major pathways leading to induction of NF-<U+03BA>B subunits. The
classical (or canonical) pathway typically leads to the induction of RelA or
c-Rel containing complexes, and involves the degradation of I<U+03BA>Ba in a manner
dependent on I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) ß and the IKK regulatory subunit NEMO. The
alternative (or non-canonical) pathway, involves the inducible processing of p100
to p52, leading to the induction of NF-<U+03BA>B2(p52)/RelB containing complexes, and is
dependent on IKKa and NF-<U+03BA>B inducing kinase (NIK). Here we demonstrate that in
primary human fibroblasts, the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway subunits NF-<U+03BA>B2 and RelB
have multiple, but distinct, effects on the expression of key regulators of the
cell cycle, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and protein stability.
Specifically, following siRNA knockdown, quantitative PCR, western blot analyses 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) show that NF-<U+03BA>B2 regulates the
expression of CDK4 and CDK6, while RelB, through the regulation of genes such as 
PSMA5 and ANAPC1, regulates the stability of p21WAF1 and the tumour suppressor
p53. These combine to regulate the activity of the retinoblastoma protein, Rb,
leading to induction of polycomb protein EZH2 expression. Moreover, our ChIP
analysis demonstrates that EZH2 is also a direct NF-<U+03BA>B target gene. Microarray
analysis revealed that in fibroblasts, EZH2 antagonizes a subset of p53 target
genes previously associated with the senescent cell phenotype, including DEK and 
RacGAP1. We show that this pathway provides the major route of crosstalk between 
the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and p53, a consequence of which is to suppress cell
senescence. Importantly, we find that activation of NF-<U+03BA>B also induces EZH2
expression in CD40L stimulated cells from Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia patients. 
We therefore propose that this pathway provides a mechanism through which
microenvironment induced NF-<U+03BA>B can inhibit tumor suppressor function and promote 
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4177746
PMID: 25255445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 25;9(9):e107009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107009.
eCollection 2014.

Deazaneplanocin a is a promising drug to kill multiple myeloma cells in their
niche.

Gaudichon J(1), Milano F(1), Cahu J(1), DaCosta L(2), Martens AC(3), Renoir
JM(2), Sola B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Associée 4652, Université de Caen, Normandie Univ, Caen, France.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U749, Institut
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (3)Department of Immunology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Tumoral plasma cells has retained stemness features and in particular, a
polycomb-silenced gene expression signature. Therefore, epigenetic therapy could 
be a mean to fight for multiple myeloma (MM), still an incurable pathology.
Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), a S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase inhibitor,
targets enhancer of zest homolog 2 (EZH2), a component of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) and is capable to induce the death of cancer cells. We show here
that, in some MM cell lines, DZNep induced both caspase-dependent and
-independent apoptosis. However, the induction of cell death was not mediated
through its effect on EZH2 and the trimethylation on lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me3). DZNep likely acted through non-epigenetic mechanisms in myeloma
cells. In vivo, in xenograft models, and in vitro DZNep showed potent antimyeloma
activity alone or in combination with bortezomib. These preclinical data let us
to envisage new therapeutic strategies for myeloma.

PMCID: PMC4177844
PMID: 25255316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Dec;13(12):3062-73. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0876.
Epub 2014 Sep 24.

A687V EZH2 is a driver of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) hypertrimethylation.

Ott HM(1), Graves AP(2), Pappalardi MB(1), Huddleston M(2), Halsey WS(2), Hughes 
AM(2), Groy A(1), Dul E(2), Jiang Y(2), Bai Y(3), Annan R(2), Verma SK(1), Knight
SD(1), Kruger RG(1), Dhanak D(1), Schwartz B(2), Tummino PJ(1), Creasy CL(4),
McCabe MT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology R&D, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. (2)Platform Technology and Science, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. (3)Molecular Medicine Unit, Cancer
Research, Oncology R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. (4)Cancer
Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology R&D,
GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. Molecular Medicine Unit, Cancer
Research, Oncology R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. (5)Cancer
Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology R&D,
GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, Pennsylvania. michael.t.mccabe@gsk.com.

The EZH2 methyltransferase silences gene expression through methylation of
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27). Recently, EZH2 mutations have been reported at
Y641, A677, and A687 in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Although the Y641F/N/S/H/C and
A677G mutations exhibit clearly increased activity with substrates dimethylated
at lysine 27 (H3K27me2), the A687V mutant has been shown to prefer a
monomethylated lysine 27 (H3K27me1) with little gain of activity toward H3K27me2.
Herein, we demonstrate that despite this unique substrate preference, A687V EZH2 
still drives increased H3K27me3 when transiently expressed in cells. However,
unlike the previously described mutants that dramatically deplete global H3K27me2
levels, A687V EZH2 retains normal levels of H3K27me2. Sequencing of
B-cell-derived cancer cell lines identified an acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell 
line harboring this mutation. Similar to exogenous expression of A687V EZH2, this
cell line exhibited elevated H3K27me3 while possessing H3K27me2 levels higher
than Y641- or A677-mutant lines. Treatment of A687V EZH2-mutant cells with
GSK126, a selective EZH2 inhibitor, was associated with a global decrease in
H3K27me3, robust gene activation, caspase activation, and decreased
proliferation. Structural modeling of the A687V EZH2 active site suggests that
the increased catalytic activity with H3K27me1 may be due to a weakened
interaction with an active site water molecule that must be displaced for
dimethylation to occur. These findings suggest that A687V EZH2 likely increases
global H3K27me3 indirectly through increased catalytic activity with H3K27me1 and
cells harboring this mutation are highly dependent on EZH2 activity for their
survival.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25253781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 15;74(22):6565-77. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1218. Epub 
2014 Sep 24.

In vivo disruption of an Rb-E2F-Ezh2 signaling loop causes bladder cancer.

Santos M(1), Martínez-Fernández M(1), Dueñas M(1), García-Escudero R(1), Alfaya
B(2), Villacampa F(3), Saiz-Ladera C(2), Costa C(2), Oteo M(4), Duarte J(3),
Martínez V(5), Gómez-Rodriguez MJ(3), Martín ML(5), Fernández M(5), Viatour P(6),
Morcillo MA(4), Sage J(6), Castellano D(3), Rodriguez-Peralto JL(7), de la Rosa
F(3), Paramio JM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Oncología Molecular, CIEMAT (ed70A), Madrid, Spain. Unidad de
Oncogenómica, Instituto de Investigación, I+12 University Hospital "12 de
Octubre," UCM, Madrid, Spain. (2)Unidad de Oncología Molecular, CIEMAT (ed70A),
Madrid, Spain. (3)Unidad de Oncogenómica, Instituto de Investigación, I+12
University Hospital "12 de Octubre," UCM, Madrid, Spain. Unidad de Uro-Oncología,
Hospital Universitario "12 de Octubre", Madrid, Spain. (4)Unidad de Oncogenómica,
Instituto de Investigación, I+12 University Hospital "12 de Octubre," UCM,
Madrid, Spain. Unidad de Aplicaciones Biomédicas y Farmacocinética, CIEMAT (ed
12), Madrid, Spain. (5)Unidad de Uro-Oncología, Hospital Universitario "12 de
Octubre", Madrid, Spain. (6)Departments of Pediatrics and Genetics, Stanford
University, Stanford, California. (7)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital
Universitario "12 de Octubre", Instituto de Investigación I+12, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Unidad de Oncología Molecular, CIEMAT (ed70A), Madrid, Spain. Unidad de
Oncogenómica, Instituto de Investigación, I+12 University Hospital "12 de
Octubre," UCM, Madrid, Spain. jesusm.paramio@ciemat.es.

Bladder cancer is a highly prevalent human disease in which retinoblastoma (Rb)
pathway inactivation and epigenetic alterations are common events. However, the
connection between these two processes is still poorly understood. Here, we show 
that the in vivo inactivation of all Rb family genes in the mouse urothelium is
sufficient to initiate bladder cancer development. The characterization of the
mouse tumors revealed multiple molecular features of human bladder cancer,
including the activation of E2F transcription factor and subsequent Ezh2
expression and the activation of several signaling pathways previously identified
as highly relevant in urothelial tumors. These mice represent a genetically
defined model for human high-grade superficial bladder cancer. Whole
transcriptional characterizations of mouse and human bladder tumors revealed a
significant overlap and confirmed the predominant role for Ezh2 in the
downregulation of gene expression programs. Importantly, the increased tumor
recurrence and progression in human patients with superficial bladder cancer is
associated with increased E2F and Ezh2 expression and Ezh2-mediated gene
expression repression. Collectively, our studies provide a genetically defined
model for human high-grade superficial bladder cancer and demonstrate the
existence of an Rb-E2F-Ezh2 axis in bladder whose disruption can promote tumor
development.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4233185
PMID: 25252918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11433-46. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku852. Epub 2014
Sep 23.

SSX2 is a novel DNA-binding protein that antagonizes polycomb group body
formation and gene repression.

Gjerstorff MF(1), Relster MM(2), Greve KB(2), Moeller JB(3), Elias D(2),
Lindgreen JN(2), Schmidt S(4), Mollenhauer J(4), Voldborg B(5), Pedersen CB(2),
Brückmann NH(2), Møllegaard NE(6), Ditzel HJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark mgjerstorff@health.sdu.dk. (2)Department of
Cancer and Inflammation Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
DK-5000, Denmark. (3)Department of Cardiovascular and Renal Research, University 
of Southern Denmark, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark. (4)Department of Cancer and
Inflammation Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark
The Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence NanoCAN, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, DK-5000, Denmark. (5)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DK-2200, Denmark. (6)Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200, Denmark.
(7)Department of Cancer and Inflammation Research, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark The Lundbeckfonden Center of Excellence
NanoCAN, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark Department of
Oncology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, DK-5000, Denmark.

Polycomb group (PcG) complexes regulate cellular identity through epigenetic
programming of chromatin. Here, we show that SSX2, a germline-specific protein
ectopically expressed in melanoma and other types of human cancers, is a
chromatin-associated protein that antagonizes BMI1 and EZH2 PcG body formation
and derepresses PcG target genes. SSX2 further negatively regulates the level of 
the PcG-associated histone mark H3K27me3 in melanoma cells, and there is a clear 
inverse correlation between SSX2/3 expression and H3K27me3 in spermatogenesis.
However, SSX2 does not affect the overall composition and stability of PcG
complexes, and there is no direct concordance between SSX2 and BMI1/H3K27me3
presence at regulated genes. This suggests that SSX2 antagonizes PcG function
through an indirect mechanism, such as modulation of chromatin structure. SSX2
binds double-stranded DNA in a sequence non-specific manner in agreement with the
observed widespread association with chromatin. Our results implicate SSX2 in
regulation of chromatin structure and function.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4191419
PMID: 25249625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Exp Hematol. 2015 Jan;43(1):53-64.e1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.09.004. Epub
2014 Sep 20.

Sall4 overexpression blocks murine hematopoiesis in a dose-dependent manner.

Milanovich S(1), Peterson J(2), Allred J(3), Stelloh C(2), Rajasekaran K(2),
Fisher J(4), Duncan SA(4), Malarkannan S(2), Rao S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Sanford Children's Health and Cancer Biology Research Centers, Sioux Falls,
SD, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of South Dakota Sanford School of
Medicine, Sioux Falls, SD, USA. Electronic address:
samuel.milanovich@sanfordhealth.org. (2)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. (3)Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI,
USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. (5)Blood Research Institute, BloodCenter of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and
Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA; Division of Pediatric 
Hematology, Oncology, and Blood and Marrow Transplant, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Sal-like protein 4 (SALL4) is a transcription factor that exists in two splice
isoforms, SALL4a and SALL4b, and regulates transcription in embryonic stem cells,
hematopoiesis, and acute myeloid leukemia. Constitutive overexpression of SALL4
in mice induces acute myeloid leukemia. Interestingly, a potential benefit of
using SALL4 to facilitate ex vivo hematopoietic stem cell expansion has been
proposed. However, distinct roles for how SALL4 contributes to normal versus
malignant processes remain undefined. Here we show that SALL4b is the predominant
isoform in murine hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors. Overexpression of
either SALL4 isoform in hematopoietic stem cells or progenitors impairs
hematopoietic colony formation and expansion in vitro. Lineage-negative bone
marrow overexpressing SALL4b fails to engraft and reconstitute hematopoiesis when
transplanted. We found that both SALL4a and SALL4b overexpression impair
hematopoiesis, in part through dose-dependent repression of BMI1. Additionally,
we have identified the following potential novel SALL4 target genes in
hematopoiesis: ARID5B (SALL4a and SALL4b), EZH2, and KLF2 (SALL4a). Lastly, we
found that SALL4 expression is variable in acute myeloid leukemia, ranging from
no expression to levels comparable to embryonic stem cells. These results show
that SALL4 isoforms contribute to only a subset of acute myeloid leukemia and
that overexpression of SALL4 isoforms impairs hematopoiesis through repression of
BMI1. Together these data demonstrate the sensitivity of hematopoiesis to
appropriately balanced SALL4 expression, highlighting the importance of
regulating this dynamic in potential therapeutic applications such as ex vivo
stem cell expansion.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4268405
PMID: 25246269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 22;9(9):e108265. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108265.
eCollection 2014.

Prognostic value of polycomb proteins EZH2, BMI1 and SUZ12 and histone
modification H3K27me3 in colorectal cancer.

Benard A(1), Goossens-Beumer IJ(1), van Hoesel AQ(1), Horati H(1), Putter H(2),
Zeestraten EC(1), van de Velde CJ(1), Kuppen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Statistics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Numerous changes in epigenetic mechanisms have been described in various types of
tumors. In search for new biomarkers, we investigated the expression of
Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins EZH2, BMI1 and SUZ12 and associated histone
modification H3K27me3 in colorectal cancer. Nuclear expression of PcG proteins
and histone modification H3K27me3 were immunohistochemically (IHC) stained on a
tissue microarray (TMA), including 247 tumor tissues and 47 normal tissues, and
scored using the semi-automated Ariol system. Tumor tissues showed higher
expression of EZH2 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.05) and H3K27me3 (p<0.001) as compared to their normal 
counterparts. Combined marker trend analyses indicated that an increase in the
number of markers showing high expression was associated with better prognosis.
High expression of all four markers in the combined marker analyses was
correlated with the best patient survival and the longest recurrence-free
survival, with overall survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01, HR 0.42(0.21-0.84)), disease-free
survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.007, HR 0.23(0.08-0.67) and local recurrence-free survival
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02, HR 0.30(0.11-0.84)). In conclusion, we found that expression of PcG
proteins and H3K27me3 showed prognostic value in our study cohort. Better
stratification of patients was obtained by combining the expression data of the
investigated biomarkers as compared to the individual markers, underlining the
importance of investigating multiple markers simultaneously.

PMCID: PMC4171510
PMID: 25243792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1206:97-106. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1369-5_9.

nRIP-seq: a technique to identify RNA targets of an RNA binding protein on a
genome-wide scale.

Zhao JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)RNA Biology Program, Sanford Children's Health Research Center,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 N. Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, 
CA, 92037, USA, czhao@sanfordburnham.org.

Native RNA immunoprecipitation (nRIP) coupled with high-throughput sequencing
(nRIP-seq) is a powerful technique that allows transcriptome-wide identification 
of the entire subset of coding and noncoding RNAs associated with a particular
protein. Since this technology is carried out in a native condition without
cross-linking, nRIP-seq detects RNAs that bind a protein directly or indirectly
through a larger RNA-protein complex. Here, we use the interaction between RNA
and chromatin modifiers, Polycomb proteins, as an example to describe this
method. Using nRIP-seq, we provide a snapshot of Ezh2, a Polycomb component, and 
RNA interaction in mouse embryonic stem cells.

PMID: 25240890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 30;5(22):11319-32.

EZH2 promotes angiogenesis through inhibition of miR-1/Endothelin-1 axis in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Lu J(1), Zhao FP(1), Peng Z(2), Zhang MW(1), Lin SX(3), Liang BJ(1), Zhang B(4), 
Liu X(1), Wang L(1), Li G(1), Tian WD(1), Peng Y(5), He ML(6), Li XP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Lab of Otolaryngology &Head and Neck
tumor, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck 
Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Shantou University Medical College,
Shantou, China. (4)School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (5)Department of Neurology, The Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Key Laboratory of
malignant tumor gene regulation and target therapy of Guangdong Higher Education 
Institutes, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (6)Department of Biomedical
Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Emerging evidence clearly indicates that EZH2 plays a crucial role in tumor
angiogenesis. However, the role of EZH2 in angiogenesis is still unknown in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). We here showed that the elevated EZH2 level was
closely associated with an aggressive and poor prognostic phenotype, and was
positively correlated with microvessel density (MVD) in NPC tissues. Functional
studies showed that EZH2 upregulation promoted cell proliferation, migration and 
tubule formation of endothelial cells, and knockdown of EZH2 suppressed tumor
growth, metastasis and angiogenesis in vivo. Mechanistic investigations revealed 
that EZH2 inhibited miR-1 transcription via promoter binding activity, leading to
enhanced expression of Endothelin-1 (ET-1) which is suppressed by miR-1 targeting
of ET-1 3'UTR. Furthermore, knockdown of EZH2 or overexpression of miR-1 exerted 
anti-angiogenic effect on NPC cells. More importantly, the neutralizing antibody 
against ET-1 significantly abrogated the pro-angiogenic effect of EZH2, and
forced expression of ET-1 rescued the anti-angiogenic effect induced by EZH2
knockdown. In clinical specimens, ET-1 was widely overexpressed and associated
with clinical stage and MVD. Taken together, our results identify a novel
signaling pathway involved in NPC angiogenesis, and also suggest that
EZH2-miR-1-ET-1 axis represents multiple potential therapeutic targets for NPC.

PMCID: PMC4294357
PMID: 25237831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2014 Nov 7;289(45):31310-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.604868. Epub 2014 
Sep 17.

NRF2/long noncoding RNA ROR signaling regulates mammary stem cell expansion and
protects against estrogen genotoxicity.

Zhang Y(1), Xia J(1), Li Q(1), Yao Y(1), Eades G(1), Gernapudi R(1), Duru N(1),
Kensler TW(2), Zhou Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201 and. (2)Department of
Pharmacology & Chemical Biology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261. (3)From the Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21201 and qzhou@som.umaryland.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as key regulators of gene expression
in embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and differentiation. In ESCs, lncRNAs
are regulated at the genetic level via transcription factor binding to lncRNA
gene promoters. Here we demonstrate that the key cytoprotective transcription
factor NRF2 controls lncRNA expression in mammary stem cells. By profiling
lncRNAs in wild-type and NRF2 knockdown mammary stem cells, we demonstrate that
the lncRNA ROR, a regulator of embryonic stem cell pluripotency, is overexpressed
upon NRF2 knockdown. We performed promoter analyses and examined predicted NRF2
binding elements in the ROR promoter using luciferase reporter constructs of a
ROR promoter deletion series. Our studies revealed that NRF2 binds to two
specific NRF2 response elements flanking the ROR promoter and that these two NRF2
response elements are equally important to suppress ROR transcription. In
addition, we identified associated H3K27me3 chromatin modification and EZH2
binding at the ROR promoter that was dependent on NRF2 binding. We observed that 
NRF2 knockdown or ROR overexpression leads to increased stem cell self-renewal in
mammary stem cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate Nrf2 regulation of the mammary
stem cell population in vivo. These observations provide further evidence for the
critical role of NRF2 in maintaining normal stem cell subpopulations in mammary
epithelium.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4223331
PMID: 25231996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 17;9(9):e107905. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107905.
eCollection 2014.

Epigenetic mechanisms underlying the dynamic expression of cancer-testis genes,
PAGE2, -2B and SPANX-B, during mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

Yilmaz-Ozcan S(1), Sade A(2), Kucukkaraduman B(1), Kaygusuz Y(1), Senses KM(1),
Banerjee S(2), Gure AO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara,
Turkey. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University,
Ankara, Turkey.

Cancer-testis (CT) genes are expressed in various cancers but not in normal
tissues other than in cells of the germline. Although DNA demethylation of
promoter-proximal CpGs of CT genes is linked to their expression in cancer, the
mechanisms leading to demethylation are unknown. To elucidate such mechanisms we 
chose to study the Caco-2 colorectal cancer cell line during the course of its
spontaneous differentiation in vitro, as we found CT genes, in particular PAGE2, 
-2B and SPANX-B, to be up-regulated during this process. Differentiation of these
cells resulted in a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) as evidenced by
the gain of epithelial markers CDX2, Claudin-4 and E-cadherin, and a concomitant 
loss of mesenchymal markers Vimentin, Fibronectin-1 and Transgelin. PAGE2 and
SPAN-X up-regulation was accompanied by an increase in Ten-eleven translocation-2
(TET2) expression and cytosine 5-hydroxymethylation as well as the disassociation
of heterochromatin protein 1 and the polycomb repressive complex 2 protein EZH2
from promoter-proximal regions of these genes. Reversal of differentiation
resulted in down-regulation of PAGE2, -2B and SPANX-B, and induction of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers, demonstrating the dynamic
nature of CT gene regulation in this model.

PMCID: PMC4168264
PMID: 25229454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. BMC Cancer. 2014 Sep 16;14:673. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-673.

Multi-transcript profiling in archival diagnostic prostate cancer needle biopsies
to evaluate biomarkers in non-surgically treated men.

Kachroo N, Warren AY, Gnanapragasam VJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Prostate Cancer Group, Hutchison/MRC research centre, University
of Cambridge, Hills Road, CB1 0XZ Cambridge, UK. vjg29@cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Most biomarkers in prostate cancer have only been evaluated in
surgical cohorts. The value of these biomarkers in a different therapy context
remains unclear. Our objective was to test a panel of surgical biomarkers for
prognostic value in men treated by external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) and primary 
androgen deprivation therapy (PADT).
METHODS: The Fluidigm® PCR array was used for multi-transcript profiling of laser
microdissected tumours from archival formalin-fixed diagnostic biopsies of
patients treated by EBRT or PADT. Cases were matched for disease characteristics 
and had known 5 year biochemical relapse outcomes (n =<U+2009>60). Results were
validated by immunohistochemistry in a custom needle biopsy tissue microarray.
Six biomarkers previously tested only in surgical cohorts were analysed (PTEN,
E-Cadherin, EGFR, EZH2, PSMA, MSMB). Transcript and protein expression was
correlated with clinical outcome analysed using Kruskal Wallis, Fisher's test and
Cox proportional hazard model.
RESULTS: Altered expression of E-Cadherin (p =<U+2009>0.008) was associated with early
relapse after EBRT. In PADT treated men however only altered MSMB transcript was 
prognostic for early relapse (p =<U+2009>0.001). The remaining biomarkers however did
not demonstrate prognostic ability in either cohort. In a separate tissue array
we validated altered E-Cadherin protein as a predictor of early relapse after
EBRT (n =<U+2009>47) (HR 0.34, CI p =<U+2009>0.02) but not in PADT treated men (n =<U+2009>63).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate proof of principle of multiple transcript profiling in
archival diagnostic biopsies of non-surgically treated men for biomarker
discovery. We identify a role for E-Cadherin as a novel biomarker of early
relapse following EBRT.

PMCID: PMC4174634
PMID: 25227682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 16;9(9):e107251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107251.
eCollection 2014.

Aberrant upregulation of 14-3-3s and EZH2 expression serves as an inferior
prognostic biomarker for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang Y(1), Li Y(2), Lin C(3), Ding J(4), Liao G(1), Tang B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, P.R. China. (2)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University, Guilin, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, P.R. China. (4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang, P.R. China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignancy in the world. 
It is of important significance to find biomarkers for the prognostic monitoring 
of HCC. The 14-3-3s and EZH2 proteins are involved in cell cycle regulation and
epigenetic silencing. We herein examined the significance of 14-3-3 s and EZH2 in
HCC (n = 167) by immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR and qRT-PCR. The correlation
between 14-3-3s and EZH2 expression and patients' clinicopathologic features were
examined, as was the correlation between 14-3-3s and EZH2 expression and the
prognosis of HCC patients. We found that 14-3-3s and EZH2 were highly expressed
in HCC (71% and 90%), the expression of EZH2, but not 14-3-3s, is associated with
vascular invasion and tumor differentiation (p<0.01). The coexistence of 14-3-3s 
and EZH2 overexpression is associated with a relatively unfavorable prognosis
(p<0.01), suggesting that aberrant upregulation of 14-3-3s and EZH2 expression
serves as an inferior prognostic biomarker for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4165773
PMID: 25226601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 16;9(9):e107817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107817.
eCollection 2014.

The KDM2B- let-7b -EZH2 axis in myelodysplastic syndromes as a target for
combined epigenetic therapy.

Karoopongse E(1), Yeung C(2), Byon J(3), Ramakrishnan A(4), Holman ZJ(1), Jiang
PY(5), Yu Q(6), Deeg HJ(4), Marcondes AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington, United States of America. (2)Clinical Research Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of America;
Department of Anatomic Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America. (3)Department of Hematology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, United States of America. (4)Clinical Research Division,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. (5)Medical Oncology, Providence Regional Cancer
Partnership and the Everett Clinic, Everett, Washington, United States of
America. (6)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore, China.

Both DNA and histone methylation are dysregulated in the myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS). Based on preliminary data we hypothesized that dysregulated
interactions of KDM2B, let-7b and EZH2 signals lead to an aberrant epigenetic
landscape. Gene expression in CD34+ cells from MDS marrows was analyzed by
NanoString miR array and validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
The functions of KDM2B, let-7b and EZH2 were characterized in myeloid cell lines 
and in primary MDS cells. Let-7b levels were significantly higher, and KDM2B and 
EZH2 expression was lower in primary CD34+ MDS marrow cells (n = 44) than in
healthy controls (n = 21; p<0.013, and p<0.0001, respectively). Overexpression of
let-7b reduced EZH2 and KDM2B protein levels, and decreased cells in S-phase
while increasing G0/G1 cells (p = 0.0005), accompanied by decreased H3K27me3 and 
cyclin D1. Silencing of KDM2B increased let-7b expression. Treatment with the
cyclopentanyl analog of 3-deazaadenosine, DZNep, combined with the DNA
hypomethylating agent 5-azacitidine, decreased levels of EZH2, suppressed
methylation of di- and tri-methylated H3K27, and increased p16 expression,
associated with cell proliferation. Thus, KDM2B, via let-7b/EZH2, promotes
transcriptional repression. DZNep bypassed the inhibitory KDM2B/let-7b/EZH2 axis 
by preventing H3K27 methylation and reducing cell proliferation. DZNep might be
able to enhance the therapeutic effects of DNA hypomethylating agents such as
5-azacitidine, currently considered standard therapy for patients with MDS.

PMCID: PMC4166605
PMID: 25225797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cancer Discov. 2014 Nov;4(11):1342-53. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-0622. Epub
2014 Sep 15.

Genomic landscape of Ewing sarcoma defines an aggressive subtype with
co-association of STAG2 and TP53 mutations.

Tirode F(1), Surdez D(1), Ma X(2), Parker M(2), Le Deley MC(3), Bahrami A(4),
Zhang Z(2), Lapouble E(5), Grossetête-Lalami S(1), Rusch M(2), Reynaud S(5),
Rio-Frio T(6), Hedlund E(2), Wu G(2), Chen X(2), Pierron G(5), Oberlin O(7),
Zaidi S(1), Lemmon G(2), Gupta P(2), Vadodaria B(8), Easton J(8), Gut M(9), Ding 
L(10), Mardis ER(10), Wilson RK(10), Shurtleff S(4), Laurence V(11), Michon
J(12), Marec-Bérard P(13), Gut I(9), Downing J(8), Dyer M(14), Zhang J(15),
Delattre O(16); St. Jude Children's Research HospitalWashington University
Pediatric Cancer Genome Project and the International Cancer Genome Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U830, Laboratory of Genetics and Cancer Biology, Institut Curie, Paris,
France. Centre de Recherche, Institut Curie, Paris, France. (2)Department of
Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee.
(3)Departement d'Epidémiologie et de Biostatistiques, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, 
France. (4)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee. (5)Unité de Génétique Somatique, Centre Hospitalier, Institut
Curie, Paris, France. (6)Centre de Recherche, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(7)Departement de Pédiatrie, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (8)The Pediatric 
Cancer Genome Laboratory, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee. (9)Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG), Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Department of Genetics, The Genome Institute, Washington University School of
Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. Department of Medicine, The Genome
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis,
Missouri. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. (11)Département d'Oncologie Medicale, Adolescents et 
Jeunes Adultes, Centre Hospitalier, Institut Curie, Paris, France.
(12)Département d'Oncologie Pediatrique, Adolescents et Jeunes Adultes, Centre
Hospitalier, Institut Curie, Paris, France. (13)Institute for Paediatric
Haematology and Oncology, Leon Bérard Cancer Centre, University of Lyon, Lyon,
France. (14)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy
Chase, Maryland. (15)Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee. olivier.delattre@curie.fr
jinghui.zhang@stjude.org. (16)INSERM U830, Laboratory of Genetics and Cancer
Biology, Institut Curie, Paris, France. Centre de Recherche, Institut Curie,
Paris, France. olivier.delattre@curie.fr jinghui.zhang@stjude.org.

Ewing sarcoma is a primary bone tumor initiated by EWSR1-ETS gene fusions. To
identify secondary genetic lesions that contribute to tumor progression, we
performed whole-genome sequencing of 112 Ewing sarcoma samples and matched
germline DNA. Overall, Ewing sarcoma tumors had relatively few single-nucleotide 
variants, indels, structural variants, and copy-number alterations. Apart from
whole chromosome arm copy-number changes, the most common somatic mutations were 
detected in STAG2 (17%), CDKN2A (12%), TP53 (7%), EZH2, BCOR, and ZMYM3 (2.7%
each). Strikingly, STAG2 mutations and CDKN2A deletions were mutually exclusive, 
as confirmed in Ewing sarcoma cell lines. In an expanded cohort of 299 patients
with clinical data, we discovered that STAG2 and TP53 mutations are often
concurrent and are associated with poor outcome. Finally, we detected subclonal
STAG2 mutations in diagnostic tumors and expansion of STAG2-immunonegative cells 
in relapsed tumors as compared with matched diagnostic samples.SIGNIFICANCE:
Whole-genome sequencing reveals that the somatic mutation rate in Ewing sarcoma
is low. Tumors that harbor STAG2 and TP53 mutations have a particularly dismal
prognosis with current treatments and require alternative therapies. Novel drugs 
that target epigenetic regulators may constitute viable therapeutic strategies in
a subset of patients with mutations in chromatin modifiers.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4264969
PMID: 25223734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Death Differ. 2015 Feb;22(2):287-97. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2014.142. Epub 2014
Sep 12.

Polycomb-mediated loss of microRNA let-7c determines inflammatory macrophage
polarization via PAK1-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

Zhang W(1), Liu H(2), Liu W(2), Liu Y(2), Xu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical
College of Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Glycoconjugate Research, Ministry of Health, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Serine/threonine kinase family members p21-activated kinases (PAKs) are important
regulators of cytoskeletal remodeling and cell motility in mononuclear phagocytic
system, but their role in macrophage differentiation and polarization remains
obscure. We have shown here that inflammatory stimuli induced PAK1 overexpression
in human and murine macrophages. Elevated expression of PAK1 contributed to
macrophage M1 polarization and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced endotoxin shock. 
We further observed that epigenetic loss of microRNA let-7c due to enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) upregulation determined PAK1 elevation and inflammatory
phenotype in M1 macrophages. EZH2/let-7c/PAK1 axis promotes macrophage M1
polarization via NIK-IKK-NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Moreover, pharmacological and genetic
ablation with EZH2/let-7c/PAK1 axis blunted inflammatory phenotype in M1
macrophages. Critically, either myeloid-restricted PAK1 deletion (PAK1(Lyz2cre)) 
or pharmacological and genetic ablation with EZH2/let-7c/PAK1 signal resulted in 
resistance to LPS-induced endotoxin shock via blunting macrophage M1
polarization. PAK1, therefore, is an essential controller of inflammatory
macrophage polarization, regulating immune responses against pathogenic stimuli.

PMCID: PMC4291490
PMID: 25215948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Korean J Pathol. 2014 Aug;48(4):263-9. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2014.48.4.263. 
Epub 2014 Aug 26.

The clinicopathological significance of epithelial mesenchymal transition
associated protein expression in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Kim KH(1), Kim L(1), Choi SJ(1), Han JY(1), Kim JM(1), Chu YC(1), Kim YM(2), Park
IS(1), Lim JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Inha University Hospital, Inha University School of
Medicine, Incheon, Korea. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, Inha University Hospital, Inha University School of Medicine, Incheon,
Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Inha University Hospital, Inha
University School of Medicine, Incheon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) has an important role in
invasion and metastasis of tumor cells. The purpose of this study was to evaluate
the roles of EMT-associated proteins on progression and metastasis as a
prognostic/predictive factor in curatively-resected (R0) head and neck squamous
cell carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODS: A total of 118 patients who received curative surgery for HNSCC at Inha 
University Hospital between January 1996 and December 2011 were included. We used
protein immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of E-cadherin, vimentin, 
and EZH2 on tissue microarrays. Also, we reviewed all medical records and
analyzed the relationship between the expression of EMT-associated proteins and
prognosis.
RESULTS: The E-cadherin-negative group showed more moderate/poor differentiation 
of cancer cell type than the higher E-cadherin-expressing group (p=.016) and high
EZH2 expression was significantly correlated with nodal metastasis (p=.012). Our 
results demonstrate a significant association between high expression of EZH2 and
vimentin and presence of distant progression (p=.026). However, expression of
E-cadherin, vimentin, and EZH2 was not significantly associated with overall
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that an EMT-associated protein expression
profile is correlated with aggressiveness of disease and prognosis, and could be 
a useful marker for determination of additional treatment in curatively-resected 
HNSCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4160588
PMID: 25214857  [PubMed]


76. Leukemia. 2014 Dec;28(12):2292-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.272. Epub 2014 Sep 12.

Molecular-defined clonal evolution in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia
independent of the BCR-ABL status.

Schmidt M(1), Rinke J(1), Schäfer V(1), Schnittger S(2), Kohlmann A(2),
Obstfelder E(1), Kunert C(1), Ziermann J(1), Winkelmann N(1), Eigendorff E(1),
Haferlach T(2), Haferlach C(2), Hochhaus A(1), Ernst T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Hämatologie und Internistische Onkologie, Klinik für Innere Medizin 
II, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany. (2)MLL Münchner Leukämie Labor,
München, Germany.

To study clonal evolution in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), we searched for
BCR-ABL-independent gene mutations in both Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative 
and Ph-positive clones in 29 chronic-phase CML patients by targeted deep
sequencing of 25 genes frequently mutated in myeloid disorders. Ph-negative
clones were analyzed in 14 patients who developed clonal cytogenetic
abnormalities in Ph-negative cells during treatment with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKI). Mutations were detected in 6/14 patients (43%) affecting the
genes DNMT3A, EZH2, RUNX1, TET2, TP53, U2AF1 and ZRSR2. In two patients, the
mutations were also found in corresponding Ph-positive diagnostic samples. To
further investigate Ph-positive clones, 15 randomly selected CML patients at
diagnosis were analyzed. Somatic mutations additional to BCR-ABL were found in
5/15 patients (33%) affecting ASXL1, DNMT3A, RUNX1 and TET2. Analysis of
individual hematopoietic colonies at diagnosis revealed that most mutations were 
part of the Ph-positive clone. In contrast, deep sequencing of subsequent samples
during TKI treatment revealed one DNMT3A mutation in Ph-negative cells that was
also present in Ph-positive cells at diagnosis, implying that the mutation
preceded the BCR-ABL rearrangement. In summary, BCR-ABL-independent gene
mutations were frequently found in Ph-negative and Ph-positive clones of CML
patients and may be considered as important cofactors in the clonal evolution of 
CML.

PMID: 25212276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Anticancer Drugs. 2015 Feb;26(2):139-47. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000166.

S-Adenosyl-L-methionine-competitive inhibitors of the histone methyltransferase
EZH2 induce autophagy and enhance drug sensitivity in cancer cells.

Liu TP(1), Lo HL, Wei LS, Hsiao HH, Yang PM.

Author information: 
(1)aPhD Program for Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, College of Medical Science
and Technology, Taipei Medical University bDepartment of Surgery, Mackay Memorial
Hospital, Taipei cMackay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and Management
dDepartment of Medicine, Mackay Medical College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has emerged as a novel anticancer target. 
Various EZH2 inhibitors have been developed in recent years. Among these,
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) is known to deplete EZH2 protein expression through
an indirect pathway. In contrast, GSK343 directly inhibits enzyme activity
through an S-adenosyl-L-methionine-competitive pathway. Therefore, we proposed
that DZNep and GSK343 may exert differential effects against cancer cells. In
this study, we found that GSK343 but not DZNep induced autophagic cell death of
cancer cells. Inhibition of EZH2 expression was not required for GSK343-induced
autophagy. In addition, GSK343 enhanced the anticancer activity of a multikinase 
inhibitor, sorafenib, in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Our results show
that GSK343 is a more potent anticancer agent than DZNep, and for the first time,
we show that it acts as an autophagy inducer.

PMCID: PMC4276571
PMID: 25203626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jul 15;7(8):4817-26. eCollection 2014.

CBX8, a novel DNA repair protein, promotes tumorigenesis in human esophageal
carcinoma.

Xiao W(1), Ou C(2), Qin J(1), Xing F(1), Sun Y(1), Li Z(3), Qiu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of 
Tongji University Shanghai 200072, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory,
The Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Guangxi Medical University Nanning 530021,
Guangxi Province, China. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai 
Yangpu District Central Hospital Shanghai 200433, China.

DNA damage response and repair are carried out by certain proteins following
damage by environmental clastogens, such as ionizing radiation and reactive
oxygen species. It has been reported that many carcinomas that are characterized 
by resistance to chemotherapy and poor outcomes show dysfunction of these
proteins. Chromobox homologue 8 (CBX8), a member of the polycomb group of
proteins, has been identified as a factor that protects tumor cells from the
detrimental effects of ionizing radiation (IR) or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). In
this study, we found that CBX8 was up-regulated in esophageal carcinoma tissues
compared with adjacent non-cancerous tissues (P<0.01) and correlated with TNM
stage in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients. Depletion of CBX8 decreased
cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo and increased the phosphorylation
levels of p21, Wee1, and CHK1, which result in cyclin-dependent kinase inhibition
and cell-cycle delay. CBX8 depletion also led to accumulation of spontaneous DNA 
damage and raised the sensitivity of tumor cells to IR or H2O2. We also found
that the total level of CBX8 in the cells was increased after treating tumor
cells with clastogens. In addition, our data showed that decreased CBX8
expression was accompanied by the reduction of EZH2 and EED, which have been
reported to participate in DNA damage repair. Collectively, CBX8 might emerge as 
an oncogene for promoting the proliferation of tumor cells and raising the
resistance of neoplasms to chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4152042
PMID: 25197352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 16;111(37):13385-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1401923111. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

p53 Suppression partially rescues the mutant phenotype in mouse models of
DiGeorge syndrome.

Caprio C(1), Baldini A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Open University PhD Program, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of
Genetics and Biophysics Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and.
(2)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Institute of Genetics and Biophysics
Adriano Buzzati Traverso, 80131 Naples, Italy; and Department of Molecular
Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of Naples Federico II, 80131
Naples, Italy antonio.baldini@igb.cnr.it.

T-box 1 (Tbx1), a gene encoding a T-box transcription factor, is required for
embryonic development in humans and mice. Half dosage of this gene in humans
causes most of the features of the DiGeorge or Velocardiofacial syndrome
phenotypes, including aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities. Here
we found a strong genetic interaction between Tbx1 and transformation related
protein 53 (Trp53). Indeed, genetic ablation of Trp53, or pharmacological
inhibition of its protein product p53, rescues significantly the cardiovascular
defects of Tbx1 heterozygous and hypomorphic mutants. We found that the Tbx1 and 
p53 proteins do not interact directly but both occupy a genetic element of Gbx2, 
which is required for aortic arch and cardiac outflow tract development, and is a
known genetic interactor of Tbx1. We found that Gbx2 expression is down-regulated
in Tbx1(+/-) embryos and is restored to normal levels in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-)
embryos. In addition, we found that the genetic element that binds both Tbx1 and 
p53 is highly enriched in H3K27 trimethylation, and upon p53 suppression H3K27me3
levels are reduced, along with Ezh2 enrichment. This finding suggests that the
rescue of Gbx2 expression in Tbx1(+/-);Trp53(+/-) embryos is due to reduction of 
repressive chromatin marks. Overall our data identify unexpected genetic
interactions between Tbx1 and Trp53 and provide a proof of principle that
developmental defects associated with reduced dosage of Tbx1 can be rescued
pharmacologically.

PMCID: PMC4169961
PMID: 25197075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Ann Oncol. 2014 Nov;25(11):2185-90. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdu391. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

High protein expression of EZH2 is related to unfavorable outcome to tamoxifen in
metastatic breast cancer.

Reijm EA(1), Timmermans AM(1), Look MP(1), Meijer-van Gelder ME(1), Stobbe CK(2),
van Deurzen CH(3), Martens JW(1), Sleijfer S(1), Foekens JA(1), Berns PM(4),
Jansen MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Genomics Netherlands. (2)Department of 
PATHAN BV, Laboratory Pathology, Sint Franciscus Hospital, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Genomics Netherlands
Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Genomics Netherlands
p.berns@erasmusmc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic breast cancer (MBC) is a highly heterogeneous disease with
great differences in outcome to both chemo- and endocrine therapy. Better insight
into the mechanisms underlying resistance is essential to better predict outcome 
to therapy and to obtain a more tailored treatment approach. We have previously
described that increased mRNA expression levels of Enhancer of Zeste homolog
(EZH2) are associated with worse outcome to tamoxifen therapy in MBC. Here, we
explored whether this is also the case for EZH2 protein expression.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A tissue microarray (TMA) was created using formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded estrogen receptor (ER)-positive primary breast tumor tissues of
250 MBC patients treated with first-line tamoxifen. Quantity and intensity of
EZH2 expression were determined by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and both were used 
to generate and group scores according to a previously described method for
scoring EZH2.
RESULTS: In total, 116 tumors (46%) were considered to be EZH2 positive. The
presence of EZH2 protein expression was significantly associated with
progression-free survival (PFS) in both univariate [hazard ratio (HR) 1.51, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.17-1.97, P = 0.002] and multivariate analysis
including traditional factors associated with tamoxifen outcome (HR 1.41, 95% CI 
1.06-1.88, P = 0.017). Considering quantity irrespective of intensity, tumors
with >50% EZH2-positive cells had the worst PFS (HR 2.15, 95% CI 1.42-3.27, P <
0.001), whereas intensity alone did not show a significant association with PFS. 
Application of other methods of scoring EZH2 positivity resulted in a similar
significant association between the amount of EZH2 positive cells and PFS.
CONCLUSION: In addition to EZH2 mRNA levels, these results suggest that protein
expression of EZH2 can be used as a marker to predict outcome to tamoxifen
therapy. This provides new rationale to explore EZH2 inhibition in the clinical
setting and increases the possibilities for a more personalized treatment
approach in MBC patients.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25193989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Oncol Rep. 2014 Nov;32(5):2143-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3459. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

MicroRNA-101 inhibits the metastasis of osteosarcoma cells by downregulation of
EZH2 expression.

Zhang K(1), Zhang Y(1), Ren K(1), Zhao G(1), Yan K(1), Ma B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710038, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNA molecules, which play
regulatory roles at the post-transcriptional level by suppressing the translation
of protein-coding genes or inducing mRNA cleavage. Dysregulated expression of
miRNAs is involved in multiple types of cancers and plays important roles in
regulating various biological processes including metastasis. miR-101 is
downregulated in various types of cancer and functions as a suppressor of cell
migration and invasion. Meanwhile, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is
associated with the metastatic potential of several aggressive tumors. In the
present study, we reported that ectopic overexpression of miR-101 downregulated
the expression level of EZH2 and significantly inhibited migration and invasion
of osteosarcoma cells. In addition, knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA showed the same
effect of miR-101 on migration and invasion. To conclude, these results indicate 
that miR-101 may act as a tumor suppressor in osteosarcoma, as it has a
suppressive role in cell migration and invasion by targeting EZH2.

PMID: 25190211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Ther. 2015 Jan;23(1):32-42. doi: 10.1038/mt.2014.163. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

EZH2 modulates angiogenesis in vitro and in a mouse model of limb ischemia.

Mitic T(1), Caporali A(2), Floris I(1), Meloni M(1), Marchetti M(1), Urrutia
R(3), Angelini GD(4), Emanueli C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol,
England, UK. (2)1] Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences,
University of Bristol, England, UK [2] Center for Cardiovascular Sciences,
Queen's Medical Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(3)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA. (4)1] Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences,
University of Bristol, England, UK [2] National Heart and Lung Institute,
Hammersmith Campus, Imperial College of London, London, England, UK.

Epigenetic mechanisms may regulate the expression of pro-angiogenic genes, thus
affecting reparative angiogenesis in ischemic limbs. The enhancer of zest
homolog-2 (EZH2) induces thtrimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3), 
which represses gene transcription. We explored (i) if EZH2 expression is
regulated by hypoxia and ischemia; (ii) the impact of EZH2 on the expression of
two pro-angiogenic genes: eNOS and BDNF; (iii) the functional effect of EZH2
inhibition on cultured endothelial cells (ECs); (iv) the therapeutic potential of
EZH2 inhibition in a mouse model of limb ischemia (LI). EZH2 expression was
increased in cultured ECs exposed to hypoxia (control: normoxia) and in ECs
extracted from mouse ischemic limb muscles (control: absence of ischemia). EZH2
increased the H3K27me3 abundance onto regulatory regions of eNOS and BDNF
promoters. In vitro RNA silencing or pharmacological inhibition by
3-deazaneplanocin (DZNep) of EZH2 increased eNOS and BDNF mRNA and protein levels
and enhanced functional capacities (migration, angiogenesis) of ECs under either 
normoxia or hypoxia. In mice with experimentally induced LI, DZNep increased
angiogenesis in ischaemic muscles, the circulating levels of pro-angiogenic
hematopoietic cells and blood flow recovery. Targeting EZH2 for inhibition may
open new therapeutic avenues for patients with limb ischemia.

PMCID: PMC4426795
PMID: 25189741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1004566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004566.
eCollection 2014.

Histone methyltransferase MMSET/NSD2 alters EZH2 binding and reprograms the
myeloma epigenome through global and focal changes in H3K36 and H3K27
methylation.

Popovic R(1), Martinez-Garcia E(1), Giannopoulou EG(2), Zhang Q(3), Zhang Q(3),
Ezponda T(1), Shah MY(1), Zheng Y(4), Will CM(1), Small EC(1), Hua Y(1), Bulic
M(1), Jiang Y(5), Carrara M(6), Calogero RA(6), Kath WL(7), Kelleher NL(4), Wang 
JP(3), Elemento O(5), Licht JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (2)Arthritis and Tissue
Degeneration Program and the David Z. Rosensweig Genomics Research Center,
Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, New York, United States of America;
Biological Sciences Department, New York City College of Technology, City
University of New York, Brooklyn, New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Statistics, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, United 
States of America. (4)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences,
Chemistry of Life Processes Institute, Northwestern University, Evanston,
Illinois, United States of America. (5)HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin
Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine and Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
United States of America. (6)Molecular Biotechnology Center, Department of
Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.
(7)Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois, United States of America.

Overexpression of the histone methyltransferase MMSET in t(4;14)+ multiple
myeloma patients is believed to be the driving factor in the pathogenesis of this
subtype of myeloma. MMSET catalyzes dimethylation of lysine 36 on histone H3
(H3K36me2), and its overexpression causes a global increase in H3K36me2,
redistributing this mark in a broad, elevated level across the genome. Here, we
demonstrate that an increased level of MMSET also induces a global reduction of
lysine 27 trimethylation on histone H3 (H3K27me3). Despite the net decrease in
H3K27 methylation, specific genomic loci exhibit enhanced recruitment of the EZH2
histone methyltransferase and become hypermethylated on this residue. These
effects likely contribute to the myeloma phenotype since MMSET-overexpressing
cells displayed increased sensitivity to EZH2 inhibition. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that such MMSET-mediated epigenetic changes require a number of
functional domains within the protein, including PHD domains that mediate MMSET
recruitment to chromatin. In vivo, targeting of MMSET by an inducible shRNA
reversed histone methylation changes and led to regression of established tumors 
in athymic mice. Together, our work elucidates previously unrecognized interplay 
between MMSET and EZH2 in myeloma oncogenesis and identifies domains to be
considered when designing inhibitors of MMSET function.

PMCID: PMC4154646
PMID: 25188243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13545-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku788. Epub
2014 Sep 2.

AGO2 and SETDB1 cooperate in promoter-targeted transcriptional silencing of the
androgen receptor gene.

Cho S(1), Park JS(2), Kang YK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno,
Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea Department of Functional Genomics,
University of Science and Technology (UST), 113 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, 305-333
Daejeon, South Korea. (2)Development and Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 
111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea. (3)Development and
Differentiation Research Center, KRIBB, 111 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon
305-806, South Korea Department of Functional Genomics, University of Science and
Technology (UST), 113 Gwahangno, Yuseong-gu, 305-333 Daejeon, South Korea
ykkang@kribb.re.kr.

In mammals, RNA interference is primarily a post-transcriptional mechanism.
Evidence has accumulated for additional role in transcriptional gene silencing
(TGS) but the question for a good paradigm for small interfering antigene RNA
(agRNA)-induced chromatin modification remains unanswered. Here, we show that
SETDB1, a histone H3-lysine 9 (H3K9)-specific methyltransferase, cooperates with 
Argonaute-2 (AGO2) and plays an essential role in agRNA-induced TGS. The androgen
receptor (AR) gene was transcriptionally silenced by agRNA targeted to its
promoter, and we show that this repression was mitigated by knockdown of SETDB1
or AGO2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated that agRNA-driven AGO2 was
first targeted to the AR promoter, followed by SETDB1. SIN3A and HDAC1/2, the
components of the SIN3-HDAC complex, immunoprecipitated with SETDB1, and
localized at the agRNA-targeted promoter. Agreeing with the presence of SETDB1,
trimethyl-H3K9 was enriched in the AR promoter. Both EZH2 and trimethyl-H3K27
were also present in the targeted locus; accordingly, EZH2 immunoprecipitated
with SETDB1. DNA methylation level was not significantly changed, suggesting the 
absence of de novo methylating activity in agRNA-induced AR promoter. Our results
demonstrate that SETDB1, together with AGO2, plays an essential role in TGS
through recruiting chromatin remodeler and/or other modifiers, consequently
creating a repressive chromatin milieu at the targeted promoter.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267665
PMID: 25183519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Am Chem Soc. 2014 Oct 1;136(39):13498-501. doi: 10.1021/ja5060934. Epub 2014
Sep 19.

Strategy for "detoxification" of a cancer-derived histone mutant based on mapping
its interaction with the methyltransferase PRC2.

Brown ZZ(1), Müller MM, Jain SU, Allis CD, Lewis PW, Muir TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Princeton University , Princeton, New Jersey 08544,
United States.

The histone methyltransferase PRC2 plays a central role in genomic stability and 
cellular development. Consequently, its misregulation has been implicated in
several cancers. Recent work has shown that a histone H3 mutant, where the PRC2
substrate residue Lys27 is replaced by methionine, is also associated with cancer
phenotypes and functions as an inhibitor of PRC2. Here we investigate the
mechanism of this PRC2 inhibition through kinetic studies and
photo-cross-linking. Efficient inhibition is dependent on (1) hydrophobic lysine 
isosteres blocking the active site, (2) proximal residues, and (3) the H3 tail
forming extensive contacts with the EZH2 subunit of PRC2. We further show that
naturally occurring post-translational modifications of the same H3 tail, both
proximal and distal to K27M, can greatly diminish the inhibition of PRC2. These
results suggest that this potent gain of function mutation may be "detoxified" by
modulating alternate chromatin modification pathways.

PMCID: PMC4183613
PMID: 25180930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Biochem. 2014 Nov;156(5):249-57. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvu054. Epub 2014 Aug 31.

Targeting histone methyltransferase EZH2 as cancer treatment.

Kondo Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenomics, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan ykondo@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

It is widely accepted that epigenetic alterations are associated with different
stages of tumour formation and progression in many cancers. Therefore, epigenetic
abnormalities in cancers are emerging as important biomarkers and may have
therapeutic potential. The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a key
epigenetic regulator that catalyses trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3
(H3K27me3) via the histone methyltransferase, EZH2, which confers stemness and
regulates differentiation during embryonic development. Given these roles of EZH2
and H3K27me3, plastic and dynamic features of cancer cells, especially cancer
stem cells (CSCs), may be closely associated with this epigenetic mechanism. In
addition, recent sequencing technology revealed that there are many recurrent
mutations in polycomb-related genes, including EZH2, in different types of
cancers. Therefore, researchers focused on targeting EZH2 as a novel cancer
treatment and identified small compounds that inhibit EZH2 activity. Some of them
are now under clinical trial in B-cell lymphoma. However, the underlying
mechanisms by which PRC2 precisely regulate epigenetic alterations at certain
genomic loci under different cellular conditions remain unclear. In this review, 
I focus on the recent advancements in EZH2 research, especially its dynamic
regulation of epigenetic alterations in tumour cells, including the CSC
population, and discuss perspectives and challenges for cancer treatment in the
near future.

© The Authors 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Japanese Biochemical Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25179367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 May 27;7:35. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-35. eCollection 2014.

Submicroscopic deletion of 5q involving tumor suppressor genes (CTNNA1, HSPA9)
and copy neutral loss of heterozygosity associated with TET2 and EZH2 mutations
in a case of MDS with normal chromosome and FISH results.

Hemmat M(1), Chen W(2), Anguiano A(1), Naggar ME(1), Racke FK(1), Jones D(3),
Wang Y(3), Strom CM(1), Chang K(1), Boyar FZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetics Department, Quest Diagnostics Nichols Institute, 33608 Ortega
Hwy, 92675 San Juan Capistrano, CA, USA. (2)University of Texas southwestern
Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, 75235 Dallas, TX, USA. (3)Quest
Diagnostics Nichols Institute, 14225 Newbrook Drive, 20151 Chantilly, VA, USA.

Advances in genome-wide molecular cytogenetics allow identification of novel
submicroscopic DNA copy number alterations (aCNAs) and copy-neutral loss of
heterozygosity (cnLOH) resulting in homozygosity for known gene mutations in
myeloid neoplasms. We describe the use of an oligo-SNP array for genomic
profiling of aCNA and cnLOH, together with sequence analysis of recurrently
mutated genes, in a patient with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) presenting with
normal karyotype and FISH results. Oligo-SNP array analysis revealed a hemizygous
deletion of 896 kb at chromosome 5q31.2, representing the smallest 5q deletion
reported to date. The deletion involved multiple genes, including two tumor
suppressor candidate genes (CTNNA1 and HSPA9) that are associated with MDS/AML.
The SNP-array study also detected 3 segments of somatic cnLOH: one involved the
entire long arm of chromosome 4; the second involved the distal half of the long 
arm of chromosome 7, and the third encompassed the entire chromosome 22 (UPD 22).
Sequence analysis revealed mutations in TET2 (4q), EZH2 (7q), ASXL1 (20q11.21),
and RUNX1 (21q22.3). Coincidently, TET2 and EZH2 were located at segments of
cnLOH resulting in their homozygosity. Loss of heterozygosity affecting these two
chromosomes and mutations in TET2 and EZH2 are indicative of a myelodysplastic
syndrome with a poor prognosis. Deletion of the tumor suppressor genes CTNNA1 and
HSPA9 is also likely to contribute to a poor prognosis. Furthermore, the original
cnLOHs in multiple chromosomes and additional cnLOH 14q in the follow-up study
suggest genetic evolution of the disease and poor prognosis. This study attests
to the fact that some patients with a myelodysplastic syndrome who exhibit a
normal karyotype may have underlying genetic abnormalities detectable by
chromosomal microarray and/or targeted mutation analyses.

PMCID: PMC4149311
PMID: 25177364  [PubMed]


88. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014 Dec;61(12):2256-62. doi: 10.1002/pbc.25211. Epub 2014 
Aug 30.

CALR mutation screening in pediatric primary myelofibrosis.

An W(1), Wan Y, Guo Y, Chen X, Ren Y, Zhang J, Chang L, Wei W, Zhang P, Zhu X.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Blood Diseases Centre, Institute of Hematology & Blood Diseases
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Tianjin, China; State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of
Hematology & Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences &
Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin, China.

BACKGROUND: Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is quite rare in children. Mutations of
JAK2(V617F) or MPL(W515K/L) were absent in pediatric patients with PMF according 
to previous studies. Recently, mutations in calreticulin (CALR) were described in
adult patients with JAK2/MPL-unmutated PMF. Our study aimed to analyze the
clinical and genetic features of Chinese pediatric patients with PMF.
PROCEDURES: We retrospectively investigated 14 pediatric patients diagnosed as
PMF according to WHO 2008 criteria. Direct sequencing was performed for the
existence of genetic alterations in JAK2, MPL, TET2, CBL, ASXL1, IDH1, IDH2,
SRSF2, EZH2, DNMT3A and CALR.
RESULTS: In our cohort, all patients had anemia, three patients (21%) had
splenomegaly, six patients (43%) had micromegakaryocytes at time of diagnosis. No
patient had spontaneous remission and six patients (43%) transformed to acute
myelocytic leukemia. In nine patients with evaluable cytogenetic information,
three subjects (33%) had abnormal karyotypes. The median survival from time of
diagnosis was 28 months. Seven patients (50%) had type 2 mutations of CALR. No
patient had mutations in the other candidate genes. There was no statistical
differences in age, gender, hemoglobin, WBC, neutrophil and platelet counts,
percentage of circulating blast, overall survival and leukemia transformation
between patients with and without CALR mutation.
CONCLUSION: Our study documented that Chinese pediatric patients with PMF in our 
cohort had its own clinical characteristics and poor outcome. CALR mutations were
detected in 50% of our pediatric patients with PMF. Based on our study, CALR
mutations screening could be used as molecular marker for diagnosis of pediatric 
patients with PMF.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25176567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):2101-7. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2627. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Epigenetic silencing of ARNTL, a circadian gene and potential tumor suppressor in
ovarian cancer.

Yeh CM(1), Shay J(1), Zeng TC(1), Chou JL(1), Huang TH(2), Lai HC(3), Chan MW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and, National Chung Cheng University, Chia-Yi,
Taiwan, R.O.C. (2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical
Center, Taipei, R.O.C.

Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death and the most deadly
gynecological malignancy in women. Epigenetic modifications play an important
role in regulating gene transcription. Specifically, aberrant promoter
hypermethylation has been implicated as a hallmark of cancer. In order to
identify genes that are differentially methylated in ovarian cancer, we performed
meDIP-chip in various ovarian cancer cell lines using Agilent 244K CpG island
microarray. One of the targets, ARNTL which is a core component of the circadian 
clock is methylated in a sub-set of ovarian cancer cell lines. Combined bisulfite
restriction analysis (COBRA) confirmed the results of the microarray. Additional 
analysis using ChIP-PCR revealed that promoter of ARNTL is enriched with the
repressive histone mark H3K27me3 in CP70 and MCP2 ovarian cancer cells. Treatment
with the EZH2 inhibitor (GSK126) significantly restored ARNTL expression in these
cells (CP70 and MCP2). Further functional analysis demonstrated that
overexpression of ARNTL inhibited cell growth and enhanced chemosensitivity of
cisplatin in ovarian cancer cells. Finally, overexpression of ARNTL restored the 
rhythmic activity of c-MYC in ovarian cancer cells. These results suggested that 
ARNTL may be a tumor suppressor and is epigenetically silenced in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 25175925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genes Dev. 2014 Sep 15;28(18):1983-8. doi: 10.1101/gad.247940.114. Epub 2014 Aug 
28.

Nascent RNA interaction keeps PRC2 activity poised and in check.

Kaneko S(1), Son J(1), Bonasio R(2), Shen SS(3), Reinberg D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, New York University Langone School of Medicine, New York 10016,
USA; (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Epigenetics Program,
University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Center for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
Langone School of Medicine, New York, 10016, USA.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) facilitates the maintenance and inheritance 
of chromatin domains repressive to transcription through catalysis of methylation
of histone H3 at Lys27 (H3K27me2/3). However, through its EZH2 subunit, PRC2 also
binds to nascent transcripts from active genes that are devoid of H3K27me2/3 in
embryonic stem cells. Here, biochemical analyses indicated that RNA interaction
inhibits SET domain-containing proteins, such as PRC2, nonspecifically in vitro. 
However, CRISPR-mediated truncation of a PRC2-interacting nascent RNA rescued
PRC2-mediated deposition of H3K27me2/3. That PRC2 activity is inhibited by
interactions with nascent transcripts supports a model in which PRC2 can only
mark for repression those genes silenced by transcriptional repressors.

© 2014 Kaneko et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4173153
PMID: 25170018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Oct 15;280(2):296-304. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.08.015. Epub 2014 Aug 26.

Involvement of EZH2, SUV39H1, G9a and associated molecules in pathogenesis of
urethane induced mouse lung tumors: potential targets for cancer control.

Pandey M(1), Sahay S(1), Tiwari P(1), Upadhyay DS(2), Sultana S(3), Gupta KP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Laboratory, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research,
Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow -226001, India. (2)Laboratory Animals Services,
CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Sitapur Road, Lucknow, India. (3)Dept.
Medical Elementology and Toxicology, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi,
India. (4)Carcinogenesis Laboratory, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow -226001, India. Electronic address:
krishnag522@yahoo.co.in.

In the present study, we showed the correlation of EZH2, SUV39H1 or G9a
expression and histone modifications with the urethane induced mouse lung
tumorigenesis in the presence or absence of antitumor agent, inositol
hexaphosphate (IP6). Tumorigenesis and the molecular events involved therein were
studied at 1, 4, 12 or 36 weeks after the exposure. There were no tumors at 1 or 
4 weeks but tumors started appearing at 12 weeks and grew further till 36 weeks
after urethane exposure. Among the molecular events, upregulation of EZH2 and
SUV39H1 expressions appeared to be time dependent, but G9a expression was altered
significantly only at later stages of 12 or 36 weeks. Alteration in miR-138
expression supports the upregulation of its target, EZH2. H3K9me2, H3K27me3 or
H4K20me3 was found to be altered at 12 or 36 weeks. However, ChIP analysis of p16
and MLH1 promoters showed their binding with H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 which was
maximum at 36 weeks. Thus, histone modification and their interactions with gene 
promoter resulted in the reduced expression of p16 and MLH1. IP6 prevented the
incidence and the size of urethane induced lung tumors. IP6 also prevented the
urethane induced alterations in EZH2, SUV39H1, G9a expressions and histone
modifications. Our results suggest that the alterations in the histone
modification pathways involving EZH2 and SUV39H1 expressions are among the early 
events in urethane induced mouse lung tumorigenesis and could be exploited for
cancer control.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25168426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Radiat Oncol. 2014 Aug 27;9:188. doi: 10.1186/1748-717X-9-188.

The prognostic role of EZH2 expression in rectal cancer patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy.

Meng X, Huang Z, Wang R, Jiao Y, Li H, Xu X, Feng R, Zhu K, Jiang S, Yan H, Yu
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology of Shandong Cancer Hospital and Institute,
No, 440 Jiyan Road, Jinan, Shandong 250117, China. sdyujinming@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (nCRT) combined with surgery has been
implemented as a standard treatment strategy in locally advanced rectal cancer
(LARC). However, there is a wide spectrum of response to nCRT. The aim of this
study was to determine whether enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2 ) expression
could predict response to nCRT and outcomes for patients in LARC.
METHOD: The study examined the EZH2 expression in 112 biopsies by
immohistochemistry. The associations between EZH2 and clinical characters were
analyzed.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression in biopsy tissue was significantly related to increased 
tumor cell proliferation, as assessed by Ki-67 expression with a cutoff value of 
37% (p <0.001). High EZH2 expression was correlated closely with low
differentiation (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029), high CEA level (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.041), T4 status (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.011)
and node metastasis (p =0.045). By univariate and multivariate analysis, we
observed low EZH2 expression could reliably and independently predict the good
response to nCRT ( p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.026 and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.023) and down-staging ( p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.021 and
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.027). In univariate analysis, high EZH2 expression was significantly
associated with poor 5-year disease-free survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025) and 5-year overall 
survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.032). In multivariate analysis, EZH2 was a prognostic factor for 
5-year DFS (HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.287; 95% CI 1.137-4.602, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.020) but not for 5-year OS
(HR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.182; 95% CI 0.940-5.364, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.069).
CONCLUSION: Our study revealed that low EZH2 expression in biopsy tissue might be
a useful predictive factor of good tumor response to nCRT and longer 5-year DFS
in patients with LARC. However this is a relatively small retrospective study, to
further validate the role of EZH2 in rectal cancer, large consistent cohort
studies are needed.

PMCID: PMC4163172
PMID: 25159232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. EMBO J. 2014 Oct 1;33(19):2135-6. doi: 10.15252/embj.201489751. Epub 2014 Aug 25.

Taming the young and restless--epigenetic gene regulation in pancreas and
beta-cell precursors.

Russ HA(1), Hebrok M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2014 Oct 1;33(19):2157-70.

The in vivo assessment of epigenetic changes during mouse pancreatic beta-cell
differentiation reveals surprising differences to directed, in vitro
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells. New findings reported in this
issue of The EMBO Journal further identify Ezh2 as a critical determinant of
endocrine progenitor number and could instruct improved protocols for stem
cell-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC4282500
PMID: 25154606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Nov 21;9(11):2459-64. doi: 10.1021/cb500548b. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Reaction coupling between wild-type and disease-associated mutant EZH2.

Swalm BM(1), Knutson SK, Warholic NM, Jin L, Kuntz KW, Keilhack H, Smith JJ,
Pollock RM, Moyer MP, Scott MP, Copeland RA, Wigle TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc. 400 Technology Square, Fourth Floor, Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139, United States.

EZH2 and EZH1 are protein methyltransferases (PMTs) responsible for histone H3,
lysine 27 (H3K27) methylation. Trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3) is a hallmark
of many cancers, including non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). Heterozygous EZH2 point
mutations at Tyr641, Ala677, and Ala687 have been observed in NHL. The Tyr641
mutations enhance activity on H3K27me2 but have weak or no activity on
unmethylated H3K27, whereas the Ala677 and Ala687 mutations use substrates of all
methylation states effectively. It has been proposed that enzymatic coupling of
the wild-type and mutant enzymes leads to the oncogenic H3K27me3 mark in
mutant-bearing NHL. We show that coupling with the wild-type enzyme is needed to 
achieve H3K27me3 for several mutants, but that others are capable of achieving
H3K27me3 on their own. All forms of PRC2 (wild-type and mutants) display kinetic 
signatures that are consistent with a distributive mechanism of catalysis.

PMID: 25154026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):6049-62.

MicroRNA-101 targets EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS to suppress proliferation, invasion and 
stem cell-like phenotype of aggressive endometrial cancer cells.

Konno Y(1), Dong P(2), Xiong Y(3), Suzuki F(4), Lu J(5), Cai M(5), Watari H(6),
Mitamura T(6), Hosaka M(6), Hanley SJ(7), Kudo M(6), Sakuragi N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan; These authors
contributed equally to this work. (2)Department of Women's Health Educational
System, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan; These authors contributed equally to
this work. (3)Department of Gynecology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South
China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, P. R. China; These
authors contributed equally to this work. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; These authors contributed equally
to this work. (5)Department of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, P. R. China.
(6)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. (7)Department
of Women's Health Educational System, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan; Department of
Women's Health Educational System, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

MicroRNA-101 has been implicated as a tumor suppressor miRNA in human tumors.
However, its potential functional impact and the underlying mechanisms in
endometrial cancer progression have not been determined. Here, we report that in 
aggressive endometrial cancer cells, re-expression of microRNA-101 leads to
inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis and senescence.
Ectopic overexpression of microRNA-101 attenuates the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-associated cancer cell migration and invasion, abrogates the
sphere-forming capacity and enhances chemosensitivity to paclitaxel. Algorithm
and microarray-based strategies identifies potential microRNA-101 targets. Among 
these, we validated EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS as direct targets of miR-101 and
silencing of these genes mimics the tumor suppressive effects observed on
promoting microRNA-101 function. Importantly, further results suggest an inverse 
correlation between low miR-101 and high EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS expression in EC
specimens. We conclude that, as a crucial tumor suppressor, microRNA-101
suppresses cell proliferation, invasiveness and self-renewal in aggressive
endometrial cancer cells via modulating multiple critical oncogenes. The
microRNA-101-EZH2/MCL-1/FOS axis is a potential therapeutic target for
endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC4171612
PMID: 25153722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 25;9(8):e104776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104776.
eCollection 2014.

Polycomb group protein Ezh2 regulates hepatic progenitor cell proliferation and
differentiation in murine embryonic liver.

Koike H(1), Ouchi R(1), Ueno Y(1), Nakata S(2), Obana Y(1), Sekine K(1), Zheng
YW(1), Takebe T(3), Isono K(4), Koseki H(4), Taniguchi H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (2)Division of Oncological
Pathology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan; Project Leader of Advanced
Medical Research Center, Yokohama City University, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, Japan; PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Saitama, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and
Immunology, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan. (5)Department of Regenerative 
Medicine, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa-ku,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan; Project Leader of Advanced Medical Research Center,
Yokohama City University, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

In embryonic liver, hepatic progenitor cells are actively proliferating and
generate a fundamental cellular pool for establishing parenchymal components.
However, the molecular basis for the expansion of the progenitors maintaining
their immature state remains elusive. Polycomb group proteins regulate gene
expression throughout the genome by modulating of chromatin structure and play
crucial roles in development. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), a key component
of polycomb group proteins, catalyzes tri-methylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 
(H3K27me3), which trigger the gene suppression. In the present study, we
investigated a role of Ezh2 in the regulation of the expanding hepatic progenitor
population in vivo. We found that Ezh2 is highly expressed in the actively
proliferating cells at the early developmental stage. Using a conditional
knockout mouse model, we show that the deletion of the SET domain of Ezh2, which 
is responsible for catalytic induction of H3K27me3, results in significant
reduction of the total liver size, absolute number of liver parenchymal cells,
and hepatic progenitor cell population in size. A clonal colony assay in the
hepatic progenitor cells directly isolated from in vivo fetal livers revealed
that the bi-potent clonogenicity was significantly attenuated by the Ezh2 loss of
function. Moreover, a marker expression based analysis and a global gene
expression analysis showed that the knockout of Ezh2 inhibited differentiation to
hepatocyte with reduced expression of a number of liver-function related genes.
Taken together, our results indicate that Ezh2 is required for the hepatic
progenitor expansion in vivo, which is essential for the functional maturation of
embryonic liver, through its activity for catalyzing H3K27me3.

PMCID: PMC4143191
PMID: 25153170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Aug 21;20(31):10825-44. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i31.10825.

Novel therapeutic targets for pancreatic cancer.

Tang SC(1), Chen YC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shing-Chun Tang, Yang-Chao Chen, School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Pancreatic cancer has become the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the last
two decades. Only 3%-15% of patients diagnosed with pancreatic cancer had 5 year 
survival rate. Drug resistance, high metastasis, poor prognosis and tumour
relapse contributed to the malignancies and difficulties in treating pancreatic
cancer. The current standard chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer is gemcitabine,
however its efficacy is far from satisfactory, one of the reasons is due to the
complex tumour microenvironment which decreases effective drug delivery to target
cancer cell. Studies of the molecular pathology of pancreatic cancer have
revealed that activation of KRAS, overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2,
inactivation of p16(INK4A) and loss of p53 activities occurred in pancreatic
cancer. Co-administration of gemcitabine and targeting the molecular pathological
events happened in pancreatic cancer has brought an enhanced therapeutic
effectiveness of gemcitabine. Therefore, studies looking for novel targets in
hindering pancreatic tumour growth are emerging rapidly. In order to give a
better understanding of the current findings and to seek the direction in future 
pancreatic cancer research; in this review we will focus on targets suppressing
tumour metastatsis and progression, KRAS activated downstream effectors, the
relationship of Notch signaling and Nodal/Activin signaling with pancreatic
cancer cells, the current findings of non-coding RNAs in inhibiting pancreatic
cancer cell proliferation, brief discussion in transcription remodeling by
epigenetic modifiers (e.g., HDAC, BMI1, EZH2) and the plausible therapeutic
applications of cancer stem cell and hyaluronan in tumour environment.

PMCID: PMC4138462
PMID: 25152585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Hum Pathol. 2014 Oct;45(10):2043-50. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27:
another poor prognostic phenotype independent of c-Myc/Bcl2 coexpression.

Oh EJ(1), Yang WI(1), Cheong JW(2), Choi SE(3), Yoon SO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Severance
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Pathology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Severance
Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
Department of Pathology, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: revita@naver.com.

Deregulation of histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) via aberration 
of the histone methyltransferase, enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), is
suggested to play a critical role in cancers including hematologic malignancies. 
In the present study, implications of H3K27me3 were investigated in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with respect to clinicopathological factors, especially
in association with c-Myc/Bcl2 coexpression and germinal center B-like (GCB) or
non-GCB subtype. By immunohistochemistry, a high level of H3K27me3 was observed
in approximately one-third (35.3%, 79/224) of DLBCL cases, and this subset of
cases was related to poor performance status (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
scores = 2) (P = .013), elevated lactate dehydrogenase level (P = .001), and a
higher international prognostic index risk group (scores =3) (P = .005). H3K27me3
level was significantly correlated with EZH2 expression (P = .004) and c-Myc
protein expression (P = .003) but not correlated with c-Myc/Bcl2 coexpression or 
with GCB or non-GCB subtype. A high level of H3K27me3 was related to an inferior 
overall survival (P = .006) and was shown to be an independent prognostic factor 
for overall survival along with the higher international prognostic index risk
group and c-Myc/Bcl2 coexpression. In conclusion, H3K27me3 was related to EZH2
and c-Myc expression, suggesting formation of a MYC-EZH2-H3K27me3 loop in a
subgroup of DLBCL cases. H3K27me3 was associated with poor patient outcome and
revealed as an independent predictor for overall survival of DLBCL patients.
H3K27me3 in DLBCL may be another high-risk phenotype independent of the phenotype
of c-Myc/Bcl2 coexpression or other known poor prognostic subgroups.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25149548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Tumour Biol. 2014 Dec;35(12):11887-94. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2453-4. Epub 2014 
Aug 23.

Suppressed expression of long non-coding RNA HOTAIR inhibits proliferation and
tumourigenicity of renal carcinoma cells.

Wu Y(1), Liu J, Zheng Y, You L, Kuang D, Liu T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, 
China.

Although long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are known to play an important role in
cell regulation in several cancers, the regulatory mechanisms in renal carcinoma 
cells remain unclear. HOX transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), an lncRNA,
coordinates with chromatin-modifying enzymes to regulate gene silencing. HOTAIR
is over-expressed in several types of carcinoma cells. Thus, we hypothesised that
lncRNA HOTAIR is crucial for cell proliferation and invasion and that its
knockdown induces apoptosis in renal carcinoma cells. lncRNA HOTAIR expression
was found to be elevated in renal carcinoma cells. Additionally, lncRNA HOTAIR
knockdown by RNA interference with siRNA was found to significantly affect the
cell cycle in the G0/G1 phase and weaken the abilities of cell proliferation and 
invasion in vitro. Xenograft experiments confirmed that the growth of xenograft
tumours formed by renal carcinoma cells was suppressed after silencing lncRNA
HOTAIR expression. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and RNA-binding
protein immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays revealed that knockdown of lncRNA HOTAIR
led to the weakening of the recruitment and binding abilities of EZH2 and
H3K27me3 locus with lncRNA HOTAIR. Furthermore, the cell cycle-related gene locus
was in an active transcriptional state by the silencing of lncRNA HOTAIR
expression and modulation of covalent histones.

PMID: 25149152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2014 Nov;28(11):1109-28. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-9788-1. 
Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Structural insights into binding of small molecule inhibitors to Enhancer of
Zeste Homolog 2.

Kalinic M(1), Zloh M, Eric S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of
Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11000, Belgrade, Serbia.

Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is a SET domain protein lysine
methyltransferase (PKMT) which has recently emerged as a chemically tractable and
therapeutically promising epigenetic target, evidenced by the discovery and
characterization of potent and highly selective EZH2 inhibitors. However, no
experimental structures of the inhibitors co-crystallized to EZH2 have been
resolved, and the structural basis for their activity and selectivity remains
unknown. Considering the need to minimize cross-reactivity between prospective
PKMT inhibitors, much can be learned from understanding the molecular basis for
selective inhibition of EZH2. Thus, to elucidate the binding of small-molecule
inhibitors to EZH2, we have developed a model of its fully-formed cofactor
binding site and used it to carry out molecular dynamics simulations of
protein-ligand complexes, followed by molecular mechanics/generalized born
surface area calculations. The obtained results are in good agreement with
biochemical inhibition data and reflect the structure-activity relationships of
known ligands. Our findings suggest that the variable and flexible post-SET
domain plays an important role in inhibitor binding, allowing possibly distinct
binding modes of inhibitors with only small variations in their structure.
Insights from this study present a good basis for design of novel and
optimization of existing compounds targeting the cofactor binding site of EZH2.

PMID: 25139678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2015 Jan;54(1):97-102. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2014.07.013. Epub
2014 Aug 15.

Overexpression of EZH2 associates with a poor prognosis in chronic lymphocytic
leukemia.

Rabello Ddo A(1), Lucena-Araujo AR(2), Alves-Silva JC(1), da Eira VB(1), de
Vasconcellos MC(3), de Oliveira FM(2), Rego EM(2), Saldanha-Araujo F(1), Pittella
Silva F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology of Cancer, University of Brasília, Av. L2
Norte, Brasília, DF 70.910-900, Brazil. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes 3900,
Ribeirão Preto, SP 14.048-900, Brazil. (3)Hospital de Base do Distrito Federal,
Setor Hospitalar Sul, Área Especial, Quadra 101, Brasília, DF 70.330-150, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology of Cancer, University of Brasília, Av. L2
Norte, Brasília, DF 70.910-900, Brazil. Electronic address: pittella@unb.br.

EZH2, a histone methyltransferase, is overexpressed in several human tumors, but 
whether it exerts any impact in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) remains
unknown. We used real time PCR to investigate the expression profile of EZH1 and 
EZH2 in 59 CLL patients, 10 samples of purified B-cells from healthy donors and
12 normal adult tissues. EZH2 was overexpressed in CLL patients and correlates
with high white blood cell count, ZAP-70 expression and chromosomal
abnormalities. EHZ1 expression does not correlate with CLL progression. EZH2
overexpression is related to a poor prognosis of CLL and could be a useful tool
to assess its aggressiveness.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25131810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Pathol. 2014 Dec;234(4):478-87. doi: 10.1002/path.4417. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

The PAX2-null immunophenotype defines multiple lineages with common expression
signatures in benign and neoplastic oviductal epithelium.

Ning G(1), Bijron JG, Yamamoto Y, Wang X, Howitt BE, Herfs M, Yang E, Hong Y,
Cornille M, Wu L, Hanamornroongruang S, McKeon FD, Crum CP, Xian W.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.

The oviducts contain high-grade serous cancer (HGSC) precursors (serous tubal
intraepithelial neoplasia or STINs), which are <U+03B3>-H2AX(p) - and TP53
mutation-positive. Although they express wild-type p53, secretory cell outgrowths
(SCOUTs) are associated with older age and serous cancer; moreover, both STINs
and SCOUTs share a loss of PAX2 expression (PAX2(n) ). We evaluated PAX2
expression in proliferating adult and embryonic oviductal cells, normal mucosa,
SCOUTs, Walthard cell nests (WCNs), STINs, and HGSCs, and the expression of genes
chosen empirically or from SCOUT expression arrays. Clones generated in vitro
from embryonic gynaecological tract and adult Fallopian tube were Krt7(p)
/PAX2(n) /EZH2(p) and underwent ciliated (PAX2(n) /EZH2(n) /FOXJ1(p) ) and basal 
(Krt7(n) /EZH2(n) /Krt5(p) ) differentiation. Similarly, non-ciliated cells in
normal mucosa were PAX2(p) but became PAX2(n) in multi-layered epithelium
undergoing ciliated or basal (WCN) cell differentiation. PAX2(n) SCOUTs fell into
two groups: type 1 were secretory or secretory/ciliated with a 'tubal' phenotype 
and were ALDH1(n) and ß-catenin(mem) (membraneous only). Type 2 displayed a
columnar to pseudostratified (endometrioid) phenotype, with an EZH2(p) , ALDH1(p)
, ß-catenin(nc) (nuclear and cytoplasmic), stathmin(p) , LEF1(p) , RCN1(p) , and 
RUNX2(p) expression signature. STINs and HGSCs shared the type 1 immunophenotype 
of PAX2(n) , ALDH1(n) , ß-catenin(mem) , but highly expressed EZH2(p) , LEF1(p) ,
RCN1(p) , and stathmin(p) . This study, for the first time, links PAX2(n) with
proliferating fetal and adult oviductal cells undergoing basal and ciliated
differentiation and shows that this expression state is maintained in SCOUTs,
STINs, and HGSCs. All three entities can demonstrate a consistent perturbation of
genes involved in potential tumour suppressor gene silencing (EZH2),
transcriptional regulation (LEF1), regulation of differentiation (RUNX2), calcium
binding (RCN1), and oncogenesis (stathmin). This shared expression signature
between benign and neoplastic entities links normal progenitor cell expansion to 
abnormal and neoplastic outgrowth in the oviduct and exposes a common pathway
that could be a target for early prevention.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4229427
PMID: 25130537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 May;56(5):1213-22. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.941836. Epub
2014 Oct 9.

Activating somatic mutations in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas: lessons from next
generation sequencing and key elements in the precision medicine era.

Bohers E(1), Mareschal S, Bertrand P, Viailly PJ, Dubois S, Maingonnat C, Ruminy 
P, Tilly H, Jardin F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen University and IRIB , Rouen ,
France.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of lymphoma,
accounting for 30-40% of newly diagnosed non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Historically,
DLBCL has been thought to involve recurrent translocations of the immunoglobulin 
heavy (IGH) locus and the deregulation of rearranged oncogenes. Whole exome
sequencing (WES) of more than 200 DLBCLs has completely redefined the genetic
landscape of the disease by identifying recurrent single nucleotide variants and 
providing new therapeutic opportunities in DLBCL molecular subtypes. Some of
these somatic mutations target genes that play a crucial role in B-cell function 
(B cell receptor [BCR] signaling, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B [NF-<U+03BA>B] pathway, Toll-like
receptor [TLR] signaling and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase [PI3K] pathway),
immunity, cell cycle/apoptosis or chromatin modification. In this review,
following an overview of the somatic mutations reported in DLBCL, we focus on
activating and clustered mutations targeting genes including MYD88, CD79A/B, EZH2
and CARD11 and discuss their clinical and therapeutic relevance in the precision 
medicine era.

PMID: 25130477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1846(2):366-79. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.08.002. 
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Role of somatic cancer mutations in human protein lysine methyltransferases.

Kudithipudi S(1), Jeltsch A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University, Pfaffenwaldring 55, D-70569
Stuttgart, Germany. (2)Institute of Biochemistry, Stuttgart University,
Pfaffenwaldring 55, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany. Electronic address:
albert.jeltsch@ibc.uni-stuttgart.de.

Methylation of lysine residues is an important post-translational modification of
histone and non-histone proteins, which is introduced by protein lysine
methyltransferases (PKMTs). An increasing number of reports demonstrate that
aberrant lysine methylation plays a central role in carcinogenesis that is often 
correlated with abnormal expression of PKMTs. Recent whole genome and whole
transcriptome sequencing projects have also discovered several somatic mutations 
in PKMTs that frequently appear in various tumors. These include chromosomal
translocations that lead to aberrant expression or mistargeting of PKMTs and
nonsense or frameshift mutations, which cause the loss of the protein function.
Another type of mutations are missense mutations which may lead to the loss of
enzyme activity, but may also alter the properties of PKMTs either by changing
the product or substrate specificity or by increasing the enzymatic activity
finally leading to a gain-of-function phenotype. In this review, we provide an
overview of the roles of EZH2, SETD2, NSD family, SMYD family, MLL family and
DOT1L PKMTs in cancer focusing on the effects of somatic cancer mutations in
these enzymes. Investigation of the effect of somatic cancer mutations in PKMTs
is pivotal to understand the general role of this important class of enzymes in
carcinogenesis and to improve and develop more individualized cancer therapies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25123655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):7172-82.

EZH2 dependent H3K27me3 is involved in epigenetic silencing of ID4 in prostate
cancer.

Chinaranagari S(1), Sharma P(1), Chaudhary J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Therapeutic Development, Clark Atlanta
University, Atlanta, GA.

Inhibitor of DNA binding/differentiation protein 4 (ID4) is dominant negative
helix loop helix transcriptional regulator is epigenetically silenced due to
promoter hyper-methylation in many cancers including prostate. However, the
underlying mechanism involved in epigenetic silencing of ID4 is not known. Here, 
we demonstrate that ID4 promoter methylation is initiated by EZH2 dependent
tri-methylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3). ID4 expressing (LNCaP) and 
non-expressing (DU145 and C81) prostate cancer cell lines were used to
investigate EZH2, H3K27me3 and DNMT1 enrichment on ID4 promoter by Chromatin
immuno-precipitation (ChIP). Enrichment of EZH2, H3K27Me3 and DNMT1 in DU145 and 
C81 cell lines compared to ID4 expressing LNCaP cell line. Knockdown of EZH2 in
DU145 cell line led to re-expression of ID4 and decrease in enrichment of EZH2,
H3K27Me3 and DNMT1 demonstrating that ID4 is regulated in an EZH2 dependent
manner. ChIP data on prostate cancer tissue specimens and cell lines suggested
EZH2 occupancy and H3K27Me3 marks on the ID4 promoter. Collectively, our data
indicate a PRC2 dependent mechanism in ID4 promoter silencing in prostate cancer 
through recruitment of EZH2 and a corresponding increase in H3K27Me3. Increased
EZH2 but decreased ID4 expression in prostate cancer strongly supports this
model.

PMCID: PMC4196193
PMID: 25115397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 30;5(16):6654-69.

The miR-124-prolyl hydroxylase P4HA1-MMP1 axis plays a critical role in prostate 
cancer progression.

Chakravarthi BV(1), Pathi SS(2), Goswami MT(2), Cieslik M(1), Zheng H(3),
Nallasivam S(3), Arekapudi SR(4), Jing X(1), Siddiqui J(1), Athanikar J(1),
Carskadon SL(1), Lonigro RJ(1), Kunju LP(1), Chinnaiyan AM(5), Palanisamy N(6),
Varambally S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology; Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan. (2)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology;
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan; These authors contributted
equally to this work. (3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University 
of Michigan. (4)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of
Michigan; Present Address: Department of Hematology and Oncology, Providence
Hospital and Medical Center, Southfiled, MI 48075, USA. (5)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan;
Department of Urology, University of Michigan; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan Medical School; Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. (6)Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology; Department of Pathology, University of Michigan;
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA.

Collagen prolyl hydroxylases (C-P4HAs) are a family of enzymes involved in
collagen biogenesis. One of the isoforms of P4HA, Prolyl 4-hydroxylase, alpha
polypeptide I (P4HA1), catalyzes the formation of 4-hydroxyproline that is
essential for the proper three-dimensional folding of newly synthesized
procollagen chains. Here, we show the overexpression of P4HA1 in aggressive
prostate cancer. Immunohistochemical analysis using tissue microarray
demonstrated that P4HA1 expression was correlated with prostate cancer
progression. Using in vitro studies, we showed that P4HA1 plays a critical role
in prostate cancer cell growth and tumor progression. Expression profiling
studies using P4HA1 modulated prostate cells suggested regulation of Matrix
metalloproteases 1. The invasive properties of P4HA1 overexpressing cells were
reversed by blocking MMP1. Our studies indicate P4HA1 copy number gain in a
subset of metastatic prostate tumors and its expression is also regulated by
microRNA-124. MiR-124 in turn is negatively regulated by transcriptional
repressors EZH2 and CtBP1, both of which are overexpressed in aggressive prostate
cancer. Chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay and mice xenograft
investigations show that P4HA1 is required for tumor growth and metastasis in
vivo. Our observations suggest that P4HA1 plays a critical role in prostate
cancer progression and could serve as a viable therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC4196154
PMID: 25115393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Circ Res. 2014 Sep 12;115(7):636-49. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304517. Epub
2014 Aug 11.

Epigenetic modification at Notch responsive promoters blunts efficacy of inducing
notch pathway reactivation after myocardial infarction.

Felician G(1), Collesi C(2), Lusic M(1), Martinelli V(1), Ferro MD(1), Zentilin
L(1), Zacchigna S(1), Giacca M(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Medicine Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Trieste, Italy (G.F., C.C., M.L., V.M.,
M.D.F., L.Z., S.Z., M.G.); and Department of Medical, Surgical and Health
Sciences, University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy (C.C., M.D.F., M.G.); and Center 
for Translational Cardiology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria "Ospedali Riuniti
di Trieste", Trieste, Italy (C.C., M.D.F., M.G.). (2)From the Molecular Medicine 
Laboratory, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(ICGEB), Trieste, Italy (G.F., C.C., M.L., V.M., M.D.F., L.Z., S.Z., M.G.); and
Department of Medical, Surgical and Health Sciences, University of Trieste,
Trieste, Italy (C.C., M.D.F., M.G.); and Center for Translational Cardiology,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria "Ospedali Riuniti di Trieste", Trieste, Italy
(C.C., M.D.F., M.G.). giacca@icgeb.org collesi@icgeb.org.

RATIONALE: The Notch pathway plays a key role in stimulating mammalian
cardiomyocyte proliferation during development and in the early postnatal life;
in adult zebrafish, reactivation of this pathway is also essential to drive
cardiac regeneration after injury.
OBJECTIVE: We wanted to assess efficacy of Notch pathway stimulation in neonatal 
and adult hearts as a means to induce cardiac regeneration after myocardial
infarction in mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In early postnatal life, cardiomyocyte exit from the cell
cycle was paralleled by decreased Notch signaling and the establishment of a
repressive chromatin environment at Notch-responsive genes, characterized by
recruitment of the polycomb group enhancer of zeste homolog 2 methyltransferase
and the acquisition of the histone 3 Lysine 27 trimethylation histone mark, as
detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Forced Notch pathway activation by
adenoassociated virus gene transfer of activated Notch1 or its ligand Jagged1
expanded the proliferative capacity of neonatal cardiomyocytes; this correlated
with increased transcription of Notch target genes and maintenance of an open
chromatin conformation at their promoters. The same adenoassociated virus
vectors, however, were largely ineffective in stimulating cardiac repair after
myocardial infarction in adult mice, despite optimal and long-lasting transgene
expression. Analysis of Notch-responsive promoters in adult cardiomyocytes showed
marks of repressed chromatin and irreversible CpG DNA methylation. Induction of
adult cardiomyocyte re-entry into the cell cycle with microRNAs was independent
from Notch pathway reactivation.
CONCLUSIONS: Notch pathway activation is crucial in regulating cardiomyocyte
proliferation during the early postnatal life, but it is largely ineffective in
driving cardiac regeneration in adults, because of permanent epigenetic
modification at Notch-responsive promoters.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25114098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Dec 5;455(1-2):24-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.004. Epub 2014 Aug 9.

Somatic alterations and dysregulation of epigenetic modifiers in cancers.

Aumann S(1), Abdel-Wahab O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Leukemia
Service, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: abdelwao@mskcc.org.

Genomic discovery efforts in patients with cancer have been critical in
identifying a recurrent theme of mutations in epigenetic modifiers. A number of
novel and exciting basic biological findings have come from this work including
the discovery of an enzymatic pathway for DNA cytosine demethylation, a link
between cancer metabolism and epigenetics, and the critical importance of
post-translational modifications at specific histone residues in malignant
transformation. Identification of cancer cell dependency on a number of these
mutations has quickly resulted in the development of therapies targeting several 
of these genetic alterations. This includes, the development of mutant-selective 
IDH1 and IDH2 inhibitors, DOT1L inhibitors for MLL rearranged leukemias, EZH2
inhibitors for several cancer types, and the development of bromodomain
inhibitors for many cancer types--all of which are in early phase clinical
trials. In many cases, however, specific genetic targets linked to malignant
transformation following mutations in individual epigenetic modifiers are not yet
known. In this review we present functional evidence of how alterations in
frequently mutated epigenetic modifiers promote malignant transformation and how 
these alterations are being targeted for cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25111821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Epigenomics. 2014 Jun;6(3):341-51. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.23.

EZH2 as a potential target in cancer therapy.

McCabe MT(1), Creasy CL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Oncology R&D, GlaxoSmithKline, 
1250 S. Collegeville Road, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.

Over the last several years, dysregulation of epigenetic mechanisms including DNA
and histone methylation has been recognized as a hallmark of cancer. Alterations 
of epigenetic regulators themselves, including the histone lysine
methyltransferase EZH2, have been reported in numerous cancer types. With the
discovery of small molecule inhibitors of EZH2, we can now begin to evaluate EZH2
as a therapeutic target in cancer. This article will provide an overview of the
dysregulation of EZH2 in cancer, possible mechanisms for inhibition of EZH2
activity, and the preclinical activity of currently available EZH2 inhibitors.

PMID: 25111487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. EMBO J. 2014 Oct 1;33(19):2157-70. doi: 10.15252/embj.201488671. Epub 2014 Aug 8.

Dynamics of genomic H3K27me3 domains and role of EZH2 during pancreatic endocrine
specification.

Xu CR(1), Li LC(2), Donahue G(3), Ying L(4), Zhang YW(2), Gadue P(4), Zaret
KS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Cell 
Proliferation, College of Life Sciences Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences 
Peking University, Beijing, China. (2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Cell Proliferation, College of Life Sciences Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life
Sciences Peking University, Beijing, China. (3)Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Perelman School of Medicine University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapeutics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
USA. (5)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Epigenetics Program, Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA zaret@upenn.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Oct 1;33(19):2135-6.

Endoderm cells undergo sequential fate choices to generate insulin-secreting beta
cells. Ezh2 of the PRC2 complex, which generates H3K27me3, modulates the
transition from endoderm to pancreas progenitors, but the role of Ezh2 and
H3K27me3 in the next transition to endocrine progenitors is unknown. We isolated 
endoderm cells, pancreas progenitors, and endocrine progenitors from different
staged mouse embryos and analyzed H3K27me3 genome-wide. Unlike the decline in
H3K27me3 domains reported during embryonic stem cell differentiation in vitro, we
find that H3K27me3 domains increase in number during endocrine progenitor
development in vivo. Genes that lose the H3K27me3 mark typically encode
transcriptional regulators, including those for pro-endocrine fates, whereas
genes that acquire the mark typically are involved in cell biology and
morphogenesis. Deletion of Ezh2 at the pancreas progenitor stage enhanced the
production of endocrine progenitors and beta cells. Inhibition of EZH2 in
embryonic pancreas explants and in human embryonic stem cell cultures increased
endocrine progenitors in vitro. Our studies reveal distinct dynamics in H3K27me3 
targets in vivo and a means to modulate beta cell development from stem cells.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4282504
PMID: 25107471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 7;9(8):e102944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102944. eCollection
2014.

Characterization of novel MSX1 mutations identified in Japanese patients with
nonsyndromic tooth agenesis.

Yamaguchi S(1), Machida J(2), Kamamoto M(3), Kimura M(4), Shibata A(4), Tatematsu
T(4), Miyachi H(5), Higashi Y(6), Jezewski P(7), Nakayama A(8), Shimozato K(5),
Tokita Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin
University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; Department of Dentistry and Oral Surgery, Aichi
Children's Health and Medical Center, Obu, Aichi, Japan; Department of
Perinatology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center,
Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. (2)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, School of
Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; Department of Oral and 
Maxillofacial Surgery, Toyota Memorial Hospital, Toyota, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin
University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery,
Japanese Red Cross Society Himeji Hospital, Himeji, Hyogo, Japan. (4)Department
of Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan; Department of Perinatology, Institute for Developmental Research,
Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. (5)Department of Maxillofacial
Surgery, School of Dentistry, Aichi-Gakuin University, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.
(6)Department of Perinatology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human 
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan. (7)Department of Periodontology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Dentistry, Institute of Oral Health
Research, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America. (8)Department of
Embryology, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center,
Kasugai, Aichi, Japan.

Since MSX1 and PAX9 are linked to the pathogenesis of nonsyndromic tooth
agenesis, we performed detailed mutational analysis of these two genes sampled
from Japanese patients. We identified two novel MSX1 variants with an amino acid 
substitution within the homeodomain; Thr174Ile (T174I) from a sporadic hypodontia
case and Leu205Arg (L205R) from a familial oligodontia case. Both the Thr174 and 
Leu205 residues in the MSX1 homeodomain are highly conserved among different
species. To define possible roles of mutations at these amino acids in the
pathogenesis of nonsyndromic tooth agenesis, we performed several functional
analyses. It has been demonstrated that MSX1 plays a pivotal role in hard tissue 
development as a suppressor for mesenchymal cell differentiation. To evaluate the
suppression activity of the variants in mesenchymal cells, we used the
myoD-promoter, which is one of convenient reporter assay system for MSX1.
Although the gene products of these MSX1 variants are stable and capable of
normal nuclear localization, they do not suppress myoD-promoter activity in
differentiated C2C12 cells. To clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying our
results, we performed further analyses including electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, and co-immunoprecipitation assays to survey the molecular interactions
between the mutant MSX1 proteins and the oligonucleotide DNA with MSX1 consensus 
binding motif or EZH2 methyltransferase. Since EZH2 is reported to interact with 
MSX1 and regulate MSX1 mediated gene suppression, we hypothesized that the T174I 
and L205R substitutions would impair this interaction. We conclude from the
results of our experiments that the DNA binding ability of MSX1 is abolished by
these two amino acid substitutions. This illustrates a causative role of the
T174I and L205R MSX1 homeodomain mutations in tooth agenesis, and suggests that
they may influence cell proliferation and differentiation resulting in lesser
tooth germ formation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4125152
PMID: 25101640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Mol Biol. 2014 Oct 9;426(20):3426-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2014.07.025. Epub 2014
Aug 1.

Histone methyltransferase EZH2 is transcriptionally induced by estradiol as well 
as estrogenic endocrine disruptors bisphenol-A and diethylstilbestrol.

Bhan A(1), Hussain I(1), Ansari KI(1), Bobzean SA(2), Perrotti LI(2), Mandal
SS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA. (2)Department of Psychology, The University 
of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA. (3)Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, The University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.
Electronic address: smandal@uta.edu.

Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a methyltransferase specific to histone 3
lysine 27, is a critical player in gene silencing and is overexpressed in breast 
cancer. Our studies demonstrate that EZH2 is transcriptionally induced by
estradiol in cultured breast cancer cells and in the mammary glands of
ovariectomized rats. EZH2 promoter contains multiple functional estrogen-response
elements. Estrogen receptors (ERs) and ER coregulators such as mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) histone methylases (MLL2 and MLL3) and histone acetyltransferase
CBP/P300 bind to the EZH2 promoter in the presence of estradiol and regulate
estradiol-induced EZH2 expression. EZH2 expression is also increased upon
exposure to estrogenic endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) such as bisphenol-A 
(BPA) and diethylstilbestrol (DES). Similar to estradiol, BPA and DES-induced
EZH2 expression is coordinated by ERs, MLLs and CBP/P300. In summary, we
demonstrate that EZH2 is transcriptionally regulated by estradiol in vitro and in
vivo, and its expression is potentially dysregulated upon exposure to estrogenic 
EDCs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25088689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Surg Res. 2014 Dec;192(2):317-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.06.044. Epub 2014 Jul
2.

Cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction induced by overexpression of miR-214 in vivo.

Yang T(1), Gu H(2), Chen X(2), Fu S(2), Wang C(2), Xu H(2), Feng Q(3), Ni Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)Department of
Cardiovascular and Thoracic surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. (3)Department of Cardiovascular
and Thoracic surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: fengqiang1088@126.com.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. Electronic
address: 11118154@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: An increasing number of studies have demonstrated the critical role
of microRNAs in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction. This
study evaluated whether miR-214 plays a pivotal role in the development of
cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure.
METHODS: In human tissues, miR-214 overexpression was determined to promote
cardiac hypertrophy. We predicted miR-214 direct target by bioinformatics
database and verifed it using luciferase dual reporting system. We silenced
miR-214 using a specific antagomir in a pressure-overload mouse model of heart
failure.
RESULTS: Analysis of transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression
of miR-214 indicated that their hearts were 21% heavier than wild-type hearts and
expressed several biochemical and functional markers consistent with dilated
cardiomyopathy. These findings include enlarged left ventricular internal
diameters, wall thinning, reduced ejection fraction, fractional shortening, and
an increased fetal gene expression. The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) was
confirmed as a direct target of miR-214 in cardiomyocytes. In vivo silencing of
miR-214 using a specific antagomir rescued cardiac EZH2 expression and prevented 
cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest that miR-214 may induce
pathologic cardiac hypertrophy in part by reducing EZH2 messenger RNA levels.
MiR-214 may therefore be a potential therapeutic target for treating certain
cardiac disease states.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25085702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e100904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100904. eCollection
2014.

EZH2 is associated with malignant behavior in pancreatic IPMN via p27Kip1
downregulation.

Kuroki H(1), Hayashi H(1), Okabe H(1), Hashimoto D(1), Takamori H(1), Nakahara
O(1), Nakagawa S(1), Fukushima Y(1), Chikamoto A(1), Beppu T(1), Hirota M(2),
Iyama K(3), Baba H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery,
Kumamoto Regional Medical Center, Kumamoto, Japan. (3)Department of Surgical
Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The epigenetic mechanism of tumorigenesis in pancreatic intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN) remains largely unknown. The aim of this study
is to examine the role of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) alteration in
pancreatic IPMN progression.
METHODS: Fifty-four surgically resected pancreatic IPMN specimens, including a
total of 181 lesions (normal duct in 48, adenoma in 50, borderline atypia in 53, 
carcinoma in situ (CIS) in 19, and invasive carcinoma in 11) were analyzed by
immunohistochemical staining (EZH2, Ki-67, p27Kip1). Using paraffin embedded
sections, total RNA was successfully extracted from 20 IPMN lesions (borderline
IPMN in 9, CIS in 6, invasive carcinoma in 5) and 7 pancreatic normal ducts, and 
then levels of EZH2 and p27Kip1 mRNA were analyzed by real time PCR.
RESULTS: In immunohistochemical analysis, cell proliferative activity revealed by
Ki-67 positive nuclei was increased during IPMN progression (normal
duct<adenoma<borderline atypia<CIS  invasive carcinoma). EZH2 expression
displayed a similar pattern (normal duct<adenoma<borderline atypia<CIS  invasive
carcinoma) with cell proliferative activity. EZH2 expression in malignant (CIS
and invasive carcinoma) IPMNs was significantly higher than that in adenoma and
borderline-atypia IPMNs. EZH2 expression level in IPMN lesions was positively
correlated with the Ki-67 positive nuclear ratio (p<0.0001). EZH2-positive cells 
in malignant IPMN did not express p27Kip1. EZH2 mRNA expressions in malignant
lesions were significantly higher than those in benign lesions (p<0.0001). In
contrast, p27Kip1 mRNA in malignant lesions was significantly decreased compared 
to those in benign lesion (p<0.05), and there was an inverse correlation between 
EZH2 and p27Kip1 mRNA levels (p = 0.0109).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 is associated with the accelerated cell proliferation and
malignant step in pancreatic IPMN via the downregulation of p27Kip1.

PMCID: PMC4118850
PMID: 25084021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cancer Med. 2014 Dec;3(6):1544-52. doi: 10.1002/cam4.309. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Low expression levels of microRNA-124-5p correlated with poor prognosis in
colorectal cancer via targeting of SMC4.

Jinushi T(1), Shibayama Y, Kinoshita I, Oizumi S, Jinushi M, Aota T, Takahashi T,
Horita S, Dosaka-Akita H, Iseki K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Clinical Pharmaceutics and
Therapeutics, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan; Hokkaido Gastroenterology
Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.

A component of polycomb repressor complex 2, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), 
plays an important role in tumor malignancy and metastasis, while milk fat
globule-epidermal growth factor-factor 8 (MFGE8) plays a key role in tumor
progression and prognosis. MicroRNAs (miRs) are also critically involved in
various physiological and pathological processes. We here evaluated the
relationship between overall survival (OS) in colorectal cancer patients and the 
expression of onco-miRs and miRs, which may target EZH2 and MFGE8. Plasma and
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples were obtained from 71 colorectal 
cancer patients. The expression levels of miRs complementary to EZH2 and MFGE8
mRNA and cancer malignancies were evaluated. The miRs analyzed were as follows:
miR-16, miR-21, miR-26a, miR-34a, miR-98, miR-101-3p, miR-101-5p, miR-124-5p
(also known as miR-124*), miR-126-3p, miR-126-5p, miR-210, miR-217, and miR-630. 
The plasma expression levels of MFGE8 in completely resected patients were
significantly lower than those in unresectable patients. Lower miR-26a expression
levels were correlated with a higher probability of OS. Higher miR-124-5p
expression levels in plasma and FFPE samples were correlated with a higher
probability of OS. The transfection of mimic miR-124-5p into WiDr and COLO201
cells inhibited the expression of structural maintenance of chromosomes 4 (SMC4) 
mRNA. Our results indicate that miR-124-5p may target the tumorigenesis gene,
SMC4, which suggests that expression levels of miR-124-5p in plasma and FFPE
samples; therefore, the expression of MFGE8, miR-26a, and miR-124-5p in plasma
may be used as biomarkers to determine the prognosis of colorectal cancer
patients.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4298381
PMID: 25081869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2015 Jan;71(1):105-12. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0168-1.

EZH2-induced H3K27me3 is associated with epigenetic repression of the ARHI
tumor-suppressor gene in ovarian cancer.

Fu Y(1), Chen J, Pang B, Li C, Zhao J, Shen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Peking Union Medical College
Hospital, Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, 100730, China.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the second leading cause of death from
gynecological malignancies worldwide. Enhancer of zeste homology 2 (EZH2),
participating in gene expression silencing by trimethylating histone 3 lysine 27 
(H3K27me3), is often up-regulated in EOC. ARHI, an imprinted tumor-suppressor
gene, is markedly down-regulated or even undetectable in the majority of EOC. To 
explore the correlation between EZH2 and ARHI expression in EOC as well as the
possible mechanism of EZH2-ARH1 interaction. We used immunohistochemical staining
to evaluate the expression of EZH2 and ARHI in EOC and normal ovarian tissue
specimens; western blotting, shRNA, and chromatin immunoprecipitation were used
to study the expression correlation of EZH2 and ARHI in EOC and normal ovarian
epithelial cells and to further explore the mechanism of EZH2 regulation of ARHI 
expression. Cell viability assay was used to evaluate the influence of these two 
genes on cell survival. (1) The expression of EZH2 inversely correlated with ARHI
expression levels and predicted shorter overall survival in EOC patients; (2)
EZH2 promoted repression of ARHI by catalyzing trimethylation on H3K27; (3) ARHI 
was synergistically silenced by DNA methylation and histone modification; and (4)
DZNep, an inhibitor of EZH2, significantly reduced survival rate of EOC cells by 
restoring ARHI expression. EZH2-<U+2033>induced H3K27me3 is associated with epigenetic
repression of the ARHI tumor-suppressor gene in EOC. Suppression of EZH2 by
DZNep, as a way of restoring the expression of ARHI, could be a potential
treatment modality to EOC.

PMID: 25077680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Endod. 2014 Aug;40(8):1132-8. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2014.01.031. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

EZH2, a potential regulator of dental pulp inflammation and regeneration.

Hui T(1), A P(1), Zhao Y(1), Wang C(1), Gao B(1), Zhang P(1), Wang J(1), Zhou
X(1), Ye L(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Sichuan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases,
West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Sichuan, China.
Electronic address: yeling@scu.edu.cn.

INTRODUCTION: Dental pulp has limited capability to regenerate, which happens in 
the early stage of pulpitis. An ambiguous relationship exists; inflammation may
impair or support pulp regeneration. Epigenetics, which is involved in cell
proliferation and inflammation, could regulate human dental pulp cell (HDPCs)
regeneration. The aim of this study was to determine the role of the epigenetic
mark, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), in the inflammation, proliferation, and
regeneration of dental pulp. We used trimethylated histone H3 lysine 27(H3K27me3)
and its lysine demethylase 6B (KDM6B) to monitor functional effects of altered
EZH2 levels.
METHODS: We detected epigenetic marks (EZH2, H3K27me3, and KDM6B) in pulp tissue 
by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. EZH2 levels in HDPCs in
inflammatory responses or differentiation were analyzed by quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. Quantitative polymerase chain
reaction was used to assess the effects of EZH2 inhibition on interleukins in
HDPCs upon tumor necrosis factor alpha stimulation. Cell proliferation was tested
by cell counting kit-8, cell cycle, and apoptosis analysis. HDPC differentiation 
was investigated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, alkaline phosphatase 
activity, and oil red O staining.
RESULTS: EZH2 and H3K27me3 were decreased, whereas KDM6B was increased in
infected pulp tissue and cells, which were similar to HDPC differentiation. EZH2 
inhibition suppressed IL-1b, IL-6, and IL-8 messenger RNA (mRNA) in HDPCs upon
inflammatory stimuli and impeded HDPC proliferation by decreasing cell number,
arresting cell cycle, and increasing apoptosis. Suppressed EZH2 impaired
adipogenesis, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor r (PPAR-r), and
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein a (CEBP/a) mRNA in adipogenic induction while
enhancing alkaline phosphatase activity, Osx, and bone sialoprotein (BSP) mRNA in
mineralization induction of HDPCs.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 inhibited HDPC osteogenic differentiation while enhancing
inflammatory response and proliferation, suggesting its role in pulp
inflammation, proliferation, and regeneration.

Copyright © 2014 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25069920  [PubMed - in process]


118. FEBS Lett. 2014 Sep 17;588(18):3322-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.07.014. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

New tumor suppressor CXXC finger protein 4 inactivates mitogen activated protein 
kinase signaling.

Lu H(1), Jin W(1), Sun J(2), Feng L(2), Lan H(2), Shen Q(1), Ma Y(2), Li J(1),
Yue Y(2), Jin H(2), Wang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, 
Institute of Clinical Science, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of Medical
Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: wangxzju@163.com.

As a well-characterized master player in epigenetic regulatory network, EZH2 is
widely implicated in the development of many malignancies. We previously found
that EZH2 promoted Wnt/ß-catenin activation through downregulation of CXXC4
expression. In this report, we demonstrated that CXXC4 inhibited MAPK signaling
through binding to ERK-1/2 and abrogating the interaction of ERK 1/2 with MEK1/2.
L183, the critical residue in CXXC4 ERK D domain, was found to be essential for
CXXC4-ERK 1/2 interaction and the growth inhibitory effect of CXXC4 in human
cancer cells. In summary, CXXC4 directly disrupted MEK1/2-ERK 1/2 interaction to 
inactivate MAPK signaling. L183 site is indispensable for the binding of CXXC4 to
ERK1/2 and growth inhibitory effect of CXXC4. Therefore, EZH2 can activate MAPK
signaling by inhibiting CXXC4 expression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25064842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6575-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu378. Epub 2014 Jul
23.

Polycomb group complexes are recruited to reactivated FMR1 alleles in Fragile X
syndrome in response to FMR1 transcription.

Kumari D(1), Usdin K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Gene Structure and Disease, Laboratory of Cell and molecular
Biology, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Section on Gene Structure and
Disease, Laboratory of Cell and molecular Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA ku@helix.nih.gov.

The FMR1 gene is subject to repeat mediated-gene silencing when the CGG-repeat
tract in the 5' UTR exceeds 200 repeat units. This results in Fragile X syndrome,
the most common heritable cause of intellectual disability and a major cause of
autism spectrum disorders. The mechanism of gene silencing is not fully
understood, and efforts to reverse this gene silencing have had limited success. 
Here, we show that the level of trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27, a
hallmark of the activity of EZH2, a component of repressive Polycomb Group (PcG) 
complexes like PRC2, is increased on reactivation of the silenced allele by
either the DNA demethylating agent 5-azadeoxycytidine or the SIRT1 inhibitor
splitomicin. The level of H3K27me3 increases and decreases in parallel with the
FMR1 mRNA level. Furthermore, reducing the levels of the FMR1 mRNA reduces the
accumulation of H3K27me3. This suggests a model for FMR1 gene silencing in which 
the FMR1 mRNA generated from the reactivated allele acts in cis to repress its
own transcription via the recruitment of PcG complexes to the FMR1 locus.

Published by Oxford University Press 2014. This work is written by (a) US
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

PMCID: PMC4240206
PMID: 25055869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 23;9(7):e102035. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102035.
eCollection 2014.

Lineage-specific regulation of epigenetic modifier genes in human liver and
brain.

Weng MK(1), Natarajan K(2), Scholz D(1), Ivanova VN(3), Sachinidis A(2),
Hengstler JG(4), Waldmann T(1), Leist M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Doerenkamp-Zbinden Chair for In Vitro Toxicology and Biomedicine, University
of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. (2)Center of Physiology and Pathophysiology,
Institute of Neurophysiology, University of Cologne (UKK), Cologne, Germany.
(3)Nycomed-Chair for Bioinformatics and Information Mining, Dept. of Computer and
Information Science, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. (4)Leibniz
Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo), Technical
University of Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany.

Despite an abundance of studies on chromatin states and dynamics, there is an
astonishing dearth of information on the expression of genes responsible for
regulating histone and DNA modifications. We used here a set of 156 defined
epigenetic modifier genes (EMG) and profiled their expression pattern in cells of
different lineages. As reference value, expression data from human embryonic stem
cells (hESC) were used. Hepatocyte-like cells were generated from hESC, and their
EMG expression was compared to primary human liver cells. In parallel, we
generated postmitotic human neurons (Lu d6), and compared their relative EMG
expression to human cortex (Ctx). Clustering analysis of all cell types showed
that neuronal lineage samples grouped together (94 similarly regulated EMG), as
did liver cells (61 similarly-regulated), while the two lineages were clearly
distinct. The general classification was followed by detailed comparison of the
major EMG groups; genes that were higher expressed in differentiated cells than
in hESC included the acetyltransferase KAT2B and the methyltransferase SETD7.
Neuro-specific EMGs were the histone deacetylases HDAC5 and HDAC7, and the
arginine-methyltransferase PRMT8. Comparison of young (Lu d6) and more aged (Ctx)
neuronal samples suggested a maturation-dependent switch in the expression of
functionally homologous proteins. For instance, the ratio of the histone H3 K27
methyltransfereases, EZH1 to EZH2, was high in Ctx and low in Lu d6. The same was
observed for the polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) subunits CBX7 and CBX8. A
large proportion of EMGs in differentiated cells was very differently expressed
than in hESC, and absolute levels were significantly higher in neuronal samples
than in hepatic cells. Thus, there seem to be distinct qualitative and
quantitative differences in EMG expression between cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC4108363
PMID: 25054330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2014 Jun 20;7:11. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-7-11. eCollection
2014.

Lineage-specific regulation of imprinted X inactivation in extraembryonic
endoderm stem cells.

Merzouk S(1), Deuve JL(2), Dubois A(3), Navarro P(4), Avner P(5), Morey C(6).

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux,
75015 Paris, France ; Pasteur Cell, Pierre and Marie Curie University (UPMC), 25 
rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France. (2)Mouse Molecular Genetics Laboratory,
Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France ; Present address:
Pierre and Marie Curie University (UPMC), UMR7622, Institute of Biology of
Paris-Seine (IBPS), 75005 Paris, France. (3)Mouse Molecular Genetics Laboratory, 
Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France ; Present address:
Epigenetics of Stem Cells Laboratory', Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux,
75015 Paris, France. (4)Present address: Epigenetics of Stem Cells Laboratory',
Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France. (5)Mouse Molecular
Genetics Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France ; 
Present address: Dynamics of Epigenetic Regulation, EMBL Monterotondo, Adriano
Buzzati-Traverso Campus, Via Ramarini 32, 00015 Monterotondo, Italy. (6)Mouse
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris,
France.

BACKGROUND: Silencing of the paternal X chromosome (Xp), a phenomenon known as
imprinted X-chromosome inactivation (I-XCI), characterises, amongst mouse
extraembryonic lineages, the primitive endoderm and the extraembryonic endoderm
(XEN) stem cells derived from it.
RESULTS: Using a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation characterisation of
histone modifications and single-cell expression studies, we show that whilst the
Xp in XEN cells, like the inactive X chromosome in other cell types, globally
accumulates the repressive histone mark H3K27me3, a large number of Xp genes
locally lack H3K27me3 and escape from I-XCI. In most cases this escape is
specific to the XEN cell lineage. Importantly, the degree of escape and the genes
concerned remain unchanged upon XEN conversion into visceral endoderm, suggesting
stringent control of I-XCI in XEN derivatives. Surprisingly, chemical inhibition 
of EZH2, a member of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), and subsequent
loss of H3K27me3 on the Xp, do not drastically perturb the pattern of silencing
of Xp genes in XEN cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The observations that we report here suggest that the maintenance of
gene expression profiles of the inactive Xp in XEN cells involves a
tissue-specific mechanism that acts partly independently of PRC2 catalytic
activity.

PMCID: PMC4105886
PMID: 25053977  [PubMed]


122. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 23;33:58. doi: 10.1186/s13046-014-0058-9.

EZH2 expression correlates with locoregional recurrence after radiation in
inflammatory breast cancer.

Debeb BG(1,)(2), Gong Y(3,)(4), Atkinson RL(5,)(6), Sneige N(7), Huo L(8,)(9),
Gonzalez-Angulo AM(10), Hung MC(11,)(12), Valero V(13,)(14), Ueno NT(15,)(16),
Woodward WA(17,)(18,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. bgdebeb@mdanderson.org. (2)Morgan Welch
Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. bgdebeb@mdanderson.org.
(3)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. yungong@mdanderson.org. (4)Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast
Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA. yungong@mdanderson.org. (5)Department of Clinical
Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. ratkinson@mdanderson.org. (6)Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer
Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. ratkinson@mdanderson.org. (7)Department of Pathology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
nsneige@mdanderson.org. (8)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. leihuo@mdanderson.org. (9)Morgan Welch 
Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research Program and Clinic, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. leihuo@mdanderson.org.
(10)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. agonzalez@mdanderson.org. (11)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. mhung@mdanderson.org. (12)Center for Molecular Medicine
and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan. mhung@mdanderson.org. (13)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
vvalero@mdanderson.org. (14)Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research
Program and Clinic, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. vvalero@mdanderson.org. (15)Department of Breast Medical Oncology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
nueno@mdanderson.org. (16)Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research
Program and Clinic, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. nueno@mdanderson.org. (17)Department of Radiation Oncology, The
University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
wwoodward@mdanderson.org. (18)Morgan Welch Inflammatory Breast Cancer Research
Program and Clinic, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. wwoodward@mdanderson.org. (19)Division of Radiation Oncology, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Unit 1202, 
77030, Houston, TX, USA. wwoodward@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a member of the polycomb group
proteins, has been shown to promote cancer progression and breast cancer stem
cell (CSC) expansion. Breast CSCs are associated with resistance to radiation in 
inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), a rare but aggressive variant of breast cancer.
In this retrospective study, we examined the clinical role of EZH2 in
locoregional recurrence (LRR) of IBC patients treated with radiation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 62 IBC patients who received radiation (7 pre-operative, 55
post-operative) and had adequate follow up to assess LRR were the subject of this
study. Positive EZH2 status was defined as nuclear immunohistochemical staining
in at least 10% of invasive cancer cells. Association of EZH2 expression with
clinicopathologic features were evaluated using the Chi-square statistic and
actuarial LRR free survival (LRFS) was determined using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: The median follow-up for this cohort was 33.7 months, and the 5-year
overall LRFS rate was 69%. Of the 62 patients, 16 (25.8%) had LRR, and 15 out of 
16 LRR occurred in EZH2 expressing cases. Univariate analysis indicated that
patients who had EZH2-positive IBC had a significantly lower 5-year locoregional 
free survival (LRFS) rate than patients who had EZH2-negative IBC (93.3% vs.
59.1%; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). Positive EZH2 expression was associated significantly with
negative ER status (97.1% in ER- vs 48.1% in ER+; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001) and triple-negative
receptor status (P = 0.0001) and all triple-negative tumors were EZH2-positive.
In multivariate analysis, only triple negative status remained an independent
predictor of worse LRFS (hazard ratio 5.64, 95% CI 2.19 - 14.49, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 correlates with locoregional recurrence in IBC patients who
received radiation treatment. EZH2 expression status may be used in addition to
receptor status to identify a subset of patients with IBC who recur locally in
spite of radiation and may benefit from enrollment in clinical trials testing
radiosensitizers.

PMCID: PMC4431485
PMID: 25051981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct 1;34(19):3662-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00205-14. Epub 2014
Jul 21.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 and H3K27me3 cooperate with H3K9 methylation to
maintain heterochromatin protein 1a at chromatin.

Boros J(1), Arnoult N(1), Stroobant V(2), Collet JF(3), Decottignies A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic and Epigenetic Alterations of Genomes, de Duve Institute, Catholic
University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (2)Ludwig Institute for Cancer
Research, Brussels Branch, and de Duve Institute, Catholic University of Louvain,
Brussels, Belgium. (3)WELBIO and de Duve Institute, Catholic University of
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Genetic and Epigenetic Alterations of Genomes, de 
Duve Institute, Catholic University of Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
anabelle.decottignies@uclouvain.be.

Methylation of histone H3 on lysine 9 or 27 is crucial for heterochromatin
formation. Previously considered hallmarks of, respectively, constitutive and
facultative heterochromatin, recent evidence has accumulated in favor of
coexistence of these two marks and their cooperation in gene silencing
maintenance. H3K9me2/3 ensures anchorage at chromatin of heterochromatin protein 
1a (HP1a), a main component of heterochromatin. HP1a chromoshadow domain,
involved in dimerization and interaction with partners, has additional but still 
unclear roles in HP1a recruitment to chromatin. Because of previously suggested
links between polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyzes H3K27
methylation, and HP1a, we tested whether PRC2 may regulate HP1a abundance at
chromatin. We found that the EZH2 and SUZ12 subunits of PRC2 are required for
HP1a stability, as knockdown of either protein led to HP1a degradation. Similar
results were obtained upon overexpression of H3K27me2/3 demethylases. We further 
showed that binding of HP1a/ß/<U+03B3> to H3K9me3 peptides is greatly increased in the
presence of H3K27me3, and this is dependent on PRC2. These data fit with recent
proteomic studies identifying PRC2 as an indirect H3K9me3 binder in mouse tissues
and suggest the existence of a cooperative mechanism of HP1a anchorage at
chromatin involving H3 methylation on both K9 and K27 residues.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187721
PMID: 25047840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Oct;18(10):1197-206. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.941807. Epub 2014 Jul 21.

Epigenetic modification in gliomas: role of the histone methyltransferase EZH2.

Bian EB(1), Li J, He XJ, Zong G, Jiang T, Li J, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Department of
Neurosurgery , Hefei 230601 , China aydzhb@126.com.

INTRODUCTION: Gliomas are characterized by increased anaplasia, malignization,
proliferation and invasion. They exhibit high resistance to standard treatment
with combinations of radiotherapy and chemotherapy. They are currently the most
common primary malignancy tumors in the brain that is related to a high mortality
rate. Recently, increasing evidence suggests that EZH2 is involved in a number of
glioma cell processes, including proliferation, apoptosis, invasion and
angiogenesis.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we emphasize the role of EZH2 in gliomas. We also 
address that EZH2 interacting with DNA methylation mediates transcriptional
repression of specific genes in gliomas, and the regulation of EZH2 by microRNAs 
in gliomas.
EXPERT OPINION: Although the exact role of EZH2 in gliomas has not been fully
elucidated, to understand the role of EZH2 proteins in epigenetic modification
will provide valuable insights into the causes of gliomas, and pave the way to
the potential future applications of EZH2 in the treatment of gliomas.

PMID: 25046371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Oct;54(10):1172-80. doi: 10.1002/mc.22188. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

The methyltransferase EZH2 is not required for mammary cancer development,
although high EZH2 and low H3K27me3 correlate with poor prognosis of ER-positive 
breast cancers.

Bae WK(1,)(2), Yoo KH(1), Lee JS(3), Kim Y(3), Chung IJ(2), Park MH(4), Yoon
JH(4), Furth PA(5), Hennighausen L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam National
University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Chonnam
National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. (4)Department of Surgery,
Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. (5)Department of
Oncology and Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) catalyzes trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 
27 (H3K27me3) and its demethylation is catalyzed by UTX. EZH2 levels are
frequently elevated in breast cancer and have been proposed to control gene
expression through regulating repressive H3K27me3 marks. However, it is not fully
established whether breast cancers with different levels of H3K27me3, EZH2 and
UTX exhibit different biological behaviors. Levels of H3K27me3, EZH2 and UTX and 
their prognostic significance were evaluated in 146 cases of breast cancer.
H3K27me3 levels were higher in HER2-negative samples. EZH2 expression was higher 
in cancers that were LN+, size<U+2009>><U+2009>20mm, and with higher tumor grade and stage.
Using a Cox regression model, H3K27me3 levels and EZH2 expression were identified
as independent prognostic factors for overall survival for all the breast cancers
studied as well as the ER-positive subgroup. The combination of low H3K27me3 and 
high EZH2 expression levels were significantly associated with shorter survival. 
UTX expression was not significantly associated with prognosis and there were no 
correlations between H3K27me3 levels and EZH2/UTX expression. To determine if
EZH2 is required to establish H3K27me3 marks in mammary cancer, Brca1 and Ezh2
were deleted in mammary stem cells in mice. Brca1-deficient mammary cancers with 
unaltered H3K27me3 levels developed in the absence of EZH2, demonstrating that
EZH2 is not a mandatory H3K27 methyltransferase in mammary neoplasia and
providing genetic evidence for biological independence between H3K27me3 and EZH2 
in this tissue.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4286524 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25043748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncogene. 2015 May 28;34(22):2922-33. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.217. Epub 2014 Jul
21.

Knockdown of PTHR1 in osteosarcoma cells decreases invasion and growth and
increases tumor differentiation in vivo.

Ho PW(1), Goradia A(1), Russell MR(1), Chalk AM(1), Milley KM(2), Baker EK(1),
Danks JA(2), Slavin JL(3), Walia M(1), Crimeen-Irwin B(1), Dickins RA(4), Martin 
TJ(1), Walkley CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research and Department of Medicine, St.
Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.
(2)School of Medical Sciences, RMIT University, Bundoora, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Pathology, St Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia. 
(4)Molecular Medicine Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most common cancer of bone. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
regulates calcium homeostasis and bone development, while the paracrine/autocrine
PTH-related protein (PTHrP) has central roles in endochondral bone formation and 
bone remodeling. Using a murine OS model, we found that OS cells express PTHrP
and the common PTH/PTHrP receptor (PTHR1). To investigate the role of PTHR1
signaling in OS cell behavior, we used shRNA to reduce PTHR1 expression. This
only mildly inhibited proliferation in vitro, but markedly reduced invasion
through collagen and reduced expression of RANK ligand (RANKL). Administration of
PTH(1-34) did not stimulate OS proliferation in vivo but, strikingly, PTHR1
knockdown resulted in a profound growth inhibition and increased
differentiation/mineralization of the tumors. Treatment with neutralizing
antibody to PTHrP did not recapitulate the knockdown of PTHR1. Consistent with
this lack of activity, PTHrP was predominantly intracellular in OS cells.
Knockdown of PTHR1 resulted in increased expression of late osteoblast
differentiation genes and upregulation of Wnt antagonists. RANKL production was
reduced in knockdown tumors, providing for reduced homotypic signaling through
the receptor, RANK. Loss of PTHR1 resulted in the coordinated loss of gene
signatures associated with the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Using Ezh2
inhibitors, we demonstrate that the increased expression of osteoblast maturation
markers is in part mediated by the loss of PRC2 activity. Collectively these
results demonstrate that PTHR1 signaling is important in maintaining OS
proliferation and undifferentiated state. This is in part mediated by
intracellular PTHrP and through regulation of the OS epigenome.

PMID: 25043296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jul;46(3):209-22. doi: 10.4143/crt.2014.46.3.209. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

Regulation and Role of EZH2 in Cancer.

Yamaguchi H(1), Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is the epigenetic regulator that induces
histone H3 lysine 27 methylation (H3K27me3) and silences specific gene
transcription. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is an enzymatic subunit of
PRC2, and evidence shows that EZH2 plays an essential role in cancer initiation, 
development, progression, metastasis, and drug resistance. EZH2 expression is
indeed regulated by various oncogenic transcription factors, tumor suppressor
miRNAs, and cancer-associated non-coding RNA. EZH2 activity is also controlled by
post-translational modifications, which are deregulated in cancer. The canonical 
role of EZH2 is gene silencing through H3K27me3, but accumulating evidence shows 
that EZH2 methlyates substrates other than histone and has methylase-independent 
functions. These non-canonical functions of EZH2 are shown to play a role in
cancer progression. In this review, we summarize current information on the
regulation and roles of EZH2 in cancer. We also discuss various therapeutic
approaches to targeting EZH2.

PMCID: PMC4132442
PMID: 25038756  [PubMed]


128. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jul 17;15(7):12688-97. doi: 10.3390/ijms150712688.

Role of EZH2 polymorphisms in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma risk in Han
Chinese population.

Ma ZB(1), Guo GH(2), Niu Q(3), Shi N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical
College, No. 661, Yellow-River Second Street, Binzhou 256600, Shandong, China.
mazhenbin@yeah.net. (2)Department of Gynaecology, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou 
Medical College, No. 661, Yellow-River Second Street, Binzhou 256600, Shandong,
China. gghbyfy@yeah.net. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital
of Binzhou Medical College, No. 661, Yellow-River Second Street, Binzhou 256600, 
Shandong, China. niuqiong@126.com. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated 
Hospital of Binzhou Medical College, No. 661, Yellow-River Second Street, Binzhou
256600, Shandong, China. shiningbyfy@yeah.net.

Gene single nucleotide polymorphisms play a critical role in the development of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). The aim of this study is to
investigate the associations between EZH2 gene polymorphisms and ESCC risk. We
undertook a case-control study to analyze three EZH2 polymorphisms (148505302C>T,
2110+6A>C and 626-394T>C) in an Han Chinese population, by extraction of genomic 
DNA from the peripheral blood of 476 patients with ESCC and 492 control
participants, and performed EZH2 genotyping using DNA sequencing. The obtained
results indicated that overall, no statistically significant association was
observed in 148505302C>T and 2110+6A>C. However, 626-394T>C genotype was at
increased risk of ESCCs (p=0.006; odds ratio (OR)=1.131, CI 95%: 1.034-1.236).
Moreover, 626-394C/C genotype ESCCs were more significantly common in patients
with tumor size of >5 cm than T allele ESCC and in cases of poor differentiation 
and lower advanced pathological stage. In conclusion, polymorphism in 626-394T>C 
was observed to be associated with susceptibility of ESCC. Nevertheless, further 
investigation with a larger sample size is needed to support our results.

PMCID: PMC4139868
PMID: 25036033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jul 17;5:e1324. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.283.

Integrative epigenome analysis identifies a Polycomb-targeted differentiation
program as a tumor-suppressor event epigenetically inactivated in colorectal
cancer.

Tan J(1), Yang X(1), Jiang X(1), Zhou J(2), Li Z(1), Lee PL(1), Li B(3), Robson
P(4), Yu Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore.
(2)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore. (3)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of 
Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (4)1] Stem Cell and Developmental Biology,
Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and
Research), Biopolis, Singapore [2] Department of Biological Sciences, National
University of Singapore, Singapore.

Aberrant DNA hypermethylation in human cancer has been associated with Polycomb
target genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells, but a functional link of the
Polycomb-targeted differentiation program to tumorigenesis remains to be
established. Here, through epigenome analysis correlating DNA hypermethylation in
colon cancer with ES cell pluripotency and differentiation, we identified a set
of DNA hypermethylated genes in cancer cells that are Polycomb targets strongly
associated with ES cell differentiation, including HAND1, a developmental
regulator. Intriguingly, HAND1 is silenced in over 90% of human primary
colorectal tumors, and re-expression of HAND1 in colon cancer cells induces
terminal differentiation, inhibits proliferation and prevents xenograft tumor
formation. Moreover, hypermethylated HAND1 has a minimum enrichment of
EZH2-H3K27me3 in cancer cells, but becomes EZH2 bound and bivalent upon the loss 
of DNA methylation, suggesting a sequential gene silencing event during
oncogenesis. These findings established a functional role of Polycomb-targeted
differentiation program as a tumor-suppressor event epigenetically inactivated in
human cancer.

PMCID: PMC4123077
PMID: 25032847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Virchows Arch. 2014 Nov;465(5):599-605. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1627-1. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

The combination of CD99 and NKX2.2, a transcriptional target of EWSR1-FLI1, is
highly specific for the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma.

Shibuya R(1), Matsuyama A, Nakamoto M, Shiba E, Kasai T, Hisaoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu,
807-8555, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a high-grade malignant neoplasm primarily affecting
children and young adults. The diagnosis of ES is often difficult because of its 
broad differential diagnosis comprising a diverse group of small round cell
tumors (SRCTs). Although the identification of tumor type-specific fusion genes
by molecular testing is the gold standard for the diagnosis of ES, such
approaches are not always available in a routine pathology practice. Thus, a
reliable immunohistochemical marker is required. A recent study using a limited
number of tumor samples has shown that NKX2.2, a putative transcriptional target 
of EWSR1-FLI1, is a useful marker for the diagnosis of ES. In the present study, 
the immunohistochemical expression of NKX2.2 was evaluated on 46 genetically
confirmed ES and 85 non-ES SRCTs, together with comparative assessment of CD99
and other molecular targets of EWSR1-FLI1, including NR0B1, E2F3, and EZH2.
NKX2.2 was expressed in 37 (80 %) of the ES samples with a mostly diffuse and
strong staining pattern, and 14 (16 %) of the non-ES SRCTs, including olfactory
neuroblastomas, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, 
small cell carcinomas, and Merkel cell carcinoma, also expressed this marker. The
sensitivity and specificity of the NKX2.2 expression in this cohort were 80 and
84 %, respectively. The specificity when combined with CD99 was 98 %, with
exceptional expression of both markers in only two non-ES SRCTs, including one
case each of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma and small cell carcinoma. NR0B1, E2F3,
and EZH2 were less sensitive for specific markers for ES when applied singly or
in any combination. In conclusion, the study reinforces that NKX2.2 is a useful
immunohistochemical marker for ES, and that the combination of CD99 and NKX2.2 is
a powerful diagnostic tool that can differentiate ES from other SRCTs.

PMID: 25031013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Apr;56(4):1100-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.944522. Epub
2014 Aug 21.

Prevalence of targetable oncogenic mutations and genomic alterations in
Epstein-Barr virus-associated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the elderly.

Gebauer N(1), Gebauer J, Hardel TT, Bernard V, Biersack H, Lehnert H, Rades D,
Feller AC, Thorns C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein ,
Luebeck , Germany.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the 
elderly constitutes a provisional clinicopathological entity in the current World
Health Organization (WHO) classification and its genomic features remain sparsely
characterized. We investigated a cohort of 26 cases of untreated de novo
EBV-positive DLBCL of the elderly by high-resolution array-based comparative
genomic profiling and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Moreover, we
screened for activating mutations affecting nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B pathway
signaling and chromatin remodeling (EZH2, CD79B, CARD11 and MYD88) due to their
impact of gene expression signatures and postulated upcoming therapeutic
targetability. We identified an overlap between genomic aberrations previously
described to be exclusive features of plasmablastic lymphoma (PL),
post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) and DLBCL, respectively,
indicating a close cytogenetic relationship between these entities. Few mutations
affecting CD79B and CARD11 and no MYD88 mutations were detectable, hinting at
EBV-mediated activation of NF-<U+03BA>B as an alternative to pathologically enforced
B-cell receptor signaling in this rare entity.

PMID: 25030036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:903542. doi: 10.1155/2014/903542. Epub 2014 Jun 15.

Number of polyploid giant cancer cells and expression of EZH2 are associated with
VM formation and tumor grade in human ovarian tumor.

Zhang L(1), Ding P(2), Lv H(1), Zhang D(1), Liu G(1), Yang Z(1), Li Y(3), Liu
J(4), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Union Medicine Center, Tianjin 300121, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Tianjin Union Medicine Center, Tianjin 300121, 
China. (3)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Tianjin Union Medicine
Center, Tianjin 300121, China. (4)Department of Medical Imaging, Tianjin Union
Medicine Center, Tianjin 300121, China.

To investigate the associations among the number of polyploid giant cancer cells 
(PGCCs) and vasculogenic mimicry (VM), EZH2 expression, and serous ovarian tumor 
grade, a total of 80 paraffin-embedded serous ovarian tumor samples including 21 
cases of primary carcinoma and their metastatic tumors, 26 cases of primary
carcinoma without metastasis, and 12 cases of serous borderline cystadenoma were 
analyzed. PGCCs and VM were detected in human serous ovarian tumor. The
metastatic foci of ovarian carcinoma had the highest number of PGCCs and VM. The 
number of PGCCs and VM increased with the grade of ovarian carcinomas. PGCCs
generated erythrocytes via budding and together they formed VM. Tumor cells and
cancer-associated fibroblasts were positive for EZH2 immunohistochemical
staining. The tumor cells and cancer associated fibroblasts in the metastatic
foci had the highest staining index of EZH2 staining. Both tumor cells and
cancer-associated fibroblasts express EZH2 which then contributes to the
malignant grade of serous ovarian tumor.

PMCID: PMC4082869
PMID: 25025074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neoplasia. 2014 Jun;16(6):481-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 Jul
10.

Gene mutation patterns in patients with minimally differentiated acute myeloid
leukemia.

Kao HW(1), Liang DC(2), Wu JH(3), Kuo MC(1), Wang PN(3), Yang CP(4), Shih YS(5), 
Lin TH(5), Huang YH(3), Shih LY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. (3)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, Chang Gung Children's Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Chang
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (6)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department 
of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Electronic address: sly7012@adm.cgmh.org.tw.

Minimally differentiated acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M0) is a rare subtype of AML
with poor prognosis. Although genetic alterations are increasingly reported in
AML, the gene mutations have not been comprehensively studied in AML-M0. We aimed
to examine a wide spectrum of gene mutations in patients with AML-M0 to determine
their clinical relevance. Twenty gene mutations including class I, class II,
class III of epigenetic regulators (IDH1, IDH2, TET2, DNMT3A, MLL-PTD, ASXL1, and
EZH2), and class IV (tumor suppressor genes) were analyzed in 67 patients with
AML-M0. Mutational analysis was performed with polymerase chain reaction-based
assays followed by direct sequencing. The most frequent gene mutations from our
data were FLT3-ITD/FLT3-TKD (28.4%), followed by mutations in IDH1/IDH2 (28.8%), 
RUNX1 (23.9%), N-RAS/K-RAS (12.3%), TET2 (8.2%), DNMT3A (8.1%), MLL-PTD (7.8%),
and ASXL1 (6.3%). Seventy-nine percent (53/67) of patients had at least one gene 
mutation. Class I genes (49.3%) were the most common mutated genes, which were
mutually exclusive. Class III genes of epigenetic regulators were also frequent
(43.9%). In multivariate analysis, old age [hazard ratio (HR) 1.029, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.013-1.044, P=.001) was the independent adverse factor 
for overall survival, and RUNX1 mutation (HR 2.326, 95% CI 0.978-5.533, P=.056)
had a trend toward inferior survival. In conclusion, our study showed a high
frequency of FLT3, RUNX1, and IDH mutations in AML-M0, suggesting that these
mutations played a role in the pathogenesis and served as potential therapeutic
targets in this rare and unfavorable subtype of AML.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4198802
PMID: 25022553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Rinsho Byori. 2014 Apr;62(4):359-68.

[Classification and clinical findings of myelodysplastic syndromes].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuruda K, Hasegawa H, Fuchigami M, Uno N, Morinaga Y, Miyazaki Y, Yanagihara K.

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of related disorders in which bone
marrow stem cells malfunction, while the type is diagnosed based on the WHO
classification revised in 2008. Although the diagnosis largely depends on the
cytomorphology, it is difficult to diagnose MDS based on the morphology alone,
particularly in patients with < 5% blasts in the bone marrow and a normal
karyotype. In Japan, a grading system for the diagnostic accuracy of MDS was
proposed in 2007, and evaluation of dysplasia (high, intermediate, low, minimal) 
is a characteristic part. Morphologic dysplastic changes are classified into
highly specific category A (pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly, degranulation of
neutrophils, micro-megakaryocytes, ringed sideroblasts) and less specific
category B (dysplasia other than category A). With the use of this grading
system, diagnostic problems should be reduced. Flow cytometry has also been
proposed as a tool to improve the evaluation of marrow dysplasia, because
immunophenotyping is an accurate method for quantitative and qualitative
evaluations of hematopoietic cells, and MDS specimens have been found to exhibit 
abnormal expressions of several cellular antigens. In addition, the molecular
classification of MDS has received marked attention in recent years. New
molecular markers including RPS14, TET2, IDH1/2, SF3B1, ASXL1, RUNX1, TP53, EZH2,
JAK2, and WT1 have been revealed to be important for the prognosis, as well as
diagnosis and classification. In this report, we review MDS diagnostic approaches
from the viewpoints of cytomorphology, immunophenotyping, and cytogenetics.

PMID: 25022065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):858-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.07.001.
Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Autoregulatory feedback loop of EZH2/miR-200c/E2F3 as a driving force for
prostate cancer development.

Tao T(1), Liu D(2), Liu C(1), Xu B(1), Chen S(1), Yin Y(3), Ang L(4), Huang Y(1),
Zhang X(1), Chen M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China; Surgical Research Center, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China; Institute of Urology, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China. (2)Department of Urology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical
School, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China; Surgical Research Center,
Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009, China. (3)Department of
Pathology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. (4)Department of
Pathology, The Second People's Hospital of Hefei, Hefei 230002, China.
(5)Department of Urology, Zhongda Hospital, Medical School, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China; Surgical Research Center, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing 210009, China; Institute of Urology, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China. Electronic address: mingchenseu@gmail.com.

The histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has recently
attracted considerable attention because of its dysregulation in prostate cancer 
(PCa) and its important function in PCa development. To date, little is known
about the underlying cellular function and regulatory networks of EZH2 in PCa.
This study aims to determine whether or not the autoregulatory feedback loop of
EZH2/miR-200c/E2F3 serves key functions in PCa development. Bioinformatics and
integrative analytical approaches were employed to identify the relationships of 
EZH2 to specific cancer-related gene sets. Results indicated that the enrichment 
of gene sets about cell cycle progression was associated with EZH2 expression.
The depletion of EZH2 in cell experiments inhibited PCa cell growth and blocked
cell cycle accompanying the downregulation of E2F3 expression. Furthermore,
miR-200c served as an important mediator between EZH2 and E2F3. Compared with
scrambled control cells, sh-EZH2 cells showed lower H3K27me3 expression and
higher miR-200c expression. Western blot and luciferase reporter assays showed
that miR-200c inversely modulated E2F3 by directly targeting the binding site
within 3'UTR. Moreover, decreased miR-200c expression largely abrogated the
effect of sh-EZH2 on E2F3 expression and E2F3-induced cell cycle progression.
EZH2 was positively regulated by E2F3 at the transcriptional level.
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization revealed a significant correlation
among EZH2, miR-200c, and E2F3 expression in human PCa tissues. In conclusion,
the autoregulatory feedback loop of EZH2/miR-200c/E2F3 served an important
function in PCa development. Targeting this aberrantly activated feedback loop
may provide a new therapeutic strategy against PCa.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncol Rep. 2014 Sep;32(3):1101-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3322. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Aberrant expression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2, correlated with HIF-1a,
refines relapse risk and predicts poor outcome for breast cancer.

Dong M(1), Fan XJ(2), Chen ZH(1), Wang TT(1), Li X(1), Chen J(1), Lin Q(1), Wen
JY(1), Ma XK(1), Wei L(1), Ruan DY(1), Lin ZX(1), Liu Q(3), Wu XY(1), Wan XB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510630, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pathology,
Gastrointestinal Institute, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510655, P.R. China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in 
South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510065, P.R. China.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a key component of
polycomb proteins, has been linked to aggressive tumor behavior in a variety of
cancers. In vitro, hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) transcriptionally
activates EZH2 and promotes the progression of breast tumor initiating cells.
Here, we characterized the clinicopathological effect of EZH2 and HIF-1a in 410
breast cancer patients. We examined EZH2 and HIF-1a expression using
immunohistochemistry and western blotting. We found that EZH2 and HIF-1a were
highly expressed in 99 (24.1%) and 272 (70.6%) patients, respectively. EZH2
overexpression was associated with lymphatic invasion (P=0.025), HER2 expression 
(P=0.005) and hypoxia (P<0.001). Overexpression of EZH2 predicted a poor 5-year
overall survival (OS, 74.8 vs. 93.4%, P=0.001), disease-free survival (DFS, 72.2 
vs. 88.6%, P=0.031), local failure-free survival (LFFS, 95.7 vs. 97.9%, P=0.045) 
and distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS, 75.4 vs. 90.5%, P=0.039).
Multivariate analysis confirmed that EZH2 is an independent prognostic factor for
OS, DFS and LFFS. Moreover, a positive correlation was identified between EZH2
and HIF-1a (r=0.299, P<0.001). Importantly, tumors coexpressing HIF-1a and EZH2
had a poorer OS (P=0.007). In conclusion, our study demonstrated that EZH2 is an 
independent negative prognostic biomarker for breast cancer. Tumors
overexpressing HIF-1a and EZH2 are more prone to disease progression.

PMID: 25017254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nihon Rinsho. 2014 Jun;72(6):1052-7.

[Detection for therapeutic targets specifically expressed in myeloma side
population cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Tagawa H.

ATP binding membrane transporter such as multi drug resistant protein (MDR1) and 
breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) are highly activated in side population
(SP) of various normal organs. It has been demonstrated that various primary as
well as cancer cell lines also possess SP. Since SP cells have been also known as
the cancer initiating cell rich population in various cancers, the population
might play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of multiple myeloma. Recent our
works demonstrated that G2/M (e.g. CCNB1, CDC2), centrosome (e.g.AURKB, CENP),
polycomb (e.g. EPC1, EZH2) and proteasome (e.g. UBE3C, PSMA5) related genes were 
upregulated in the SP of myeloma cell lines and CD138-positive primary samples.
Although myeloma has been known as incurable disease, discovery of new agents
such as immunomodulatory drugs (lenalidomide) and proteasome inhibitor
(bortezomib) provide improvement of prognosis of the tumor entity. These drugs
might be effective to downregulate aforementioned aberrantly upregulated gene
products in myeloma SP. Here we show some evidences of use of these drugs for
targeting myeloma-SP cells.

PMID: 25016803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncotarget. 2014 Jul 2. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-101 targets EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS to suppress proliferation, invasion and 
stem cell-like phenotype of aggressive endometrial cancer cells.

Konno Y(1), Dong P(2), Xiong Y, Suzuki F, Lu J, Cai M, Watari H, Mitamura T,
Hosaka M, Hanley SJ, Kudo M, Sakuragi N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. (2)Department
of Women's Health Educational System, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan; Department of
Women's Health Educational System, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

MicroRNA-101 has been implicated as a tumor suppressor miRNA in human tumors.
However, its potential functional impact and the underlying mechanisms in
endometrial cancer progression have not been determined. Here, we report that in 
aggressive endometrial cancer cells, re-expression of microRNA-101 leads to
inhibition of cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis and senescence.
Ectopic overexpression of microRNA-101 attenuates the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition-associated cancer cell migration and invasion, abrogates the
sphere-forming capacity and enhances chemosensitivity to paclitaxel. Algorithm
and microarray-based strategies identifies potential microRNA-101 targets. Among 
these, we validated EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS as direct targets of miR-101 and
silencing of these genes mimics the tumor suppressive effects observed on
promoting microRNA-101 function. Importantly, further results suggest an inverse 
correlation between low miR-101 and high EZH2, MCL-1 and FOS expression in EC
specimens. We conclude that, as a crucial tumor suppressor, microRNA-101
suppresses cell proliferation, invasiveness and self-renewal in aggressive
endometrial cancer cells via modulating multiple critical oncogenes. The
microRNA-101-EZH2/MCL-1/FOS axis is a potential therapeutic target for
endometrial cancer.

PMID: 25015211  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


139. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2015;33(6):1185-97. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2014.938247. Epub 
2014 Jul 11.

HDAC inhibition through valproic acid modulates the methylation profiles in human
embryonic kidney cells.

Ganai SA(1), Kalladi SM, Mahadevan V.

Author information: 
(1)a Center for Nanotechnology & Advanced Biomaterials, School of Chemical &
Biotechnology , SASTRA University , Thanjavur 613401 , India.

Post-translational modifications on the tails of core and linker histones dictate
transcription and have vital roles in disease and development. Acetylation and
deacetylation events enabled by histone acetyl transferases and histone
deacetylases (HDACs) on the chromatin milieu are intricately involved in gene
regulation. Inhibition of HDACs is emerging as a powerful strategy in
regenerative therapy, transplantation, development and in nuclear reprogramming
events. Valproic acid (VPA), belonging to the short-chain fatty acid group of
HDAC inhibitors, modulates the epigenome altering gene expression profiles across
cell lines. This work attempts to explore the methylation profiles triggered by
VPA treatment on human embryonic kidney cells (HEK 293) through a biochemical and
computational approach. VPA treatment (for 48<U+2009>h) has been observed to
hypermethylate lysine 4 on the core histone H3 and confers a hypomethylation
status of H3 lysine 27 in HEK 293 cells leaving the nuclear area and nuclear
contour unaltered. Our structural docking and Binding Free Energy (BFE)
calculations establish an active role for VPA in inhibiting the demethylase
JARID1A (Jumonji, AT Rich Interactive Domain 1A) and the methyl-transferase EZH2 
(Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2). This work has also proven that VPA can inhibit
the activity of proteins like GSK3ß and PKCßII involved in developmental
disorders. This work establishes a dynamic correlation between histone
methylation events and HDAC inhibition and may define newer epigenetic strategies
for treating neurodevelopmental and oncological disorders.

PMID: 25012937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 9;9(7):e100340. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100340. eCollection
2014.

Long noncoding RNA-EBIC promotes tumor cell invasion by binding to EZH2 and
repressing E-cadherin in cervical cancer.

Sun NX(1), Ye C(1), Zhao Q(1), Zhang Q(1), Xu C(1), Wang SB(2), Jin ZJ(1), Sun
SH(2), Wang F(2), Li W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, 
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

In recent years, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been demonstrated to play key
roles in tumorgenesis. However, the contributions of lncRNAs to cervical cancer
(CC) remain largely unknown. In this study, differentially expressed lncRNAs and 
mRNAs in cervical cancer and paired peritumoral tissues were detected by
transcriptome microarray analysis. We found 708 probe sets of lncRNAs increased
and 836 probe sets decreased in CC tissues, while 1288 mRNA differential probe
sets increased and 901 mRNA probe sets decreased. The results were validated by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Then, we found a
specific differentially expressed lncRNA can physically bind to enhancer of zeste
homolog2 (EZH2) by using RNA immunoprecipitation. We termed it as EZH2-binding
lncRNA in cervical cancer [lncRNA-EBIC]. Wound healing assays and Matrigel
invasion assays were used to determine the function of this lncRNA by silencing
it. We observed that the migration and invasion of cervical cancer cells in vitro
were inhibited upon suppression of lncRNA-EBIC by siRNA. We also found that the
association between lncRNA-EBIC and EZH2 was required for the repression of
E-cadherin, which was a key molecular in the metastasis of cervical cancer.
Conclusion: These results demonstrated that lncRNA-EBIC was an oncogenic lncRNA, 
which could promote tumor cell invasion in CC by binding to EZH2 and inhibiting
E-cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC4090119
PMID: 25007342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Apr;240(4):458-66. doi: 10.1177/1535370214542215.
Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Inhibition of EZH2 expression is associated with the proliferation, apoptosis,
and migration of SW620 colorectal cancer cells in vitro.

He SB(1), Zhou H(2), Zhou J(2), Zhou GQ(3), Han T(2), Wan DW(4), Gu W(2), Gao
L(2), Zhang Y(2), Xue XF(2), Zhang LF(2), Fei M(5), Hu SQ(6), Yang XD(7), Zhu
XG(8), Wang L(2), Li DC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China Department of General Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China
captain_hsb@163.com idechun1955@163.com. (2)Department of General Surgery, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Changshu No. 2 Hospital, Suzhou
215500, China. (4)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510000, China. (5)Jiangsu Institute Hematology,
the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratories, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China. (7)Department of
General Surgery, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou
215006, China. (8)Department of General Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China captain_hsb@163.com idechun1955@163.com.

Erratum in
    Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2015 Apr;240(4):546-55.

Epigenetic changes have been recently recognized as important in many human
cancers. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)gene has shown overexpression in
various human cancers, consistent with a straightforward role of EZH2 as an
oncogene, but its function in carcinogenesis is partly contradictory. The role of
EZH2 in development of human colorectal cancer (CRC) has not yet been clarified. 
In present study, we observed up-regulation of EZH2 expression in tumor tissues
from CRC patients [corrected]. The expression of EZH2 in CRC cell lines is
consistent with the trend in cancer tissues using RT-PCR. We showed that TNM
stage and lymph node metastasis in CRC patients are significantly correlated with
EZH2 expression levels [corrected]. EZH2 level of transcription and protein was
inhibited by small interfering RNA (siRNA). More importantly, EZH2-siRNA
inhibited the proliferation and migration of SW620 cells while promoting their
apoptosis, and inducing G0/G1 cell cycle arrest of CRC cells. Collectively, our
results suggest that upregulated EZH2 expression may contribute to the
progression of the patients with CRC. A comprehensive study of epigenetic
mechanisms and the relevance of EZH2 in CRC is important for fully understanding 
this disease and as a basis for developing new treatment options in patients with
CRC [corrected].

© 2014 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

PMID: 25005166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 1;20(19):5001-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2499.
Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Molecular pathways: deregulation of histone h3 lysine 27 methylation in
cancer-different paths, same destination.

Ezponda T(1), Licht JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
j-licht@northwestern.edu.

Methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me), a modification associated with 
gene repression, plays a critical role in regulating the expression of genes that
determine the balance between cell differentiation and proliferation. Alteration 
of the level of this histone modification has emerged as a recurrent theme in
many types of cancer, demonstrating that either excess or lack of H3K27
methylation can have oncogenic effects. Cancer genome sequencing has revealed the
genetic basis of H3K27me deregulation, including mutations of the components of
the H3K27 methyltransferase complex PRC2 and accessory proteins, and deletions
and inactivating mutations of the H3K27 demethylase UTX in a wide variety of
neoplasms. More recently, mutations of lysine 27 on histone H3 itself were shown 
to prevent H3K27me in pediatric glioblastomas. Aberrant expression or mutations
in proteins that recognize H3K27me3 also occur in cancer and may result in
misinterpretation of this mark. In addition, due to the cross-talk between
different epigenetic modifications, alterations of chromatin modifiers
controlling H3K36me, or even mutations of this residue, can ultimately regulate
H3K27me levels and distribution across the genome. The significance of mutations 
altering H3K27me is underscored by the fact that many tumors harboring such
lesions often have a poor clinical outcome. New therapeutic approaches targeting 
aberrant H3K27 methylation include small molecules that block the action of
mutant EZH2 in germinal center-derived lymphoma. Understanding the biologic
consequences and gene expression pathways affected by aberrant H3K27 methylation 
may also lead to other new therapeutic strategies.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4184969
PMID: 24987060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Transl Oncol. 2015 Jan;17(1):41-9. doi: 10.1007/s12094-014-1195-5. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

EZH2 promotes tumor progression by increasing VEGF expression in clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.

Xu ZQ(1), Zhang L, Gao BS, Wan YG, Zhang XH, Chen B, Wang YT, Sun N, Fu YW.

Author information: 
(1)Urology Center, The First Hospital, Jilin University, Changchun, 130021,
Jilin, People's Republic of China, dr_xzq@sina.com.

OBJECTIVES: The present study is to evaluate the expression level of enhancer of 
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and analyze
their correlations with clinicopathological characteristics and survival in
patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CCRCC). The effect of EZH2 on
apoptosis and cell proliferation in 786-O renal cancer cell line is investigated.
METHODS: The expression level of EZH2 and VEGF was detected in 185 primary CCRCC 
patients' tissues using tissue microarray and immunohistochemistry. Small
interfering RNA or enhanced green fluorescent protein transfection was employed
to investigate the effect of EZH2 inhibition or overexpression on VEGF
expression, apoptosis and cell proliferation in 786-O cells using flow cytometry,
immunofluorescence microscopy, quantitative real-time reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: High expression level of EZH2 and VEGF was observed in advanced CCRCC
and correlated with the TNM stage (p = 0.013, p = 0.001) and distant metastasis
(p = 0.011, p = 0.038), respectively. EZH2 was positively correlated with VEGF in
CCRCC tissues (correlation coefficient = 0.850, p < 0.001). Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis revealed that patients with positive EZH2 expression had a shorter
overall survival time compared to patients with negative EZH2 expression (34.3
vs. 67.2, p < 0.001). In 786-O cells, EZH2 silencing inhibited VEGF expression
and cell proliferation while increasing apoptosis (p < 0.001). EZH2
overexpression promoted VEGF expression and cell proliferation while inhibiting
apoptosis (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 correlates positively with VEGF and associates with adverse
clinicopathologic characteristics and shorter survival time in CCRCC patients.
EZH2 accelerates antiapoptosis and cell cycle in 786-O cells.

PMID: 24986100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2014 Jul 1;4(7):a014316. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a014316.

MYC association with cancer risk and a new model of MYC-mediated repression.

Cole MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth College, Lebanon, New Hampshire 03756.

MYC is one of the most frequently mutated and overexpressed genes in human cancer
but the regulation of MYC expression and the ability of MYC protein to repress
cellular genes (including itself) have remained mysterious. Recent genome-wide
association studies show that many genetic polymorphisms associated with disease 
risk map to distal regulatory elements that regulate the MYC promoter through
large chromatin loops. Cancer risk-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) contain more potent enhancer activity, promoting higher MYC levels and a
greater risk of disease. The MYC promoter is also subject to complex regulatory
circuits and limits its own expression by a feedback loop. A model for MYC
autoregulation is discussed which involves a signaling pathway between the PTEN
(phosphatase and tensin homolog) tumor suppressor and repressive histone
modifications laid down by the EZH2 methyltransferase.

Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 24985129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Jun 26;5:e1298. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.256.

EZH2-mediated epigenetic suppression of long noncoding RNA SPRY4-IT1 promotes
NSCLC cell proliferation and metastasis by affecting the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition.

Sun M(1), Liu XH(1), Lu KH(2), Nie FQ(2), Xia R(1), Kong R(1), Yang JS(3), Xu
TP(2), Liu YW(1), Zou YF(4), Lu BB(5), Yin R(6), Zhang EB(1), Xu L(6), De W(1),
Wang ZX(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated 
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, People's Republic
of China. (5)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Nanjing Medical University Affiliated Cancer Hospital, Cancer Institute 
of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Recent evidence indicates that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have a critical role
in the regulation of cellular processes such as differentiation, proliferation,
and metastasis. These lncRNAs are dysregulated in a variety of cancers and many
function as tumor suppressors; however, the regulatory factors involved in
silencing lncRNA transcription are poorly understood. In this study, we showed
that epigenetic silencing of lncRNA SPRY4 intronic transcript 1 (SPRY4-IT1)
occurs in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells through direct transcriptional
repression mediated by the Polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2). SPRY4-IT1 is derived from an intron within SPRY4, and is upregulated in
melanoma cells; knockdown of its expression leads to cell growth arrest, invasion
inhibition, and elevated rates of apoptosis. Upon depletion of EZH2 by RNA
interference, SPRY4-IT1 expression was restored, and transfection of SPRY4-IT1
into NSCLC cells resulted in a significant antitumoral effect, both in culture
and in xenografted nude mice. Moreover, overexpression of SPRY4-IT1 was found to 
have a key role in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition through the regulation
of E-cadherin and vimentin expression. In EZH2-knockdown cells, which
characteristically showed impaired cell proliferation and metastasis, the
induction of SPRY4-IT1 depletion partially rescued the oncogenic phenotype,
suggesting that SPRY4-IT1 repression has an important role in EZH2 oncogenesis.
Of most relevance, translation of these findings into human NSCLC tissue samples 
demonstrated that patients with low levels of SPRY4-IT1 expression had a shorter 
overall survival time, suggesting that SPRY4-IT1 could be a biomarker for poor
prognosis of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4611729
PMID: 24967960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Apr 15;7(5):2496-507. eCollection 2014.

Histone-modifying genes as biomarkers in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hung SY(1), Lin HH(2), Yeh KT(3), Chang JG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenome Research Center, China Medical University Hospital Taichung 40447,
Taiwan ; Graduate Institute of Integrated Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, 
China Medical University Taichung 40402, Taiwan. (2)Epigenome Research Center,
China Medical University Hospital Taichung 40447, Taiwan. (3)Departmant of
Pathology, Changhua Christian Hospital Changhua 50006, Taiwan. (4)Epigenome
Research Center, China Medical University Hospital Taichung 40447, Taiwan ;
Graduate Institute of Integrated Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China
Medical University Taichung 40402, Taiwan ; Department of Laboratory Medicine,
China Medical University Hospital Taichung 40447, Taiwan ; School of Medicine,
China Medical University Taichung 40447, Taiwan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the world's fifth most common cancer and second
leading cause of cancer-related death in Taiwan. Over 600,000 HCC patients die
each year worldwide despite recent advances in surgical techniques and medical
treatments. Epigenetic regulations including DNA methylation and histone
modification control gene expressions and play important roles during
tumorigenesis. This study evaluates association between histone-modifying genes
and prognosis of HCC to ferret out new diagnostic markers. We collected 50 paired
HCC and adjacent non-cancerous tissues from Taiwanese patients for survey by
RT-qPCR and tissue microarray-based immunohistochemistry (TMA-based IHC)
staining. RT-qPCR data showed four of twenty-four genes over eightfold
up-regulated in tumor tissues: e.g., histone phosphorylation gene-ARK2,
methylation genes-G9a, SUV39H2, and EZH2 (n=50, all p<0.0001). Results of
TMA-based IHC staining showed proteins of ARK2, EZH2, G9a, and SUV39H2 also
overexpressed in tumor tissues. Staining intensity of SUV39H2 correlated with HCV
infection (p=0.025). We further restricted the analysis only in tumor tissues, we
found EZH2 staining intensity associated with tumor stage (p=0.016) and survival 
(p=0.007); SUV39H2 intensity associated with tumor stage (p=0.044). Our findings 
indicate overexpression of histone-modifying genes EZH2 and SUV39H2 associated
with prognosis of HCC cases. EZH2 expression can serve as a novel prognostic
biomarker during HCC progression among Taiwanese.

PMCID: PMC4069878
PMID: 24966962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1839(9):793-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.06.011. 
Epub 2014 Jun 21.

Akt1 mediates the posterior Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modifications
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Kong KA(1), Lee JY(1), Oh JH(1), Lee Y(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Lab., Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox genes are organized in clusters and expressed
colinearly to specify body patterning during embryonic development. Previously,
Akt1 has been identified as a putative Hox gene regulator through in silico
analysis. Substantial upregulation of consecutive 5' Hoxc genes has been observed
when Akt1 is absent in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells. In this study, we 
provide evidence that Akt1 regulates the 5' Hoxc gene expression by epigenetic
modifications. Enrichment of histone H3K9 acetylation and a low level of the
H3K27me3 mark were detected at the posterior 5' Hoxc loci when Akt1 is absent. A 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor de-repressed 5' Hoxc gene expression when
Akt1 is present, and a DNA demethylating reagent synergistically upregulated
HDAC-induced 5' Hoxc gene expression. A knockdown study revealed that Hdac6 is
mediated in the Hoxc12 repression through direct binding to the transcription
start site (TSS) in the presence of Akt1. Co-immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that endogenous Akt1 directly interacted with Hdac6. Furthermore,
exogenous Akt1 was enriched at the promoter region of the posterior Hoxc genes
such as Hoxc11 and Hoxc12, not the Akt1-independent Hoxc5 and Hoxd10 loci. The
regulation of the H3K27me3 mark by Ezh2 and Kdm6b at the 5' Hoxc gene promoter
turned out to be Akt1 dependent. Taken together, these results suggest that Akt1 
mediates the posterior 5' Hoxc gene expression through epigenetic modification
such as histone methylation and acetylation, and partly through a direct binding 
to the promoter region of the 5' Hoxc genes and/or Hdac6 in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24955524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):204-16. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.045. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

EZH2-mediated inactivation of IFN-<U+03B3>-JAK-STAT1 signaling is an effective
therapeutic target in MYC-driven prostate cancer.

Wee ZN(1), Li Z(2), Lee PL(2), Lee ST(2), Lim YP(3), Yu Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics & Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A(*)STAR), Biopolis, Singapore
138672, Singapore; NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, 
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117456, Singapore. (2)Cancer
Therapeutics & Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for
Science, Technology, and Research (A(*)STAR), Biopolis, Singapore 138672,
Singapore. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore; NUS Graduate
School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117456, Singapore. (4)Cancer Therapeutics & Stratified
Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology, and
Research (A(*)STAR), Biopolis, Singapore 138672, Singapore; Department of
Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117597, Singapore; Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, DUKE-NUS Graduate
Medical School of Singapore, Singapore 169857, Singapore. Electronic address:
yuq@gis.a-star.edu.sg.

Although small-molecule targeting of EZH2 appears to be effective in lymphomas
carrying EZH2 activating mutations, finding similar approaches to target
EZH2-overexpressing epithelial tumors remains challenging. In MYC-driven, but not
PI3K-driven prostate cancer, we show that interferon-<U+03B3> receptor 1 (IFNGR1) is
directly repressed by EZH2 in a MYC-dependent manner and is downregulated in a
subset of metastatic prostate cancers. EZH2 knockdown restored the expression of 
IFNGR1 and, when combined with IFN-<U+03B3> treatment, led to strong activation of
IFN-JAK-STAT1 tumor-suppressor signaling and robust apoptosis. Pharmacologic
depletion of EZH2 by the histone-methylation inhibitor DZNep mimicked the effects
of EZH2 knockdown on IFNGR1 induction and delivered a remarkable synergistic
antitumor effect with IFN-<U+03B3>. In contrast, although they efficiently depleted
histone Lysine 27 trimethylation, EZH2 catalytic inhibitors failed to mimic EZH2 
depletion. Thus, EZH2-inactivated IFN signaling may represent a therapeutic
target, and patients with advanced prostate cancer driven by MYC may benefit from
the combination of EZH2 and IFN-<U+03B3>-targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24953652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 23;5:4177. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5177.

Ezh2 loss promotes development of myelodysplastic syndrome but attenuates its
predisposition to leukaemic transformation.

Sashida G(1), Harada H(2), Matsui H(3), Oshima M(1), Yui M(1), Harada Y(4),
Tanaka S(5), Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Wang C(1), Saraya A(1), Muto T(5), Hayashi
Y(6), Suzuki K(7), Nakajima H(7), Inaba T(3), Koseki H(8), Huang G(6), Kitamura
T(9), Iwama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan [2] JST, CREST, 7
Gobancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)1] Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan [2]. (3)Division
of Molecular Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan. (4)1]
Division of Radiation Information Registry, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima
734-8553, Japan [2]. (5)1] Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8670, Japan [2] Department of Hematology, Chiba University Hospital, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. (6)1] Division of Pathology, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3026, USA [2] Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3026, USA. (7)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670,
Japan. (8)1] JST, CREST, 7 Gobancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan [2]
Laboratory for Lymphocyte Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(9)Division of Cellular Therapy and Division of Stem Cell Signaling, Institute of
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan.

Loss-of-function mutations of EZH2, a catalytic component of polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), are observed in ~\n10% of patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), but are rare in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Recent studies
have shown that EZH2 mutations are often associated with RUNX1 mutations in MDS
patients, although its pathological function remains to be addressed. Here we
establish an MDS mouse model by transducing a RUNX1S291fs mutant into
hematopoietic stem cells and subsequently deleting Ezh2. Ezh2 loss significantly 
promotes RUNX1S291fs-induced MDS. Despite their compromised proliferative
capacity of RUNX1S291fs/Ezh2-null MDS cells, MDS bone marrow impairs normal
hematopoietic cells via selectively activating inflammatory cytokine responses,
thereby allowing propagation of MDS clones. In contrast, loss of Ezh2 prevents
the transformation of AML via PRC1-mediated repression of Hoxa9. These findings
provide a comprehensive picture of how Ezh2 loss collaborates with RUNX1 mutants 
in the pathogenesis of MDS in both cell autonomous and non-autonomous manners.

PMID: 24953053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Blood. 2014 Jul 31;124(5):737-49. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-12-544106. Epub 2014
Jun 20.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 governs life and death of peripheral T cells.

Zhang Y(1), Kinkel S(1), Maksimovic J(2), Bandala-Sanchez E(1), Tanzer MC(1),
Naselli G(3), Zhang JG(1), Zhan Y(1), Lew AM(1), Silke J(1), Oshlack A(2),
Blewitt ME(1), Harrison LC(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; Department of Medical Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia; and. (2)Bioinformatics, Quantitative Sciences Core, Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC,
Australia. (3)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
VIC, Australia;

Differentiation of naïve CD4(+) T cells into effector (Th1, Th2, and Th17) and
induced regulatory (iTreg) T cells requires lineage-specifying transcription
factors and epigenetic modifications that allow appropriate repression or
activation of gene transcription. The epigenetic silencing of cytokine genes is
associated with the repressive H3K27 trimethylation mark, mediated by the Ezh2 or
Ezh1 methyltransferase components of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
Here we show that silencing of the Ifng, Gata3, and Il10 loci in naïve CD4(+) T
cells is dependent on Ezh2. Naïve CD4(+) T cells lacking Ezh2 were epigenetically
primed for overproduction of IFN-<U+03B3> in Th2 and iTreg and IL-10 in Th2 cells. In
addition, deficiency of Ezh2 accelerated effector Th cell death via death
receptor-mediated extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways, confirmed in vivo
for Ezh2-null IFN-<U+03B3>-producing CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cells responding to Listeria
monocytogenes infection. These findings demonstrate the key role of PRC2/Ezh2 in 
differentiation and survival of peripheral T cells and reveal potential
immunotherapeutic targets.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24951427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Nov;35(11):2404-14. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu136. Epub 2014
Jun 19.

Loss of histone demethylase KDM6B enhances aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer
through downregulation of C/EBPa.

Yamamoto K(1), Tateishi K(2), Kudo Y(1), Sato T(3), Yamamoto S(1), Miyabayashi
K(1), Matsusaka K(4), Asaoka Y(1), Ijichi H(1), Hirata Y(1), Otsuka M(1), Nakai
Y(1), Isayama H(1), Ikenoue T(5), Kurokawa M(3), Fukayama M(4), Kokudo N(6),
Omata M(7), Koike K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Department of Hematology and Oncology and
Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan, Division of Clinical Genome Research,
The Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan, Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery Division,
Artificial Organ and Transplantation Division, Department of Surgery, Graduate
School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
113-8655, Japan and Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital, 1-1-1 Fujimi-cho,
Kofu-shi, Yamanashi-Prefecture 400-8506, Japan. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Department of Hematology and Oncology and Department of
Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan, Division of Clinical Genome Research, The
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku,
Tokyo 108-8639, Japan, Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery Division, Artificial
Organ and Transplantation Division, Department of Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan
and Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital, 1-1-1 Fujimi-cho, Kofu-shi,
Yamanashi-Prefecture 400-8506, Japan ktate-tky@umin.ac.jp. (3)Department of
Hematology and Oncology and. (4)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(5)Division of Clinical Genome Research, The Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.
(6)Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery Division, Artificial Organ and
Transplantation Division, Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo , Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan and.
(7)Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital, 1-1-1 Fujimi-cho, Kofu-shi,
Yamanashi-Prefecture 400-8506, Japan.

Genetic mutations in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) with critical roles 
have been well examined. The recent discovery of alterations in genes encoding
histone modifiers suggests their possible roles in the complexity of cancer
development. We previously reported loss of heterozygosity of the KDM6B gene,
which encodes a histone demethylase for trimethylated histone H3 lysine 27, a
repressive chromatin mark, in PDAC cells. In this study, we demonstrated that
loss of KDM6B enhanced aggressiveness of PDAC cells. KDM6B has been regarded as a
tumor suppressor that mediates oncogenic KRAS-induced senescence. Consistently,
KDM6B was highly expressed in pancreatic precancerous lesions (pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasms); then, the expression decreased as the malignant grade
progressed. We found that knockdown of KDM6B in PDAC cells promoted tumor sphere 
formation and increased peritoneal dissemination and liver metastasis in vivo.
Microarray and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis implicated CEBPA for
aggressiveness induced by KDM6B knockdown. CEBPA knockdown recapitulated the
phenotypic change of PDAC cells after KDM6B knockdown, which was reversed by
forced expression of C/EBPa. Moreover, similar protein expression patterns of
KDM6B and C/EBPa in human PDAC emphasized their functional correlation. Notably, 
pharmacological inhibition of the H3K27 methylase EZH2 in PDAC cells inhibited
tumor sphere formation along with the upregulation of CEBPA expression, and this 
effect was impaired in KDM6B knockdown cells, highlighting the role for KDM6B in 
the activation of CEBPA. Together, our results propose a significant role for the
KDM6B-C/EBPa axis in the PDAC phenotype.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24947179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2014;54(1):23-30.

Molecular pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma.

Kishimoto W(1), Nishikori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University.

t(14;18) translocation has been recognized as a genetic hallmark of follicular
lymphoma (FL), but it is now known that additional genetic aberrations are
required for the development of FL. With recent advances in the technology for
DNA analysis, recurrent gene aberrations such as TNFRSF14, EPHA7, EZH2, CREBBP,
EP300, MLL2 and MEF2B have been identified. A few t(14;18)-positive B cells can
be detected in healthy individuals, and these B cells are reported to have their 
own biological features that are closely associated with the pathogenesis of FL. 
On the other hand, FL is characterized by a unique microenvironment. Further
understanding of the pathogenesis of FL is expected to contribute to the
development of novel treatment approaches for this disease.

PMID: 24942943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2014;54(1):3-9.

Pathology of follicular lymphoma.

Takata K(1), Miyata-Takata T, Sato Y, Yoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is a heterogeneous disease, and there are many different
subgroups, such as in terms of age of onset, involved organ (especially
extranodal sites such as gastrointestinal tract) and genetic abnormality. Grade
3B is currently regarded as a distinct entity by molecular genetic analyses, but 
the independence of Grade 3A remains unclear. Variations of clinical course are
known in FL. Some cases are very indolent, but others are not. The latter cases
show histological transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
(high-grade transformation) and an aggressive course. Histological transformation
to DLBCL is reported to occur in about 30-40% of patients, at a rate of about 3% 
each year. However, it reaches a plateau at about 16 years, so the stratification
of patients in whom transformation would or would not occur is very important for
the therapeutic strategy. From genome-wide analysis by next-generation
sequencing, EZH2, CREBBP and MLL2, which are histone-modifying genes, have been
shown to be frequently mutated in FL and to have an important role in
lymphomagenesis. IGH-BCL2 translocation and CREBBP mutations are early events,
whereas MLL2 and TNFSFR14 mutations represent late events during disease
evolution. In the 2008 WHO classification, three new variants: (1) pediatric
follicular lymphoma, (2) primary intestinal follicular lymphoma and (3) in situ
follicular lymphoma, are included. Pathologists and clinicians should consider
these new developments when deciding on the diagnostic and therapeutic strategy.

PMID: 24942941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jul 29;111(3):568-76. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.335. Epub 2014 Jun 
17.

ß-Arrestin1 promotes the progression of chronic myeloid leukaemia by regulating
BCR/ABL H4 acetylation.

Qin R(1), Li K(1), Qi X(1), Zhou X(1), Wang L(2), Zhang P(3), Zou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Clinical Molecular Medicine, Children's Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China [2] Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014,
China [3] Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014,
China [4] Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Children's Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. (2)Chongqing Stem Cell
Therapy Engineering Technique Center, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400014, China. (3)1] Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China [2]
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders,
Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China [3]
Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Children's Hospital, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400014, China [4] Hematological Department, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.

BACKGROUND: ß-Arrestins are scaffold proteins that interact with various cellular
signals. Although ß-arrestin2 mediates the initiation and progression of myeloid 
leukaemia, the critical role of ß-arrestin1 in the chronic myeloid leukaemia
(CML) is still unknown. The aim of this study is to investigate the essential
function of ß-arrestin1 in CML.
METHODS: The expressions of ß-arrestin1 and BCR/ABL in CML patients, animal
models and K562 cells were measured by RT-PCR, immunofluorescence and western
blotting. The effect of ß-arrestin1 on CML animal models and K562 cells by colony
formation, MTT and survival analysis were assessed. BCR/ABL H4 acetylation was
analysed through the use of Chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP) -on-chip and
confirmed by ChIP respectively. Co-immunoprecipitation and confocal were examined
for the binding of ß-arrestin1 with enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2).
RESULTS: The higher expression of ß-arrestin1 is positively correlated with
clinical phases of CML patients. Depletion of ß-arrestin1 decelerates progression
of K562 and primary cells, and increases survival of CML mice. Importantly,
silenced ß-arrestin1 results in the decrease of BCR/ABL H4 acetylation level in
K562 cells. Further data illustrate that nuclear ß-arrestin1 binds to EZH2 to
mediate BCR/ABL acetylation and thus regulates cell progression in K562 cells and
the survival of CML mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal a novel function of ß-arrestin1 binding to EZH2 
to promote CML progression by regulating BCR/ABL H4 acetylation.

PMCID: PMC4119990
PMID: 24937675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 25;588(17):3000-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.05.057. Epub
2014 Jun 10.

The polycomb group protein EZH2 inhibits lung cancer cell growth by repressing
the transcription factor Nrf2.

Li Z(1), Xu L(2), Tang N(1), Xu Y(1), Ye X(1), Shen S(1), Niu X(1), Lu S(3), Chen
Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Lung Tumor Clinical Medical Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, People's Republic of China. (2)Department 
of Oncology, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China. (3)Shanghai Lung Tumor
Clinical Medical Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai 200030, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
shunlushjtu@163.com. (4)Shanghai Lung Tumor Clinical Medical Center, Shanghai
Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, People's Republic
of China. Electronic address: zhiwei_chenchen@163.com.

EZH2 is a key component of the polycomb PRC2 complex and functions as a histone
H3 Lys27 (H3K27) trimethyltransferase. Here we show that EZH2 is down-regulated
in human non-small cell lung cancer and low EZH2 expression predicts poor
survival. Further we demonstrate that EZH2 inhibits lung cancer cell
proliferation and colony formation in vitro and growth in vivo. We found that
EZH2 binds to the promoter of Nrf2, where it increases H3K27me3 and represses
Nrf2 expression. Finally, Nrf2 seems to be essential for the hyper proliferation 
of lung cancer cells in the absence of EZH2.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24928441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:380-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.06.004.
Epub 2014 Jun 10.

A long noncoding RNA Sox2ot regulates lung cancer cell proliferation and is a
prognostic indicator of poor survival.

Hou Z(1), Zhao W(2), Zhou J(3), Shen L(2), Zhan P(1), Xu C(1), Chang C(2), Bi
H(3), Zou J(4), Yao X(3), Huang R(5), Yu L(6), Yan J(7).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing
210029, Jiangsu, China; Clinical Center of Nanjing Respiratory Diseases and
Imaging, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. (2)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal
for Disease Study, Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing Biomedical Research
Institute, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210061, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. (4)First Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department
of Radiology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(6)First Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing
210029, Jiangsu, China; Clinical Center of Nanjing Respiratory Diseases and
Imaging, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: likeyunj@163.com.
(7)MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study, Model Animal Research
Center, Nanjing Biomedical Research Institute, Nanjing University, Nanjing
210061, Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: yanjun@nju.edu.cn.

Sox2 overlapping transcript (Sox2ot) is a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), localized 
on human chromosome 3q26.33, which is frequently amplified in lung squamous cell 
carcinomas (SCCs). However, its roles in lung cancer remain under investigation. 
In this study, we found that Sox2ot was up-regulated over two folds in 53.01% of 
human primary lung cancers (44/83). The expression level of Sox2ot is
significantly higher in SCCs than that in adenocarcinomas (ADCs) of the lung.
Further study found high Sox2ot expression predicted poor survival in lung cancer
patients (P=0.0053), implying Sox2ot is a novel prognostic factor. In two human
lung cancer cell lines, HCC827 and SK-MES-1, knocking down Sox2ot inhibited cell 
proliferation by inducing G2/M arrest, with a concomitant decrease of cells in S 
phase. Reduced protein levels of Cyclin B1 and Cdc2 were also observed.
Importantly, knocking down Sox2ot decreased EZH2 expression and reintroduction of
EZH2 allowed Sox2ot knockdown cells progressed through G2/M phase, which
correlates with the restoration of Cyclin B1 and Cdc2 expressions. Altogether,
our data suggested that Sox2ot plays an important role in regulating lung cancer 
cell proliferation, and may represent a novel prognostic indicator for the
disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24927902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2014 Jun;12(5):258-71. doi: 10.1089/adt.2014.583.

A sensitive luminescent assay for the histone methyltransferase NSD1 and other
SAM-dependent enzymes.

Drake KM(1), Watson VG, Kisielewski A, Glynn R, Napper AD.

Author information: 
(1)High-Throughput Screening and Drug Discovery Lab, Nemours Center for Childhood
Cancer Research, A I duPont Hospital for Children , Wilmington, Delaware.

A major focus of our pediatric cancer research is the discovery of chemical
probes to further our understanding of the biology of leukemia harboring fusion
proteins arising from chromosomal rearrangements, and to develop novel
specifically targeted therapies. The NUP98-NSD1 fusion protein occurs in a highly
aggressive subtype of acute myeloid leukemia after rearrangement of the genes
NUP98 and NSD1. The methyltransferase activity of NSD1 is retained in the fusion,
and it gives rise to abnormally high levels of methylation at lysine 36 on
histone 3, enforcing oncogene activation. Therefore, inhibition of the
methyltransferase activity of NUP98-NSD1 may be considered a viable therapeutic
strategy. Here, we report the development and validation of a highly sensitive
and robust luminescence-based assay for NSD1 and other methyltransferases that
use S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) as a methyl donor. The assay quantifies
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), which is produced during methyl transfer from SAM. 
SAH is converted enzymatically to adenosine monophosphate (AMP); in the process, 
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is consumed and the amount of ATP remaining is
measured using a luminescent assay kit. The assay was validated by pilot
high-throughput screening (HTS), dose-response confirmation of hits, and
elimination of artifacts through counterscreening against SAH detection in the
absence of NSD1. The known methyltransferase inhibitor suramin was identified,
and profiled for selectivity against the histone methyltransferases EZH2, SETD7, 
and PRMT1. HTS using the luminescent NSD1 assay described here has the potential 
to deliver selective NSD1 inhibitors that may serve as leads in the development
of targeted therapies for NUP98-NSD1-driven leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4060815
PMID: 24927133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Jun 12;10(6):e1003671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003671. 
eCollection 2014.

Comparison of REST cistromes across human cell types reveals common and
context-specific functions.

Rockowitz S(1), Lien WH(2), Pedrosa E(3), Wei G(4), Lin M(1), Zhao K(4), Lachman 
HM(5), Fuchs E(2), Zheng D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
New York, United States of America. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology & Development, The Rockefeller University,
New York, New York, United States of America. (3)Department of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, New
York, United States of America. (4)Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York, United States of America; Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Neuroscience, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York, United States of
America. (6)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, New York, United States of America; Department of Neuroscience, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York, United States of
America; The Saul R. Korey Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, New York, United States of America.

Recent studies have shown that the transcriptional functions of REST are much
broader than repressing neuronal genes in non-neuronal systems. Whether REST
occupies similar chromatin regions in different cell types and how it interacts
with other transcriptional regulators to execute its functions in a
context-dependent manner has not been adequately investigated. We have applied
ChIP-seq analysis to identify the REST cistrome in human CD4+ T cells and
compared it with published data from 15 other cell types. We found that REST
cistromes were distinct among cell types, with REST binding to several tumor
suppressors specifically in cancer cells, whereas 7% of the REST peaks in
non-neuronal cells were ubiquitously called and <25% were identified for = 5 cell
types. Nevertheless, using a quantitative metric directly comparing raw ChIP-seq 
signals, we found the majority (~80%) was shared by = 2 cell types. Integration
with RNA-seq data showed that REST binding was generally correlated with low gene
expression. Close examination revealed that multiple contexts were correlated
with reduced expression of REST targets, e.g., the presence of a cognate RE1
motif and cellular specificity of REST binding. These contexts were shown to play
a role in differential corepressor recruitment. Furthermore, transcriptional
outcome was highly influenced by REST cofactors, e.g., SIN3 and EZH2 co-occupancy
marked higher and lower expression of REST targets, respectively. Unexpectedly,
the REST cistrome in differentiated neurons exhibited unique features not
observed in non-neuronal cells, e.g., the lack of RE1 motifs and an association
with active gene expression. Finally, our analysis demonstrated how REST could
differentially regulate a transcription network constituted of miRNAs, REST
complex and neuronal factors. Overall, our findings of contexts playing critical 
roles in REST occupancy and regulatory outcome provide insights into the
molecular interactions underlying REST's diverse functions, and point to novel
roles of REST in differentiated neurons.

PMCID: PMC4055426
PMID: 24922058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Oct;12(10):1388-97. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0034. Epub
2014 Jun 10.

EZH2 represses target genes through H3K27-dependent and H3K27-independent
mechanisms in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Gao SB(1), Zheng QF(1), Xu B(1), Pan CB(2), Li KL(2), Zhao Y(2), Zheng QL(2), Lin
X(1), Xue LX(3), Jin GH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, P.R. China. Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and
Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Health Science Center,
Peking University, Beijing, P.R. China. (4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, 
Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, P.R. China. Fujian Provincial Key
Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Xiamen
University, Xiamen, P.R. China. ghjin@xmu.edu.cn.

Alterations of polycomb group (PcG) genes directly modulate the trimethylation of
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and may thus affect the epigenome of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which is crucial for controlling the HCC cell
phenotype. However, the extent of downstream regulation by PcGs in HCC is not
well defined. Using cDNA microarray analysis, we found that the target gene
network of PcGs contains well-established genes, such as cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors (CDKN2A), and genes that were previously undescribed for their
regulation by PcG, including E2F1, NOTCH2, and TP53. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrated that EZH2 occupancy coincides with
H3K27me3 at E2F1 and NOTCH2 promoters. Interestingly, PcG repress the expression 
of the typical tumor suppressor TP53 in human HCC cells, and an increased level
of PcG was correlated with the downregulation of TP53 in certain HCC specimens.
Unexpectedly, we did not find obvious H3K27me3 modification or an EZH2 binding
signal at the TP53 promoters, suggesting that PcG regulates TP53 expression in an
H3K27me3-independent manner. Finally, the reduced expression of PcGs effectively 
blocked the aggressive signature of liver cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo.IMPLICATIONS: Taken together, our results establish the functional and
mechanistic significance of certain gene regulatory networks that are regulated
by PcGs in HCC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24916103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Oncotarget. 2014 May 30;5(10):3307-15.

Negative regulation of DAB2IP by Akt and SCFFbw7 pathways.

Dai X(1), North BJ, Inuzuka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Deletion of ovarian carcinoma 2/disabled homolog 2 (DOC-2/DAB2) interacting
protein (DAB2IP), is a tumor suppressor that serves as a scaffold protein
involved in coordinately regulating cell proliferation, survival and apoptotic
pathways. DAB2IP is epigenetically down-regulated in a variety of tumors through 
the action of the histone methyltransferase EZH2. Although DAB2IP is
transcriptionally down-regulated in a variety of tumors, it remains unclear if
other mechanisms contribute to functional inactivation of DAB2IP. Here we
demonstrate that DAB2IP can be functionally down-regulated by two independent
mechanisms. First, we identified that Akt1 can phosphorylate DAB2IP on S847,
which regulates the interaction between DAB2IP and its effector molecules H-Ras
and TRAF2. Second, we demonstrated that DAB2IP can be degraded in part through
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway by SCF(Fbw7). DAB2IP harbors two Fbw7 phosho-degron 
motifs, which can be regulated by the kinase, CK1d. Our data hence indicate that 
in addition to epigenetic down-regulation, two additional pathways can functional
inactivate DAB2IP. Given that DAB2IP has previously been identified to possess
direct causal role in tumorigenesis and metastasis, our data indicate that a
variety of pathways may pass through DAB2IP to govern cancer development, and
therefore highlight DAB2IP agonists as potential therapeutic approaches for
future anti-cancer drug development.

PMCID: PMC4102811
PMID: 24912918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jan;28(1):21-30. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12280. Epub
2014 Jun 27.

EZH2: an emerging role in melanoma biology and strategies for targeted therapy.

Tiffen J(1), Gallagher SJ, Hersey P.

Author information: 
(1)Melanoma Research Group, Kolling Institute of Medical Research, University of 
Sydney, St Leonards, NSW, Australia.

Histone modifications are increasingly being recognized as important epigenetic
mechanisms that govern chromatin structure and gene expression. EZH2 is the
catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), responsible for
tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27me3) that leads to gene
silencing. This highly conserved histone methyltransferase is found to be
overexpressed in many different types of cancers including melanoma, where it is 
postulated to abnormally repress tumor suppressor genes. Somatic mutations have
been identified in approximately 3% of melanomas, and activating mutations
described within the catalytic SET domain of EZH2 confer its oncogenic activity. 
In the following review, we discuss the evidence that EZH2 is an important driver
of melanoma progression and we summarize the progress of EZH2 inhibitors against 
this promising therapeutic target.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24912396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3061-74. doi: 10.1172/JCI72399. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

Ewing's sarcoma precursors are highly enriched in embryonic osteochondrogenic
progenitors.

Tanaka M, Yamazaki Y, Kanno Y, Igarashi K, Aisaki K, Kanno J, Nakamura T.

Ewing's sarcoma is a highly malignant bone tumor found in children and
adolescents, and the origin of this malignancy is not well understood. Here, we
introduced a Ewing's sarcoma-associated genetic fusion of the genes encoding the 
RNA-binding protein EWS and the transcription factor ETS (EWS-ETS) into a
fraction of cells enriched for osteochondrogenic progenitors derived from the
embryonic superficial zone (eSZ) of long bones collected from late gestational
murine embryos. EWS-ETS fusions efficiently induced Ewing's sarcoma-like small
round cell sarcoma formation by these cells. Analysis of the eSZ revealed a
fraction of a precursor cells that express growth/differentiation factor 5
(Gdf5), the transcription factor Erg, and parathyroid hormone-like hormone
(Pthlh), and selection of the Pthlh-positive fraction alone further enhanced
EWS-ETS-dependent tumor induction. Genes downstream of the EWS-ETS fusion protein
were quite transcriptionally active in eSZ cells, especially in regions in which 
the chromatin structure of the ETS-responsive locus was open. Inhibition of
ß-catenin, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1), or enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) suppressed cell growth in a murine model of Ewing's sarcoma, suggesting
the utility of the current system as a preclinical model. These results indicate 
that eSZ cells are highly enriched in precursors to Ewing's sarcoma and provide
clues to the histogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma in bone.

PMCID: PMC4071408
PMID: 24911143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 1;20(15):4154-66. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3292.
Epub 2014 Jun 6.

Essential role of aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3 for the maintenance of non-small
cell lung cancer stem cells is associated with the STAT3 pathway.

Shao C(1), Sullivan JP(2), Girard L(3), Augustyn A(1), Yenerall P(1),
Rodriguez-Canales J(4), Liu H(4), Behrens C(4), Shay JW(5), Wistuba II(4), Minna 
JD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer
Center. (2)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts; (3)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Simmons
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Pharmacology, and. (4)Department of Translational
Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston;
Departments of. (5)Cell Biology. (6)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology
Research, Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, Pharmacology, and Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
john.minna@utsouthwestern.edu.

PURPOSE: Lung cancer stem cells (CSC) with elevated aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)
activity are self-renewing, clonogenic, and tumorigenic. The purpose of our study
is to elucidate the mechanisms by which lung CSCs are regulated.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A genome-wide gene expression analysis was performed to
identify genes differentially expressed in the ALDH(+) versus ALDH -: cells.
RT-PCR, Western blot analysis, and Aldefluor assay were used to validate
identified genes. To explore the function in CSCs, we manipulated their
expression followed by colony and tumor formation assays.
RESULTS: We identified a subset of genes that were differentially expressed in
common in ALDH(+) cells, among which ALDH1A3 was the most upregulated gene in
ALDH(+) versus ALDH -: cells. shRNA-mediated knockdown of ALDH1A3 in non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) resulted in a dramatic reduction in ALDH activity,
clonogenicity, and tumorigenicity, indicating that ALDH1A3 is required for
tumorigenic properties. In contrast, overexpression of ALDH1A3 by itself it was
not sufficient to increase tumorigenicity. The ALDH(+) cells also expressed more 
activated STAT3 than ALDH -: cells. Inhibition of STAT3 or its activator EZH2
genetically or pharmacologically diminished the level of ALDH(+) cells and
clonogenicity. Unexpectedly, ALDH1A3 was highly expressed in female, never
smokers, well-differentiated tumors, or adenocarcinoma. ALDH1A3 low expression
was associated with poor overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that ALDH1A3 is the predominant ALDH isozyme
responsible for ALDH activity and tumorigenicity in most NSCLCs, and that
inhibiting either ALDH1A3 or the STAT3 pathway are potential therapeutic
strategies to eliminate the ALDH(+) subpopulation in NSCLCs.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4438754
PMID: 24907115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Br J Haematol. 2014 Sep;166(5):646-59. doi: 10.1111/bjh.12957. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Integrating genetics and epigenetics in myelodysplastic syndromes: advances in
pathogenesis and disease evolution.

Bravo GM(1), Lee E, Merchan B, Kantarjian HM, García-Manero G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Universitary Hospital of La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal diseases characterized 
by inefficient haematopoiesis, increased apoptosis and risk of evolution to acute
myeloid leukaemia. Alterations in epigenetic processes, including DNA
methylation, histone modifications, miRNA and splicing machinery, are well known 
pathogenical events in MDS. Although many advances have been made in determining 
the mutational frequency, distribution and association affecting these epigenomic
regulators, functional integration to better understand pathogenesis of the
disease is a challenging and expanding area. Recent studies are shedding light on
the molecular basis of myelodysplasia and how mutations and epimutations can
induce and promote this neoplastic process through aberrant transcription factor 
function (RUNX1, ETV6, TP53), kinase signalling (FLT3, NRAS, KIT, CBL) and
epigenetic deregulation (TET2, IDH1/2, DNMT3A, EZH2, ASXL1, SF3B1, U2AF1, SRSF2, 
ZRSR2). In this review we will try to focus on the description of these
mutations, their impact on prognosis, the functional connections between the
different epigenetic pathways, and the existing and future therapies targeting
these processes.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24903747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Res. 2014 Aug 15;74(16):4353-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0181. Epub 
2014 Jun 5.

Snail recruits Ring1B to mediate transcriptional repression and cell migration in
pancreatic cancer cells.

Chen J(1), Xu H(2), Zou X(2), Wang J(2), Zhu Y(2), Chen H(2), Shen B(2), Deng
X(2), Zhou A(3), Chin YE(3), Rauscher FJ 3rd(4), Peng C(5), Hou Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Union Hospital, Fujian
Medical University, Fuzhou, China. (2)Department of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory for
Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Institute of Health Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China. houzy@sjtu.edu.cn chhpeng@yearh.net. (6)Department 
of Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell
Biology, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
Shanghai Key Laboratory for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. houzy@sjtu.edu.cn
chhpeng@yearh.net.

Transcriptional repressor Snail is a master regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), yet the epigenetic mechanism governing Snail to induce EMT is
not well understood. Here, we report that in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC), elevated levels of the ubiquitin E3 ligase Ring1B and Snail, along with
elevated monoubiquitination of H2A at K119 (H2AK119Ub1), are highly correlated
with poor survival. Mechanistic investigations identified Ring1B as a
Snail-interacting protein and showed that the carboxyl zinc fingers of Snail
recruit Ring1B and its paralog Ring1A to repress its target promoters.
Simultaneous depletion of Ring1A and Ring1B in pancreatic cancer cells decreased 
Snail binding to the target chromatin, abolished H2AK119Ub1 modification, and
thereby compromised Snail-mediated transcriptional repression and cell migration.
We found that Ring1B and the SNAG-associated chromatin modifier EZH2 formed
distinct protein complexes with Snail and that EZH2 was required for
Snail-Ring1A/B recruitment to the target promoter. Collectively, our results
unravel an epigenetic mechanism underlying transcriptional repression by Snail,
suggest Ring1A/B as a candidate therapeutic target, and identify H2AK119Ub1 as a 
potential biomarker for PDAC diagnosis and prognosis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4285394
PMID: 24903147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. ACS Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jan 14;5(4):378-83. doi: 10.1021/ml400494b. eCollection
2014.

Discovery and Optimization of Tetramethylpiperidinyl Benzamides as Inhibitors of 
EZH2.

Nasveschuk CG(1), Gagnon A(1), Garapaty-Rao S(1), Balasubramanian S(1), Campbell 
R(1), Lee C(1), Zhao F(1), Bergeron L(1), Cummings R(1), Trojer P(1), Audia
JE(1), Albrecht BK(1), Harmange JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Constellation Pharmaceuticals , 215 1st Street, Suite 200, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, United States.

The identification and development of a novel series of small molecule Enhancer
of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2) inhibitors is described. A concise and modular
synthesis enabled the rapid development of structure-activity relationships,
which led to the identification of 44 as a potent, SAM-competitive inhibitor of
EZH2 that dose-dependently decreased global H3K27me3 in KARPAS-422 lymphoma
cells.

PMCID: PMC4027731
PMID: 24900844  [PubMed]


167. BMC Cell Biol. 2014 May 24;15:18. doi: 10.1186/1471-2121-15-18.

Polycomb group protein expression during differentiation of human embryonic stem 
cells into pancreatic lineage in vitro.

Pethe P, Nagvenkar P, Bhartiya D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health, J,M, Street, Parel-12, Mumbai, India. deepa.bhartiya@yahoo.in.

BACKGROUND: Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are chromatin modifiers involved in
early embryonic development as well as in proliferation of adult stem cells and
cancer cells. PcG proteins form large repressive complexes termed Polycomb
Repressive Complexes (PRCs) of which PRC1 and PRC2 are well studied.
Differentiation of human Embryonic Stem (hES) cells into insulin producing cells 
has been achieved to limited extent, but several aspects of differentiation
remain unexplored. The PcG protein dynamics in human embryonic stem (hES) cells
during differentiation into pancreatic lineage has not yet been reported. In the 
present study, the expression of RING1A, RING1B, BMI1, CBX2, SUZ12, EZH2, EED and
JARID2 during differentiation of hES cells towards pancreatic lineage was
examined.
RESULTS: In-house derived hES cell line KIND1 was used to study expression of PcG
protein upon spontaneous and directed differentiation towards pancreatic lineage.
qRT-PCR analysis showed expression of gene transcripts for various lineages in
spontaneously differentiated KIND1 cells, but no differentiation into pancreatic 
lineage was observed. Directed differentiation induced KIND1 cells grown under
feeder-free conditions to transition from definitive endoderm (Day 4), primitive 
gut tube stage (Day 8) and pancreatic progenitors (Day 12-Day 16) as evident from
expression of SOX17, PDX1 and SOX9 by qRT-PCR and Western blotting. In
spontaneously differentiating KIND1 cells, RING1A and SUZ12 were upregulated at
day 15, while other PcG transcripts were downregulated. qRT-PCR analysis showed
transcripts of RING1B, BMI1, SUZ12, EZH2 and EED were upregulated, while RING1A
and CBX2 expression remained low and JARID2 was downregulated during directed
differentiation of KIND1 cells. Upregulation of BMI1, EZH2 and SUZ12 during
differentiation into pancreatic lineage was also confirmed by Western blotting.
Histone modifications such as H3K27 trimethylation and monoubiquitinylation of
H2AK119 increased during differentiation into pancreatic lineage as seen by
Western blotting.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows expression of PcG proteins was distinct during
spontaneous and directed differentiation. Differentiation into pancreatic lineage
was achieved by directed differentiation approach and was associated with
increased expression of PcG proteins RING1B, BMI1, EZH2 and SUZ12 accompanied by 
increase in monoubiquitinylation of H2AK119 and trimethylation of H3K27.

PMCID: PMC4038052
PMID: 24885493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 17;55(2):171-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.05.009. Epub 2014 
May 29.

Regulatory interactions between RNA and polycomb repressive complex 2.

Cifuentes-Rojas C(1), Hernandez AJ(2), Sarma K(1), Lee JT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of
Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA
02114, USA; Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. Electronic address: lee@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2014 Jul 17;55(2):157-8.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a histone methyltransferase that is
localized to thousands of mammalian genes. Though important to human disease and 
as a drug target, how PRC2 is recruited remains unclear. One model invokes
cis-regulatory RNA. Herein, we biochemically and functionally probe PRC2's
recognition of RNA using the X-inactivation model. We observe surprisingly high
discriminatory capabilities. While SUZ12 and JARID2 subunits can bind RNA, EZH2
has highest affinity and is somewhat promiscuous. EED regulates the affinity of
EZH2 for RNA, lending greater specificity to PRC2-RNA interactions. Intriguingly,
while RNA is crucial for targeting, RNA inhibits EZH2's catalytic activity.
JARID2 weakens PRC2's binding to RNA and relieves catalytic inhibition. We
propose that RNA guides PRC2 to its target but inhibits its enzymatic activity
until PRC2 associates with JARID2 on chromatin. Our study provides a molecular
view of regulatory interactions between RNA and PRC2 at the chromatin interface.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4107928
PMID: 24882207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 25;289(30):20788-801.

MicroRNA miR-124 controls the choice between neuronal and astrocyte
differentiation by fine-tuning Ezh2 expression.

Neo WH, Yap K, Lee SH, Looi LS, Khandelia P, Neo SX, Makeyev EV, Su IH.

Polycomb group protein Ezh2 is a histone H3 Lys-27 histone methyltransferase
orchestrating an extensive epigenetic regulatory program. Several nervous
system-specific genes are known to be repressed by Ezh2 in stem cells and
derepressed during neuronal differentiation. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying this regulation remain poorly understood. Here we show that Ezh2
levels are dampened during neuronal differentiation by brain-enriched microRNA
miR-124. Expression of miR-124 in a neuroblastoma cells line was sufficient to
up-regulate a significant fraction of nervous system-specific Ezh2 target genes. 
On the other hand, naturally elevated expression of miR-124 in embryonic
carcinoma cells undergoing neuronal differentiation correlated with
down-regulation of Ezh2 levels. Importantly, overexpression of Ezh2 mRNA with a
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) lacking a functional miR-124 binding site, but
not with the wild-type Ezh2 3'-UTR, hampered neuronal and promoted
astrocyte-specific differentiation in P19 and embryonic mouse neural stem cells. 
Overall, our results uncover a molecular mechanism that allows miR-124 to balance
the choice between alternative differentiation possibilities through fine-tuning 
the expression of a critical epigenetic regulator.

PMCID: PMC4110287
PMID: 24878960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Ann Hematol. 2014 Aug;93(8):1263-77. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2116-y. Epub 2014
May 29.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma: using pathologic and molecular biomarkers to
define subgroups for novel therapy.

Carbone A(1), Gloghini A, Kwong YL, Younes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centro di Riferimento Oncologico (CRO) Aviano,
Istituto Nazionale Tumori, IRCCS, Via F. Gallini 2, 33081, Aviano, Italy,
acarbone@cro.it.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) comprises specific subtypes, disease
entities, and other not otherwise specified (NOS) lymphomas. This review will
focus on DLBCL NOS because of their prevalence and their heterogeneity with
respect to morphology, clinical presentation, biology, and response to treatment.
Gene expression profiling of DLBCL NOS has identified molecular subgroups that
correlate with prognosis and may have relevance for treatment based on signaling 
pathways. New technologies have revealed that the "activated B cell" subgroup is 
linked to activation of the nuclear factor kB (NF-kB) pathway, with mutations
found in CD79A/B, CARD11, and MYD88, and loss of function mutations in TNFAIP3.
The "germinal center B cell-like" subgroup is linked to mutational changes in
EZH2 and CREBBP. Biomarkers that are related to pathways promoting tumor cell
growth and survival in DLBCL have been recognized, although their predictive role
requires clinical validation. Immunohistochemistry for detecting the expression
of these biomarkers is a practical technique that could provide a rational for
clinical trial design.

PMCID: PMC4082139
PMID: 24870942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Elife. 2014 May 27;3:e02439. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02439.

Distinct and separable roles for EZH2 in neurogenic astroglia.

Hwang WW(1), Salinas RD(2), Siu JJ(1), Kelley KW(3), Delgado RN(2), Paredes
MF(4), Alvarez-Buylla A(2), Oldham MC(5), Lim DA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, United States Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA. (2)Department of Neurological Surgery, University 
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States Eli and Edythe Broad
Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, USA. (3)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, USA Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, United States. (4)Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States Eli and Edythe Broad
Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, USA Department of Neurology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States. (5)Eli and Edythe Broad 
Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, USA Department of Neurology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, United States. (6)Department of
Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
United States Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, USA Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, USA limd@neurosurg.ucsf.edu.

The epigenetic mechanisms that enable specialized astrocytes to retain neurogenic
competence throughout adult life are still poorly understood. Here we show that
astrocytes that serve as neural stem cells (NSCs) in the adult mouse
subventricular zone (SVZ) express the histone methyltransferase EZH2. This
Polycomb repressive factor is required for neurogenesis independent of its role
in SVZ NSC proliferation, as Ink4a/Arf-deficiency in Ezh2-deleted SVZ NSCs
rescues cell proliferation, but neurogenesis remains defective. Olig2 is a direct
target of EZH2, and repression of this bHLH transcription factor is critical for 
neuronal differentiation. Furthermore, Ezh2 prevents the inappropriate activation
of genes associated with non-SVZ neuronal subtypes. In the human brain, SVZ cells
including local astroglia also express EZH2, correlating with postnatal
neurogenesis. Thus, EZH2 is an epigenetic regulator that distinguishes neurogenic
SVZ astrocytes, orchestrating distinct and separable aspects of adult stem cell
biology, which has important implications for regenerative medicine and
oncogenesis.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02439.001.

PMCID: PMC4032491
PMID: 24867641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2014 Jul 15;89(4):729-35. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.03.035. Epub 2014 May 24.

DOC-2/DAB2 interacting protein status in high-risk prostate cancer correlates
with outcome for patients treated with radiation therapy.

Jacobs C(1), Tumati V(1), Kapur P(2), Yan J(3), Hong D(1), Bhuiyan M(1), Xie
XJ(3), Pistenmaa D(4), Yu L(1), Hsieh JT(5), Saha D(4), Kim DW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (3)Department of Clinical Sciences,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (4)Department of 
Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas; Simmons Cancer Center, Dallas, Texas. (5)Simmons Cancer Center, Dallas,
Texas; Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas; Simmons Cancer Center, Dallas, Texas.
Electronic address: Nathan.Kim@utsouthwestern.edu.

PURPOSE: This pilot study investigates the role of DOC-2/DAB2 Interacting Protein
(DAB2IP) and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) as prognostic biomarkers in
high-risk prostate cancer patients receiving definitive radiation therapy.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: Immunohistochemistry was performed and scored by an expert
genitourinary pathologist. Clinical endpoints evaluated were freedom from
biochemical failure (FFBF), castration resistance-free survival (CRFS), and
distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS). Log-rank test and Cox regression were
used to determine significance of biomarker levels with clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients with high-risk prostate cancer (stage = T3a, or
Gleason score = 8, or prostate-specific antigen level = 20 ng/mL) treated with
radiation therapy from 2005 to 2012 at our institution were evaluated. Nearly all
patients expressed EZH2 (98%), whereas 28% of patients revealed DAB2IP reduction 
and 72% retained DAB2IP. Median follow-up was 34.0 months for DAB2IP-reduced
patients, 29.9 months for DAB2IP-retained patients, and 32.6 months in the EZH2
study. Reduction in DAB2IP portended worse outcome compared with DAB2IP-retained 
patients, including FFBF (4-year: 37% vs 89%, P=.04), CRFS (4-year: 50% vs 90%,
P=.02), and DMFS (4-year: 36% vs 97%, P=.05). Stratified EZH2 expression trended 
toward significance for worse FFBF and CRFS (P=.07). Patients with reduced DAB2IP
or highest-intensity EZH2 expression exhibited worse FFBF (4-year: 32% vs 95%,
P=.02), CRFS (4-year: 28% vs 100%, P<.01), and DMFS (4-year: 39% vs 100%, P=.04) 
compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: Loss of DAB2IP is a potent biomarker that portends worse outcome
despite definitive radiation therapy for patients with high-risk prostate cancer.
Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is expressed in most high-risk tumors and is a less
potent discriminator of outcome in this study. The DAB2IP status in combination
with degree of EZH2 expression may be useful for determining patients with worse 
outcome within the high-risk prostate cancer population.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4464555
PMID: 24867541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogenesis. 2014 May 26;3:e104. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.17.

Inhibitors of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) activate tumor-suppressor
microRNAs in human cancer cells.

Hibino S(1), Saito Y(1), Muramatsu T(1), Otani A(1), Kasai Y(1), Kimura M(1),
Saito H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacotherapeutics, Keio University Faculty of Pharmacy,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) enhances tumorigenesis and is commonly
overexpressed in several types of cancer. To investigate the anticancer effects
of EZH2 inhibitors, microRNA (miRNA) expression profiles were examined in gastric
and liver cancer cells treated with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep). We confirmed that SAHA and DZNep suppressed EZH2
expression in AGS and HepG2 cells and inhibited their proliferation. The results 
of microarray analyses demonstrated that miR-1246 was commonly upregulated in
cancer cells by treatment with SAHA and DZNep. MiR-302a and miR-4448 were
markedly upregulated by treatment with SAHA and DZNep, respectively. DYRK1A,
CDK2, BMI-1 and Girdin, which are targets of miR-1246, miR-302a and miR-4448,
were suppressed by treatment with SAHA and DZNep, leading to apoptosis, cell
cycle arrest and reduced migration of AGS and HepG2 cells. ChIP assay revealed
that SAHA and DZNep inhibited the binding of EZH2 to the promoter regions of
miR-1246, miR-302a and miR-4448. These findings suggest that EZH2 inhibitors such
as SAHA and DZNep exert multiple anticancer effects through activation of
tumor-suppressor miRNAs.

PMCID: PMC4035694
PMID: 24861464  [PubMed]


174. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Oct;20(4):853-8. doi: 10.1007/s12253-014-9764-z. Epub 2014
May 26.

Screening of critical genes in lung adenocarcinoma via network analysis of gene
expression profile.

Huang P(1), Cao K, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, NO.241 Huaihaixi Road, Shanghai, 200030, People's Republic of China.

Biomarker discovery is of great importance in diagnosis and treatment of
diseases. In present study, a number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
were identified for lung adenocarcinoma via comparative analysis of gene
expression data. A gene expression core signature was generated for four types of
lung adenocarcinoma (EGFR-mutated, KRAS-mutated, ALK-mutated and triple-negative 
adenocarcinoma). Functional enrichment analysis with DAVID tools revealed that
up-regulated genes were mainly associated with cell cycle while down-regulated
genes were mainly involved in vasculature development and cell adhesion. Then it 
was used to retrieve relevant small molecule drugs with Connectivity map and
trichostatin A was predicted to be the top candidate drug for treatment of lung
cancer. Network clustering was performed with MCL in cytoscape to identify
sub-networks and several hub genes were obtained: CDC25C, ICT1, TK1 and EZH2.
These genes play important roles in the progression of lung cancer and some have 
been suggested as potential biomarkers. Therefore, our findings are beneficial in
deepening the understandings about the pathogenesis and providing directions for 
future researches.

PMID: 24859971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int J Hematol. 2014 Jul;100(1):96-104. doi: 10.1007/s12185-014-1595-x. Epub 2014 
May 24.

TET2 gene mutation is unfavorable prognostic factor in cytogenetically normal
acute myeloid leukemia patients with NPM1+ and FLT3-ITD - mutations.

Tian X(1), Xu Y, Yin J, Tian H, Chen S, Wu D, Sun A.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188
Shizi Street, Suzhou, 215006, Jiangsu province, People's Republic of China.

Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (cn-AML) is a group of
heterogeneous diseases. Gene mutations are increasingly used to assess the
prognosis of cn-AML patients and guide risk-adapted treatment. In the present
study, we analyzed the molecular genetics characteristics of 373 adult cn-AML
patients and explored the relationship between TET2 gene mutations or different
genetic mutation patterns and prognosis. We found that 16.1 % of patients had
TET2 mutations, 31.6 % had FLT3 internal tandem duplications (ITDs), 6.2 % had
FLT3 tyrosine kinase domain mutations, 2.4 % had c-KIT mutations, 37.8 % had NPM1
mutations, 11.3 % had WT1 mutations, 5.9 % had RUNX1 mutations, 11.5 % had ASXL1 
mutations, 3.8 % had MLL-PTDs, 7.8 % had IDH1 mutations, 7.8 % had NRAS
mutations, 12.3 % had IDH2 mutations, 1.6 % had EZH2 mutations, and 14.7 % had
DNMT3A mutations, while none had CBL mutations. Gene mutations were detected in
76.94 % (287/373) of all patients. In the NPM1m(+) patients, those with TET2
mutations were associated with a shorter median overall survival (OS) as compared
to TET2 wild-type (wt) patients (9.9 vs. 27.0 months, respectively; P = 0.023);
Interestingly, the TET2 mutation was identified as an unfavorable prognostic
factor and was closely associated with a shorter median OS as compared to TET2-wt
(9.5 vs. 32.2 months, respectively; P = 0.013) in the NPM1m(+)/FLT3-ITDm(-)
patient group. Thus, identification of TET2 combined with classic NPM1 and
FLT3-ITD mutations allowed us to stratify cn-AML into distinct subtypes.

PMID: 24859829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Dec;1839(12):1463-76. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.05.014. Epub 2014 May 23.

Examining the impact of gene variants on histone lysine methylation.

Van Rechem C(1), Whetstine JR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. (2)Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA. Electronic address:
jwhetstine@hms.harvard.edu.

In recent years, there has been a boom in the amount of genome-wide sequencing
data that has uncovered important and unappreciated links between certain genes, 
families of genes and enzymatic processes and diseases such as cancer. Such
studies have highlighted the impact that chromatin modifying enzymes could have
in cancer and other genetic diseases. In this review, we summarize characterized 
mutations and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in histone lysine
methyltransferases (KMTs), histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) and histones. We
primarily focus on variants with strong disease correlations and discuss how they
could impact histone lysine methylation dynamics and gene regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4752941
PMID: 24859469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;20(12):3047-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0629.
Epub 2014 May 23.

Manipulating the epigenome in germinal center lymphomas: is it getting easier and
ezier?

Amengual JE(1), O'Connor OA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Center for Lymphoid Malignancies, Department of
Medicine, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, New York. (2)Authors' Affiliation: Center for Lymphoid
Malignancies, Department of Medicine, Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York oo2130@cumc.columbia.edu.

Mutations affecting key epigenetic modifiers tend to cluster in malignancies in
which cells of origin lie in the germinal center (GC). EZH2, as transcriptional
repressor, is mutated in high frequency in Chinese and Western patients with
follicular lymphoma and may represent a rational target for GC-derived lymphomas.
.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24857928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2014:e334-40. doi: 10.14694/EdBook_AM.2014.34.e334.

New molecular abnormalities and clonal architecture in AML: from reciprocal
translocations to whole-genome sequencing.

Graubert TA(1), Brunner AM(1), Fathi AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by recurrent genetic alterations,
including amplifications, deletions, rearrangements, and point mutations.
Clinically, these lesions can be used to stratify patients into categories of
risk, which directs further clinical management and prognostication. Patient risk
categories were first described based on recurrent karyotypic abnormalities; most
patients with AML, however, fall into intermediate cytogenetic risk, the majority
harboring a normal karyotype. Subsequently, identification of recurrently mutated
genes, including FLT3, NPM1, and CEBPA, allowed further stratification of
patients with a normal karyotype. More extensive genomic and epigenomic analysis 
of AML samples has expanded the number of known molecular alterations present in 
this disease. The further understanding of this mutational landscape has shed
light into the pathogenesis of AML. AML arises in a founding clone that often
gives rise to subclones. Clonal evolution is a feature of the natural history of 
the disease but may also be influenced by the selective pressure of chemotherapy.
The complex network of genetic and epigenetic alterations in this disease has
yielded numerous new targets for intervention. In the future, further
understanding of this mutational framework, along with the development of novel
therapeutic targets, may lead to improved outcomes for patients with AML.

PMID: 24857122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 15;74(14):3935-46. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2733. Epub 
2014 May 22.

NDY1/KDM2B functions as a master regulator of polycomb complexes and controls
self-renewal of breast cancer stem cells.

Kottakis F(1), Foltopoulou P(1), Sanidas I(1), Keller P(1), Wronski A(1), Dake
BT(1), Ezell SA(1), Shen Z(1), Naber SP(1), Hinds PW(1), McNiel E(1), Kuperwasser
C(1), Tsichlis PN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Authors' Affiliation: Molecular Oncology
Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts
ptsichlis@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

The JmjC domain histone H3K36me2/me1 demethylase NDY1/KDM2B is overexpressed in
various types of cancer. Here we show that knocking down NDY1 in a set of 10 cell
lines derived from a broad range of human tumors inhibited their
anchorage-dependent and anchorage-independent growth by inducing senescence
and/or apoptosis in some and by inhibiting G1 progression in all. We further show
that the knockdown of NDY1 in mammary adenocarcinoma cell lines decreased the
number, size, and replating efficiency of mammospheres and downregulated the stem
cell markers ALDH and CD44, while upregulating CD24. Together, these findings
suggest that NDY1 is required for the self-renewal of cancer stem cells and are
in agreement with additional findings showing that tumor cells in which NDY1 was 
knocked down undergo differentiation and a higher number of them is required to
induce mammary adenocarcinomas, upon orthotopic injection in animals.
Mechanistically, NDY1 functions as a master regulator of a set of miRNAs that
target several members of the polycomb complexes PRC1 and PRC2, and its knockdown
results in the de-repression of these miRNAs and the downregulation of their
polycomb targets. Consistent with these observations, NDY1/KDM2B is expressed at 
higher levels in basal-like triple-negative breast cancers, and its
overexpression is associated with higher rates of relapse after treatment. In
addition, NDY1-regulated miRNAs are downregulated in both normal and cancer
mammary stem cells. Finally, in primary human breast cancer, NDY1/KDM2B
expression correlates negatively with the expression of the NDY1-regulated miRNAs
and positively with the expression of their PRC targets.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4454481
PMID: 24853546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1243. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.201.

P53-regulated long non-coding RNA TUG1 affects cell proliferation in human
non-small cell lung cancer, partly through epigenetically regulating HOXB7
expression.

Zhang EB(1), Yin DD(2), Sun M(1), Kong R(1), Liu XH(1), You LH(1), Han L(3), Xia 
R(1), Wang KM(4), Yang JS(5), De W(1), Shu YQ(3), Wang ZX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (2)Central Laboratory, Second Affiliated Hospital of
Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (3)Department of Oncology, First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (5)Department of Oncology, Affiliated
Nanjing Hospital of Nanjing Medical Univeraity, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Recently, a novel class of transcripts, long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), is being 
identified at a rapid pace. These RNAs have critical roles in diverse biological 
processes, including tumorigenesis. Here we report that taurine-upregulated gene 
1 (TUG1), a 7.1-kb lncRNA, recruiting and binding to polycomb repressive complex 
2 (PRC2), is generally downregulated in non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
tissues. In a cohort of 192 NSCLC patients, the lower expression of TUG1 was
associated with a higher TNM stage and tumor size, as well as poorer overall
survival (P<0.001). Univariate and multivariate analyses revealed that TUG1
expression serves as an independent predictor for overall survival (P<0.001).
Further experiments revealed that TUG1 expression was induced by p53, and
luciferase and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays confirmed that TUG1
was a direct transcriptional target of p53. TUG1 knockdown significantly promoted
the proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the lncRNA-mediated regulation 
of the expression of HOX genes in tumorigenesis and development has been recently
receiving increased attention. Interestingly, inhibition of TUG1 could upregulate
homeobox B7 (HOXB7) expression; ChIP assays demonstrated that the promoter of
HOXB7 locus was bound by EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2), a key component of
PRC2, and was H3K27 trimethylated. This TUG1-mediated growth regulation is in
part due to specific modulation of HOXB7, thus participating in AKT and MAPK
pathways. Together, these results suggest that p53-regulated TUG1 is a growth
regulator, which acts in part through control of HOXB7. The p53/TUG1/PRC2/HOXB7
interaction might serve as targets for NSCLC diagnosis and therapy.

PMCID: PMC4047917
PMID: 24853421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2014 May 22;9(5):e98176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098176. eCollection
2014.

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an inhibitor of the histone methyltransferase EZH2, 
induces apoptosis and reduces cell migration in chondrosarcoma cells.

Girard N(1), Bazille C(2), Lhuissier E(1), Benateau H(3), Llombart-Bosch A(4),
Boumediene K(1), Bauge C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA4652 MILPAT, Caen, France.
(2)Normandie Univ, Caen, France; UNICAEN, EA4652 MILPAT, Caen, France; Service
d'Anatomie Pathologique, CHU, Caen, France. (3)Normandie Univ, Caen, France;
UNICAEN, EA4652 MILPAT, Caen, France; Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-faciale, CHU, 
Caen, France. (4)Pathology Department, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Growing evidences indicate that the histone methyltransferase EZH2
(enhancer of zeste homolog 2) may be an appropriate therapeutic target in some
tumors. Indeed, a high expression of EZH2 is correlated with poor prognosis and
metastasis in many cancers. In addition, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an
S-adenosyl-L homocysteine hydrolase inhibitor which induces EZH2 protein
depletion, leads to cell death in several cancers and tumors. The aim of this
study was to determine whether an epigenetic therapy targeting EZH2 with DZNep
may be also efficient to treat chondrosarcomas.
METHODS: EZH2 expression was determined by immunohistochemistry and western-blot.
Chondrosarcoma cell line CH2879 was cultured in the presence of DZNep, and its
growth and survival were evaluated by counting adherent cells periodically.
Apoptosis was assayed by cell cycle analysis, Apo2.7 expression using flow
cytometry, and by PARP cleavage using western-blot. Cell migration was assessed
by wound healing assay.
RESULTS: Chondrosarcomas (at least with high grade) highly express EZH2, at
contrary to enchondromas or chondrocytes. In vitro, DZNep inhibits EZH2 protein
expression, and subsequently reduces the trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone
H3 (H3K27me3). Interestingly, DZNep induces cell death of chondrosarcoma cell
lines by apoptosis, while it slightly reduces growth of normal chondrocytes. In
addition, DZNep reduces cell migration.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that an epigenetic therapy that
pharmacologically targets EZH2 via DZNep may constitute a novel approach to treat
chondrosarcomas.

PMCID: PMC4031152
PMID: 24852755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Med Genet. 2014 Aug;51(8):512-7. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102402. Epub 2014 
May 22.

Mutations in SETD2 cause a novel overgrowth condition.

Luscan A(1), Laurendeau I(1), Malan V(2), Francannet C(3), Odent S(4), Giuliano
F(5), Lacombe D(6), Touraine R(7), Vidaud M(1), Pasmant E(1), Cormier-Daire V(8).

Author information: 
(1)EA7331, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculté des Sciences 
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris, France Service de Biochimie et de
Génétique Moléculaire, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Cochin,
Paris, France. (2)Service d'Histo-Embryo-Cytogénétique, Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(3)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(4)Université de Rennes 1, CNRS UMR6290, Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU
Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France. (5)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Hôpital
l'Archet 2, Nice, France. (6)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Bordeaux et
EA4576, Université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. (7)Service de Génétique, CHU de
Saint-Etienne, hôpital Nord, Saint-Etienne, France. (8)INSERM UMR_1163,
Département de génétique, Université Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Overgrowth conditions are a heterogeneous group of disorders
characterised by increased growth and variable features, including macrocephaly, 
distinctive facial appearance and various degrees of learning difficulties and
intellectual disability. Among them, Sotos and Weaver syndromes are clinically
well defined and due to heterozygous mutations in NSD1 and EZH2, respectively.
NSD1 and EZH2 are both histone-modifying enzymes. These two epigenetic writers
catalyse two specific post-translational modifications of histones: methylation
of histone 3 lysine 36 (H3K36) and lysine 27 (H3K27). We postulated that
mutations in writers of these two chromatin marks could cause overgrowth
conditions, resembling Sotos or Weaver syndromes, in patients with no NSD1 or
EZH2 abnormalities.
METHODS: We analysed the coding sequences of 14 H3K27 methylation-related genes
and eight H3K36 methylation-related genes using a targeted next-generation
sequencing approach in three Sotos, 11 'Sotos-like' and two Weaver syndrome
patients.
RESULTS: We identified two heterozygous mutations in the SETD2 gene in two
patients with 'Sotos-like' syndrome: one missense p.Leu1815Trp de novo mutation
in a boy and one nonsense p.Gln274* mutation in an adopted girl. SETD2 is
non-redundantly responsible for H3K36 trimethylation. The two probands shared
similar clinical features, including postnatal overgrowth, macrocephaly, obesity,
speech delay and advanced carpal ossification.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results illustrate the power of targeted next-generation
sequencing to identify rare disease-causing variants. We provide a compelling
argument for Sotos and Sotos-like syndromes as epigenetic diseases caused by
loss-of-function mutations of epigenetic writers of the H3K36 histone mark.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 24852293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jul 15;20(14):3849-61. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1916. 
Epub 2014 May 21.

VEGF/VEGFR-2 upregulates EZH2 expression in lung adenocarcinoma cells and EZH2
depletion enhances the response to platinum-based and VEGFR-2-targeted therapy.

Riquelme E(1), Suraokar M(2), Behrens C(2), Lin HY(3), Girard L(4), Nilsson
MB(2), Simon G(2), Wang J(5), Coombes KR(5), Lee JJ(3), Hong WK(2), Heymach J(2),
Minna JD(4), Wistuba II(6).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Translational Molecular Pathology.
(2)Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology. (3)Biostatistics, and. (4)Hamon
Center for Therapeutic Oncology; Departments of Internal Medicine and
Pharmacology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas.
(5)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston; (6)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Translational
Molecular Pathology, Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology,
iiwistuba@mdanderson.org.

PURPOSE: To investigate the mechanisms of regulation and role associated with
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression in lung cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated the mechanisms of EZH2 expression associated
with the VEGF/VEGFR-2 pathway. Furthermore, we sought to determine the role of
EZH2 in response of lung adenocarcinoma to platinum-based chemotherapy, as well
as the effect of EZH2 depletion on VEGFR-2-targeted therapy in lung
adenocarcinoma cell lines. In addition, we characterized EZH2 expression in lung 
adenocarcinoma specimens and correlated it with patients' clinical
characteristics.
RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrate that VEGF/VEGFR-2 activation induces
expression of EZH2 through the upregulation of E2F3 and hypoxia-inducible
factor-1a (HIF1a), and downregulated expression of miR-101. EZH2 depletion by
treatment with 3-deazaneplanocin A and knockdown by siRNA decreased the
expression of EZH2 and H3K27me3, increased PARP-C level, reduced cell
proliferation and migration, and increased sensitivity of the cells to treatment 
with cisplatin and carboplatin. In addition, high EZH2 expression was associated 
with poor overall survival in patients who received platinum-based adjuvant
therapy, but not in patients who did not receive this therapy. Furthermore, we
demonstrated for the first time that the inhibition of EZH2 greatly increased the
sensitivity of lung adenocarcinoma cells to the anti-VEGFR-2 drug AZD2171.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the VEGF/VEGFR-2 pathway plays a role in
regulation of EZH2 expression via E2F3, HIF1a, and miR-101. EZH2 depletion
decreases the malignant potential of lung adenocarcinoma and sensitivity of the
cells to both platinum-based and VEGFR-2-targeted therapy.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4190586
PMID: 24850841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Hepatol. 2014 Oct;61(4):832-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.05.015. Epub 2014 May
15.

The functional and mechanistic relatedness of EZH2 and menin in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Gao SB(1), Xu B(2), Ding LH(3), Zheng QL(3), Zhang L(2), Zheng QF(1), Li SH(2),
Feng ZJ(3), Wei J(2), Yin ZY(4), Hua X(5), Jin GH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China; Fujian
Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular Carcinoma, 
Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR 
China; State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Xiamen University,
Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China; Fujian
Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular Carcinoma, 
Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR 
China. (3)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen
University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China. 
(4)Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular
Carcinoma, Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 
361102, PR China; Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Zhongshan
Hospital of Xiamen University, Hubin South Road 201-209, 361004, PR China.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Pennsylvania, BRBII/III, Room 412,
421 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19096, USA. (6)Department of Basic Medical
Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an
South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China; Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic 
Liver Disease and Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 
110, Xiang'an South Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China; State Key Laboratory of
Cellular Stress Biology, Xiamen University, Chengzhi Building 110, Xiang'an South
Road, Xiamen 361102, PR China. Electronic address: ghjin@xmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The alterations of histone modification may serve as a
promising diagnostic biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the
clinical and mechanistic relatedness of the histone H3 lysine 27 and 4
trimethylation (H3K27me3 and H3K4me3) in HCC remains poorly understood. Here we
propose that the combination of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 is a more precise
predictive/prognostic value for outcome of HCC patients.
METHODS: We used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays and a ChIP-on-chip
screen to analyse HCC.
RESULTS: We found that the EZH2 occupancy coincides with the H3K27me3 at
promoters and directly silences the transcription of target genes in HCC. The
H3K27me3-related gene network of EZH2 contains well-established genes, such as
CDKN2A, as well as previously unappreciated genes, including FOXO3, E2F1, and
NOTCH2, among others. We further observed independently increasing profiles of
H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 at the promoters of certain target genes in HCC specimens.
Importantly, Kaplan-Meier analysis reveals that 3-year overall and tumour-free
survival rates are dramatically reduced in patients that simultaneously express
EZH2 and menin, compared to rates in the EZH2 or menin under expressing patients.
Furthermore, an inhibitor of H3K27me3 alone, or in combination with an H3K4me3
inhibitor, effectively blocked the aggressive phenotype of HCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that a combined analysis of both H3K27me3 and
H3K4me3 may serve as powerful diagnostic biomarkers of HCC, and targeting both
might benefit anti-HCC therapy.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24845612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS Pathog. 2014 May 15;10(5):e1004136. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004136.
eCollection 2014.

The downregulation of GFI1 by the EZH2-NDY1/KDM2B-JARID2 axis and by human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) associated factors allows the activation of the HCMV major
IE promoter and the transition to productive infection.

Sourvinos G(1), Morou A(2), Sanidas I(3), Codruta I(4), Ezell SA(3), Doxaki C(4),
Kampranis SC(5), Kottakis F(3), Tsichlis PN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Laboratory of Virology, Medical School, 
University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (2)Laboratory of Virology, Medical
School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (3)Molecular Oncology
Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (5)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Laboratory of
Biochemistry, Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Earlier studies had suggested that epigenetic mechanisms play an important role
in the control of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection. Here we show that
productive HCMV infection is indeed under the control of histone H3K27
trimethylation. The histone H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2, and its regulators
JARID2 and NDY1/KDM2B repress GFI1, a transcriptional repressor of the major
immediate-early promoter (MIEP) of HCMV. Knocking down EZH2, NDY1/KDM2B or JARID2
relieves the repression and results in the upregulation of GFI1. During
infection, the incoming HCMV rapidly downregulates the GFI1 mRNA and protein in
both wild-type cells and in cells in which EZH2, NDY1/KDM2B or JARID2 were
knocked down. However, since the pre-infection levels of GFI1 in the latter cells
are significantly higher, the virus fails to downregulate it to levels permissive
for MIEP activation and viral infection. Following the
EZH2-NDY1/KDM2B-JARID2-independent downregulation of GFI1 in the early stages of 
infection, the virus also initiates an EZH2-NDY1/<U+039A>DM2<U+0392>-JARID2-dependent program
that represses GFI1 throughout the infection cycle. The EZH2 knockdown also
delays histone H3K27 trimethylation in the immediate early region of HCMV, which 
is accompanied by a drop in H3K4 trimethylation that may contribute to the
shEZH2-mediated repression of the major immediate early HCMV promoter. These data
show that HCMV uses multiple mechanisms to allow the activation of the HCMV MIEP 
and to prevent cellular mechanisms from blocking the HCMV replication program.

PMCID: PMC4022736
PMID: 24830456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1460-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-559542. Epub 2014
May 13.

Integrated genomic sequencing reveals mutational landscape of T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia.

Kiel MJ(1), Velusamy T(1), Rolland D(1), Sahasrabuddhe AA(1), Chung F(1), Bailey 
NG(1), Schrader A(2), Li B(3), Li JZ(4), Ozel AB(5), Betz BL(1), Miranda RN(6),
Medeiros LJ(6), Zhao L(7), Herling M(2), Lim MS(1), Elenitoba-Johnson KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI;
(2)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling and Oncoproteome, Department of Medicine,
University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; (3)Department of Computational Medicine 
and Bioinformatics and. (4)Department of Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics and Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI; (5)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI; (6)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; and.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1383-4.

The comprehensive genetic alterations underlying the pathogenesis of T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia (T-PLL) are unknown. To address this, we performed
whole-genome sequencing (WGS), whole-exome sequencing (WES), high-resolution
copy-number analysis, and Sanger resequencing of a large cohort of T-PLL. WGS and
WES identified novel mutations in recurrently altered genes not previously
implicated in T-PLL including EZH2, FBXW10, and CHEK2. Strikingly, WGS and/or WES
showed largely mutually exclusive mutations affecting IL2RG, JAK1, JAK3, or
STAT5B in 38 of 50 T-PLL genomes (76.0%). Notably, gain-of-function IL2RG
mutations are novel and have not been reported in any form of cancer. Further,
high-frequency mutations in STAT5B have not been previously reported in T-PLL.
Functionally, IL2RG-JAK1-JAK3-STAT5B mutations led to signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5 (STAT5) hyperactivation, transformed Ba/F3 cells
resulting in cytokine-independent growth, and/or enhanced colony formation in
Jurkat T cells. Importantly, primary T-PLL cells exhibited constitutive
activation of STAT5, and targeted pharmacologic inhibition of STAT5 with pimozide
induced apoptosis in primary T-PLL cells. These results for the first time
provide a portrait of the mutational landscape of T-PLL and implicate
deregulation of DNA repair and epigenetic modulators as well as high-frequency
mutational activation of the IL2RG-JAK1-JAK3-STAT5B axis in the pathogenesis of
T-PLL. These findings offer opportunities for novel targeted therapies in this
aggressive leukemia.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4148768
PMID: 24825865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. FEBS Lett. 2014 Jun 5;588(12):2107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.04.044. Epub
2014 May 8.

Huaier suppresses proliferation and induces apoptosis in human pulmonary cancer
cells via upregulation of miR-26b-5p.

Wu T(1), Chen W(2), Liu S(3), Lu H(4), Wang H(5), Kong D(5), Huang X(6), Kong
Q(7), Ning Y(8), Lu Z(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory, Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014,
China; School of Laboratory Medicine, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan
430065, China. (2)Department of Medical Laboratory, Central Hospital of Wuhan,
Wuhan 430014, China; Department of Central Laboratory, Central Hospital of Wuhan,
Wuhan 430014, China; Cancer Research Institute of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China.
(3)Cancer Research Institute of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China. (4)Cancer Research
Institute of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China; Department of Oncology, Central Hospital
of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China. (5)Department of Medical Laboratory, Central
Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China. (6)Department of Central Laboratory,
Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China; Cancer Research Institute of
Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China. (7)Department of Central Laboratory, Central Hospital
of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China; Cancer Research Institute of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, 
China; Department of Oncology, Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China.
(8)School of Laboratory Medicine, Hubei University of Chinese Medicine, Wuhan
430065, China. Electronic address: ningyong128@163.com. (9)Department of Medical 
Laboratory, Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China; Department of Central
Laboratory, Central Hospital of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China; Cancer Research
Institute of Wuhan, Wuhan 430014, China. Electronic address: lzx71@yahoo.com.

Various studies have reported that Huaier possesses anti-tumor effects. However, 
the mechanisms are not completely elucidated. Here, we found 66 differentially
expressed miRNAs in Huaier-treated pulmonary adenocarcinoma A549 cells, with
upregulation of miR-26b-5p. Transfection of A549 cells with miR-26b-5p mimic
inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis, while transfection of
Huaier-treated A549 cells with a miR-26b-5p inhibitor reversed the effects of
Huaier. EZH2 was verified as the target of miR-26b-5p. Thus, our findings
indicate that Huaier might suppress proliferation and induce apoptosis in lung
cancer cells via a miR-26b-5p-EZH2-mediated approach, which provides a new
perspective for understanding the anti-tumor effects of Huaier.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24815696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jul 5;392(1-2):8-13. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.04.016.
Epub 2014 May 9.

Epigenetic-related gene expression profile in medullary thyroid cancer revealed
the overexpression of the histone methyltransferases EZH2 and SMYD3 in aggressive
tumours.

Sponziello M(1), Durante C(1), Boichard A(2), Dima M(1), Puppin C(3), Verrienti
A(1), Tamburrano G(1), Di Rocco G(4), Redler A(4), Lacroix L(2), Bidart JM(2),
Schlumberger M(2), Damante G(3), Russo D(5), Filetti S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Università di Roma
"Sapienza", 00161 Roma, Italy. (2)Institut Gustave Roussy, Université Paris Sud, 
94805 Villejuif, France. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche,
Università di Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche, 
Università di Roma "Sapienza", 00161 Roma, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze
della Salute, Università di Catanzaro, 88100 Catanzaro, Italy. (6)Dipartimento di
Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Università di Roma "Sapienza", 00161 Roma,
Italy. Electronic address: sebastiano.filetti@uniroma1.it.

Epigenetic control of gene expression plays a major influence in the development 
and progression of many cancer types. Aim of the present study was to investigate
the expression of epigenetic regulators in a large cohort of medullary thyroid
carcinomas (MTC), correlating the data with the clinical outcome and mutational
status of the patients. Taqman Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) were used to analyze
expression levels of several genes involved in the epigenetic control of
transcription in a series of 54 MTCs. The patients cohort included 13 familial
MTCs and 41 sporadic forms; 33 hosted a RET mutation and 13 a RAS somatic
mutation. The expression profiling revealed in the more aggressive diseases (i.e.
occurrence of metastases; persistent disease; disease-related death) a
significant increase of EZH2 and SMYD3 gene expression. The increased levels of
EZH2 and SMYD3 did not correlate significantly with mutational status of RET or
RAS genes. Thus, the histone methyltransferases EZH2 and SMYD3 mRNA expression
may represent useful prognostic biomarkers tailoring the most appropriate
follow-up and timing of therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24813658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jul 1;103(1):7-16. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu122. Epub 2014 May 8.

Chromatin modifications remodel cardiac gene expression.

Mathiyalagan P(1), Keating ST(1), Du XJ(2), El-Osta A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, The Alfred Medical Research and
Education Precinct, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia. (2)Baker IDI Heart and
Diabetes Institute, The Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct,
Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia Central Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine,
Monash University, Victoria, Australia. (3)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, The Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct, Melbourne,
Victoria 3004, Australia Central Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, Monash
University, Victoria, Australia Department of Pathology, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia assam.el-osta@bakeridi.edu.au.

Signalling and transcriptional control involve precise programmes of gene
activation and suppression necessary for cardiovascular physiology. Deep
sequencing of DNA-bound transcription factors reveals a remarkable complexity of 
co-activators or co-repressors that serve to alter chromatin modification and
regulate gene expression. The regulated complexes characterized by genome-wide
mapping implicate the recruitment and exchange of proteins with specific
enzymatic activities that include roles for histone acetylation and methylation
in key developmental programmes of the heart. As for transcriptional changes in
response to pathological stress, co-regulatory complexes are also differentially 
utilized to regulate genes in cardiac disease. Members of the histone deacetylase
(HDAC) family catalyse the removal of acetyl groups from proteins whose
pharmacological inhibition has profound effects preventing heart failure. HDACs
interact with a complex co-regulatory network of transcription factors,
chromatin-remodelling complexes, and specific histone modifiers to regulate gene 
expression in the heart. For example, the histone methyltransferase (HMT),
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), is regulated by HDAC inhibition and
associated with pathological cardiac hypertrophy. The challenge now is to target 
the activity of enzymes involved in protein modification to prevent or reverse
the expression of genes implicated with cardiac hypertrophy. In this review, we
discuss the role of HDACs and HMTs with a focus on chromatin modification and
gene function as well as the clinical treatment of heart failure.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2014. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24812277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Leukemia. 2014 Dec;28(12):2376-87. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.126. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

FAS-antisense 1 lncRNA and production of soluble versus membrane Fas in B-cell
lymphoma.

Sehgal L(1), Mathur R(1), Braun FK(1), Wise JF(1), Berkova Z(1), Neelapu S(1),
Kwak LW(1), Samaniego F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lymphoma and Myeloma, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Impaired Fas-mediated apoptosis is associated with poor clinical outcomes and
cancer chemoresistance. Soluble Fas receptor (sFas), produced by skipping of exon
6, inhibits apoptosis by sequestering Fas ligand. Serum sFas is associated with
poor prognosis of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. We found that the alternative splicing
of Fas in lymphomas is tightly regulated by a long-noncoding RNA corresponding to
an antisense transcript of Fas (FAS-AS1). Levels of FAS-AS1 correlate inversely
with production of sFas, and FAS-AS1 binding to the RBM5 inhibits RBM5-mediated
exon 6 skipping. EZH2, often mutated or overexpressed in lymphomas,
hyper-methylates the FAS-AS1 promoter and represses the FAS-AS1 expression.
EZH2-mediated repression of FAS-AS1 promoter can be released by DZNeP
(3-Deazaneplanocin A) or overcome by ectopic expression of FAS-AS1, both of which
increase levels of FAS-AS1 and correspondingly decrease expression of sFas.
Treatment with Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor or EZH2 knockdown decreases the
levels of EZH2, RBM5 and sFas, thereby enhancing Fas-mediated apoptosis. This is 
the first report showing functional regulation of Fas repression by its antisense
RNA. Our results reveal new therapeutic targets in lymphomas and provide a
rationale for the use of EZH2 inhibitors or ibrutinib in combination with
chemotherapeutic agents that recruit Fas for effective cell killing.

PMID: 24811343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 8;5:e1220. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.106.

The combination of the prodrugs perforin-CEBPD and perforin-granzyme B
efficiently enhances the activation of caspase signaling and kills prostate
cancer.

Chuang CH(1), Wang WJ(2), Li CF(3), Ko CY(4), Chou YH(5), Chuu CP(6), Cheng
TL(1), Wang JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Environmental Biology, Kaohsiung Medical 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Science, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)1] Department of Pathology, Chi-Mei
Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan [2] National Institute of Cancer Research,
National Health Research Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan [3] Institute of Clinical
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)1] PhD Program for 
Neural Regenerative Medicine, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Center for Neurotrauma and
Neuroregeneration, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of
Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (6)Institute of
Cellular and System Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli,
Taiwan. (7)1] Institute of Bioinformatics and Biosignal Transduction, College of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan [2] 
Infectious Disease and Signaling Research Center, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan [3] Center of Molecular Inflammation, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan [4] Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan 

The survival of prostate cancer (PrCa) patients is associated with the transition
to hormone-independent tumor growth and metastasis. Clinically, the dysregulation
of androgen action has been associated with the formation of PrCa and the outcome
of androgen deprivation therapy in PrCa. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein delta
(CEBPD) is a transcription factor that has been reported to act as an oncogene or
tumor suppressor, depending on the extra- and intracellular environments
following tumorigenesis. We found that androgen can activate CEBPD transcription 
by direct binding of the androgen receptor (AR) to the CEBPD promoter region.
Increases of suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) attenuated the androgen-induced transcription of CEBPD. Importantly, the
increases in E2F1, SUZ12 and EZH2 as well as the inactivation of CEBPD were
associated with the clinicopathological variables and survival of PrCa patients. 
We revealed that caspase 8 (CASP8), an apoptotic initiator, is responsive to
CEBPD induction. Reporter and in vivo DNA-binding assays revealed that CEBPD
directly binds to and activates CASP8 reporter activity. A prodrug system was
developed for therapeutic application in AR-independent or androgen-insensitive
PrCa to avoid the epigenetic effects on the suppression of CEBPD expression. Our 
results showed that the combination of a perforin (PF)-CEBPD prodrug (which
increases the level of procaspase-8) and a PF-granzyme B prodrug (which activates
CASP8 and caspase 3 (CASP3)) showed an additive effect in triggering the
apoptotic pathway and enhancing apoptosis in PrCa cells.

PMCID: PMC4047860
PMID: 24810056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. PLoS Pathog. 2014 May 8;10(5):e1004125. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004125.
eCollection 2014.

Epstein-Barr virus down-regulates tumor suppressor DOK1 expression.

Siouda M(1), Frecha C(1), Accardi R(1), Yue J(1), Cuenin C(1), Gruffat H(2),
Manet E(2), Herceg Z(1), Sylla BS(1), Tommasino M(1).

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, 
France. (2)CIRI, International Center for Infectiology Research, Oncogenic
Herpesviruses Team, Université de Lyon, Lyon, France; Inserm, U1111, Lyon,
France; Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Lyon, France; Université Lyon 1, Centre
International de Recherche en Infectiologie, Lyon, France; CNRS, UMR5308, Lyon,
France.

The DOK1 tumor suppressor gene encodes an adapter protein that acts as a negative
regulator of several signaling pathways. We have previously reported that DOK1
expression is up-regulated upon cellular stress, via the transcription factor
E2F1, and down-regulated in a variety of human malignancies due to aberrant
hypermethylation of its promoter. Here we show that Epstein Barr virus (EBV)
infection of primary human B-cells leads to the down-regulation of DOK1 gene
expression via the viral oncoprotein LMP1. LMP1 alone induces recruitment to the 
DOK1 promoter of at least two independent inhibitory complexes, one containing
E2F1/pRB/DNMT1 and another containing at least EZH2. These events result in
tri-methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) of the DOK1 promoter and
gene expression silencing. We also present evidence that the presence of
additional EBV proteins leads to further repression of DOK1 expression with an
additional mechanism. Indeed, EBV infection of B-cells induces DNA methylation at
the DOK1 promoter region including the E2F1 responsive elements that, in turn,
lose the ability to interact with E2F complexes. Treatment of EBV-infected
B-cell-lines with the methyl-transferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine rescues
DOK1 expression. In summary, our data show the deregulation of DOK1 gene
expression by EBV and provide novel insights into the regulation of the DOK1
tumor suppressor in viral-related carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4014463
PMID: 24809689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jul;32(1):261-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3167. Epub 2014 May 7.

MiR-101, downregulated in retinoblastoma, functions as a tumor suppressor in
human retinoblastoma cells by targeting EZH2.

Lei Q(1), Shen F(1), Wu J(1), Zhang W(2), Wang J(2), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710062, P.R. China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology,
No.1 Hospital of Xi'an, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710062, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that microRNAs are involved in multiple processes
in cancer development and progression, and several miRNAs have emerged as
candidate components of oncogene or tumor-suppressor networks in retinoblastoma. 
miR-101 has been identified as a tumor suppressor in several types of human
cancer. However, the specific function of miR-101 in retinoblastoma remains
unclear. In the present study, we found that the expression of miR-101 in
retinoblastoma tissues was much lower than that in the normal controls. In
addition, downregulation of miR-101 more frequently occurred in retinoblastoma
specimens with adverse clinicopathological and histopathological features. In
addition, miR-101 inhibited cell viability and progression in retinoblastoma
cells by promoting cell apoptosis and arresting the cell cycle. Finally, we found
that miR-101 directly inhibited EZH2 expression by targeting its 3'-UTR, and EZH2
was upregulated and inversely correlated with miR-101 expression in the
retinoblastoma tissues. Thus, for the first time, we provide convincing evidence 
that downregulation of miR-101 is associated with tumor aggressiveness in
retinoblastoma and inhibits cell growth and proliferation of retinoblastoma cells
by targeting EZH2. In conclusion, all the evidence supports the tumor-suppressor 
role of miR-101 in human retinoblastoma.

PMID: 24807198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biomed Nanotechnol. 2014 Jul;10(7):1217-30.

TET1 exerts its tumor suppressor function by interacting with p53-EZH2 pathway in
gastric cancer.

Fu HL, Ma Y, Lu LG, Hou P, Li BJ, Jin WL, Cui DX.

TET1 protein is reported to suppress cancer invasion and metastasis in prostate
and breast cancer while EZH2, a polycomb group protein, has been identified as an
oncogene in many types of cancers including gastric cancer. Here we report that
there is an inverse relation of the expression pattern of TET1 and EZH2 in both
normal gastric mucosa and gastric cancer. In gastric mucosa, EZH2 is selectively 
expressed in the proliferating neck cells while TET1 and 5-hydroxymethyl-cytosine
(5-hmc) exhibit very low expression in the neck cells. In contrast, TET1 and
5-hmc expression is high in gastric glandular epithelium while EZH2 expression is
absent in this cell population. On the other hand, in proliferating Ki67-positive
gastric cancer cells, EZH2 is highly expressed while TET1 and 5-hmc expression is
significantly down-regulated. When the mouse homologue of human TET1 protein Tet1
is overexpressed in a gastric cancer cell line MGC-803, we observed the
dramatically down-regulation of EZH2 in one-third of the Tet1 overexpressed
cells. In addition, Tet1 overexpressing cells also lost the H3K27 trimethylation 
mark and the cell proliferation protein Ki67. Furthermore, Tet1 overexpression
induced p53 tumor suppressor protein. The increase of p53 protein level is
accompanied by the phosphorylation of p53 by activated DNA-PK. Together, these
results suggested a mechanism by which TET1 suppresses cancer formation by
coupling DNA demethylation with DNA-PK activation of p53 and suppression of
oncogenic protein EZH2. Conversely, loss of TET1 and 5-hmc expression might
contribute to EZH2 up-regulation during gastric cancer development.

PMID: 24804542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Blood. 2014 Jun 19;123(25):3914-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-473439. Epub 2014 
May 6.

A transgenic mouse model demonstrating the oncogenic role of mutations in the
polycomb-group gene EZH2 in lymphomagenesis.

Berg T(1), Thoene S(2), Yap D(3), Wee T(2), Schoeler N(4), Rosten P(2), Lim E(5),
Bilenky M(5), Mungall AJ(5), Oellerich T(6), Lee S(7), Lai CK(2), Umlandt P(2),
Salmi A(2), Chang H(2), Yue L(2), Lai D(2), Cheng SW(5), Morin RD(8), Hirst M(9),
Serve H(6), Marra MA(10), Morin GB(10), Gascoyne RD(11), Aparicio SA(3),
Humphries RK(12).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University of Frankfurt,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany;
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; (2)Terry Fox
Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; (3)Molecular
Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada; (4)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada; Skin Cancer Unit, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg,
Germany; Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University
Medical Center Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karl University of Heidelberg, Mannheim,
Germany; (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; (6)Department of Medicine, Hematology and
Oncology, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt/Main, Germany; (7)Molecular
Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; (8)Canada's
Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada; Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada; (9)Canada's Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada; Department of Microbiology and Immunology and. (10)Canada's Michael Smith
Genome Sciences Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada; and. (11)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Centre for Lymphoid Cancer, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (12)Terry Fox Laboratory, British 
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Medicine, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada;

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 is frequently mutated in germinal
center-derived diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. To further 
characterize these EZH2 mutations in lymphomagenesis, we generated a mouse line
where EZH2(Y641F) is expressed from a lymphocyte-specific promoter. Spleen cells 
isolated from the transgenic mice displayed a global increase in trimethylated
H3K27, but the mice did not show an increased tendency to develop lymphoma. As
EZH2 mutations often coincide with other mutations in lymphoma, we combined the
expression of EZH2(Y641F) by crossing these transgenic mice with Eµ-Myc
transgenic mice. We observed a dramatic acceleration of lymphoma development in
this combination model of Myc and EZH2(Y641F). The lymphomas show histologic
features of high-grade disease with a shift toward a more mature B-cell
phenotype, increased cycling and gene expression, and epigenetic changes
involving important pathways in B-cell regulation and function. Furthermore, they
initiate disease in secondary recipients. In summary, EZH2(Y641F) can collaborate
with Myc to accelerate lymphomagenesis demonstrating a cooperative role of EZH2
mutations in oncogenesis. This murine lymphoma model provides a new tool to study
global changes in the epigenome caused by this frequent mutation and a promising 
model system for testing novel treatments.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 24802772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Anticancer Drugs. 2014 Sep;25(8):938-49. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000000122.

Epigenetic and molecular mechanisms underlying the antileukemic activity of the
histone deacetylase inhibitor belinostat in human acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells.

Savickiene J(1), Treigyte G, Valiuliene G, Stirblyte I, Navakauskiene R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Vilnius
University, Vilnius, Lithuania.

Therapeutic strategies targeting histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition have
become promising in many human malignancies. Belinostat (PXD101) is a
hydroxamate-type HDAC inhibitor tested in phase I and II clinical trials in solid
tumors and hematological cancers. However, little is known about the use of
belinostat for differentiation therapy against acute myelogenous leukemia. Here, 
we characterize the antileukemia activity of belinostat as a single drug and in
combination with all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) in promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 and
NB4 cells. Belinostat exerted dose-dependent growth-inhibitory or proapoptotic
effects, promoting cell cycle arrest at the G0/G1 or the S transition. Apoptosis 
was accompanied by activation of caspase 3, degradation of PARP-1, and cell
cycle-dependent changes in the expression of survivin, cyclin E1, and cyclin A2. 
Belinostat induced a dose-dependent reduction in the expression of EZH2 and
SUZ12, HDAC-1, HDAC-2, and histone acetyltransferase PCAF (p300/CBP-associated
factor). Belinostat increased acetylation of histone H4, H3 at K9 and H3 at K16
residues in a dose-dependent manner, but did not reduce trimethylation of H3 at
K27 at proapoptotic doses. Combined treatment with belinostat and RA dose
dependently accelerated and reinforced granulocytic differentiation, accompanied 
by changes in the expression of CD11b, C/EBPa (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-a),
and C/EBPe. Our results concluded the usefulness of belinostat, as an epigenetic 
drug, for antileukemia and differentiation therapy.

PMID: 24800886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Pharmacogenomics. 2014 Apr;15(5):609-18. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.225.

A polymorphism in the promoter is associated with EZH2 expression but not with
outcome in advanced pancreatic cancer patients.

Maftouh M(1), Avan A, Funel N, Paolicchi E, Vasile E, Pacetti P, Vaccaro V,
Faviana P, Campani D, Caponi S, Mambrini A, Boggi U, Cantore M, Milella M, Peters
GJ, Reni M, Giovannetti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Cancer Center
Amsterdam, CCA room 1.52, De Boelelaan 1117, 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

AIM: EZH2 expression is a prognostic marker in radically resected pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) patients. Here we investigated its role in locally
advanced/metastatic patients, as well as candidate polymorphisms.
MATERIALS & METHODS: EZH2 expression and polymorphisms were evaluated by
quantitative reverse transcription PCR in 32 laser microdissected tumors, while
polymorphisms were also studied in blood samples from two additional cohorts
treated with gemcitabine monotherapy (n = 93) or polychemotherapeutic regimens (n
= 247).
RESULTS: EZH2 expression correlated with survival and with the rs6958683
polymorphism in the first cohort of patients, but this polymorphism was not
associated with survival in our larger cohorts.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 is a prognostic factor for locally advanced/metastatic PDACs,
while candidate polymorphisms cannot predict clinical outcome. Other factors
involved in EZH2 regulation, such as miR-101, should be investigated in
accessible samples in order to improve the clinical management of advanced PDAC.

PMID: 24798718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2014 Mar;36(3):161-4.

[Phenotypic genetic regulation and treatment of malignant lymphoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo S, Zhao H, Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Email: yizhuozhang111@163.com.

PMID: 24785273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Ann Hematol. 2014 Sep;93(9):1515-22. doi: 10.1007/s00277-014-2090-4. Epub 2014
Apr 30.

Identification of acquired mutations by whole-genome sequencing in GATA-2
deficiency evolving into myelodysplasia and acute leukemia.

Fujiwara T(1), Fukuhara N, Funayama R, Nariai N, Kamata M, Nagashima T, Kojima K,
Onishi Y, Sasahara Y, Ishizawa K, Nagasaki M, Nakayama K, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Tohoku University Graduate School, 
2-1 Seiryo-cho, Aoba-ku, Sendai, 980-8575, Japan.

Heterozygous GATA-2 germline mutations are associated with overlapping clinical
manifestations termed GATA-2 deficiency, characterized by immunodeficiency and
predisposition to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). However, there is considerable clinical heterogeneity among patients, and 
the molecular basis for the evolution of immunodeficiency into MDS/AML remains
unknown. Thus, we conducted whole-genome sequencing on a patient with a germline 
GATA-2 heterozygous mutation (c. 988 C > T; p. R330X), who had a history
suggestive of immunodeficiency and evolved into MDS/AML. Analysis was conducted
with DNA samples from leukocytes for immunodeficiency, bone marrow mononuclear
cells for MDS and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Whereas we did not 
identify a candidate genomic deletion that may contribute to the evolution into
MDS, a total of 280 MDS-specific nonsynonymous single nucleotide variants were
identified. By narrowing down with the single nucleotide polymorphism database,
the functional missense database, and NCBI information, we finally identified
three candidate mutations for EZH2, HECW2 and GATA-1, which may contribute to the
evolution of the disease.

PMCID: PMC4119934
PMID: 24782121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Adv Hematol. 2014;2014:103175. doi: 10.1155/2014/103175. Epub 2014 Mar 23.

The epigenetic landscape of acute myeloid leukemia.

Conway O'Brien E(1), Prideaux S(1), Chevassut T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Brighton and Sussex Medical School, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton BN1
9PS, UK.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a genetically heterogeneous disease. Certain
cytogenetic and molecular genetic mutations are recognized to have an impact on
prognosis, leading to their inclusion in some prognostic stratification systems. 
Recently, the advent of high-throughput whole genome or exome sequencing has led 
to the identification of several novel recurrent mutations in AML, a number of
which have been found to involve genes concerned with epigenetic regulation.
These genes include in particular DNMT3A, TET2, and IDH1/2, involved with
regulation of DNA methylation, and EZH2 and ASXL-1, which are implicated in
regulation of histones. However, the precise mechanisms linking these genes to
AML pathogenesis have yet to be fully elucidated as has their respective
prognostic relevance. As massively parallel DNA sequencing becomes increasingly
accessible for patients, there is a need for clarification of the clinical
implications of these mutations. This review examines the literature surrounding 
the biology of these epigenetic modifying genes with regard to leukemogenesis and
their clinical and prognostic relevance in AML when mutated.

PMCID: PMC3980839
PMID: 24778653  [PubMed]


201. J Bone Marrow Res. 2013 May 23;1:122.

Genomic Analysis of Invasive Human Bone Marrow Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Mathews LA(1), Hurt EM(2), Zhang X(3), Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Med Immune, LLC, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA. (3)Cancer Stem Cell Section,
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, Center for Cancer Research, Frederick National
Laboratories, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are capable 
of differentiation into multiple cell lineages and demonstrate a wide variety of 
use in various therapeutic applications. Only recently has research begun to
understand the gene expression profiles of hMSCs and their differentiated
counterparts in vivo and ex vivo.
PURPOSE: The research presented here aimed at gaining a better understanding of
gene expression patterns present during hMSC invasion through a basement
membrane.
METHODS: Changes in gene expression were evaluated between invasive and
non-invasive cells using Agilent's gene expression arrays and Matrigel invasion
chambers. The cells were specifically attracted to a defined stem cell media
called SCM.
RESULTS: A total 435 genes were up-regulated by 2- fold or more in the invasive
population of cells and classified into developmental programs and
immunological/inflammatory signaling pathways determined by Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (IPA). This list included a variety of regulators of growth and
differentiation including NANOG, STAT3 and STAT5A and members of the polycomb
repressive complex-2 (PCRC2) EZH2 and SUZ12. The known regulator of inflammation 
and hypoxia HIF-1a was also increased suggesting that regulation of the
microenvironment is important during this process. Finally, the invasion process 
could be reversed using the STAT3 inhibitor Static.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall these data will increase the understanding of the genetic
pathways functioning during hMSC invasion and aid in the development of their
therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3999892
PMID: 24772452  [PubMed]


202. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):7239-47. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1950-9. Epub 2014
Apr 27.

EZH2-specific microRNA-98 inhibits human ovarian cancer stem cell proliferation
via regulating the pRb-E2F pathway.

Liu T(1), Hou L, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Medical School, Tongji University, Shanghai,
200072, China, liutelt@163.com.

The Polycomb group protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), plays an
important role in transcriptional regulation through chromatin remodeling and
interactions with other transcription factors to control cell proliferation and
embryonic development. Previous study has shown that EZH2 is important for cell
cycle regulation and is highly expressed in human ovarian cancer. Loss of EZH2
inhibits growth of ovarian cancer as well as other human carcinomas. In this
study, an expression plasmid of EZH2-targeted microRNA-98 was constructed and
transfected into human ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs). Seventy-two hours after
transfection, cell growth was inhibited and arrested at the G0/G1 transition.
p21(CIPI/WAF1) was up-regulated, while the CDK2/cyclin E complex and c-Myc were
down-regulated. Most importantly, expression levels of E2F1, retinoblastoma
protein (pRb), and histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) in the pRb-E2F signaling pathway
had changed. Furthermore, microRNA-98 suppressed the growth of OCSCs xenograft
tumors. Our findings suggest that EZH2-specific microRNA-98 can effectively
inhibit cell proliferation in vitro and regulate the pRb-E2F pathway in human
OCSCs.

PMID: 24771265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2014 Jun 1;24(11):2486-92. doi: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2014.04.010.
Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Biological evaluation of tanshindiols as EZH2 histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

Woo J(1), Kim HY(2), Byun BJ(2), Chae CH(2), Lee JY(3), Ryu SY(3), Park WK(2),
Cho H(4), Choi G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Research Group, Drug Discovery Division, Korea Research Institute
of Chemical Technology, Gajeong-Ro 141, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of 
Korea; Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Science and
Technology, Gajeong-Ro 217, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-350, Republic of Korea.
(2)Pharmacology Research Group, Drug Discovery Division, Korea Research Institute
of Chemical Technology, Gajeong-Ro 141, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of 
Korea. (3)Pharmacology Research Group, Drug Discovery Division, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Gajeong-Ro 141, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600,
Republic of Korea; Graduate School of New Drug Discovery and Development,
Chungnam National University, Daehak-ro 79, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-764, Republic
of Korea. (4)Pharmacology Research Group, Drug Discovery Division, Korea Research
Institute of Chemical Technology, Gajeong-Ro 141, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600,
Republic of Korea; Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Science 
and Technology, Gajeong-Ro 217, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-350, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: hycho@krict.re.kr. (5)Pharmacology Research Group, Drug
Discovery Division, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology, Gajeong-Ro
141, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-600, Republic of Korea; Medicinal and Pharmaceutical
Chemistry, University of Science and Technology, Gajeong-Ro 217, Yuseong-gu,
Daejeon 305-350, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: gchoi@krict.re.kr.

EZH2 is the core subunit of Polycomb repressive complex 2 catalyzing the
methylation of histone H3 lysine-27 and closely involved in tumorigenesis. To
discover small molecule inhibitors for EZH2 methyltransferase activity, we
performed an inhibitor screen with catalytically active EZH2 protein complex and 
identified tanshindiols as EZH2 inhibitors. Tanshindiol B and C potently
inhibited the methyltransferase activity in in vitro enzymatic assay with IC50
values of 0.52µM and 0.55µM, respectively. Tanshindiol C exhibited growth
inhibition of several cancer cells including Pfeiffer cell line, a diffuse large 
B cell lymphoma harboring EZH2 A677G activating mutation. Tanshindiol treatment
in Pfeiffer cells significantly decreased the tri-methylated form of histone H3
lysine-27, a substrate of EZH2, as revealed by Western blot analysis and histone 
methylation ELISA. Based on enzyme kinetics and docking studies, we propose that 
tanshindiol-mediated inhibition of EZH2 activity is competitive for the substrate
S-adenosylmethionine. Taken together, our findings strongly suggest that
tanshindiols possess a unique anti-cancer activity whose mechanism involves the
inhibition of EZH2 activity and would provide chemically valuable information for
designing a new class of potent EZH2 inhibitors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24767850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 1;192(11):5012-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302943. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

Ezh2 regulates transcriptional and posttranslational expression of T-bet and
promotes Th1 cell responses mediating aplastic anemia in mice.

Tong Q(1), He S(2), Xie F(3), Mochizuki K(3), Liu Y(2), Mochizuki I(3), Meng
L(4), Sun H(5), Zhang Y(5), Guo Y(6), Hexner E(7), Zhang Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200433, China; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109;
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute for Cancer Research 
and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19140; Institute of
Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200433, China; and. (5)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai 
Institutes for Biological Sciences Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200433, 
China; and. (6)International Joint Cancer Institute, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200433, China; (7)Department of Medicine and Abramson Cancer
Center, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 
19104. (8)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, 48109; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Fels Institute
for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
19140; yi.zhang@temple.edu.

Acquired aplastic anemia (AA) is a potentially fatal bone marrow (BM) failure
syndrome. IFN-<U+03B3>-producing Th1 CD4(+) T cells mediate the immune destruction of
hematopoietic cells, and they are central to the pathogenesis. However, the
molecular events that control the development of BM-destructive Th1 cells remain 
largely unknown. Ezh2 is a chromatin-modifying enzyme that regulates multiple
cellular processes primarily by silencing gene expression. We recently reported
that Ezh2 is crucial for inflammatory T cell responses after allogeneic BM
transplantation. To elucidate whether Ezh2 mediates pathogenic Th1 responses in
AA and the mechanism of Ezh2 action in regulating Th1 cells, we studied the
effects of Ezh2 inhibition in CD4(+) T cells using a mouse model of human AA.
Conditionally deleting Ezh2 in mature T cells dramatically reduced the production
of BM-destructive Th1 cells in vivo, decreased BM-infiltrating Th1 cells, and
rescued mice from BM failure. Ezh2 inhibition resulted in significant decrease in
the expression of Tbx21 and Stat4, which encode transcription factors T-bet and
STAT4, respectively. Introduction of T-bet but not STAT4 into Ezh2-deficient T
cells fully rescued their differentiation into Th1 cells mediating AA. Ezh2 bound
to the Tbx21 promoter in Th1 cells and directly activated Tbx21 transcription.
Unexpectedly, Ezh2 was also required to prevent proteasome-mediated degradation
of T-bet protein in Th1 cells. Our results demonstrate that Ezh2 promotes the
generation of BM-destructive Th1 cells through a mechanism of transcriptional and
posttranscriptional regulation of T-bet. These results also highlight the
therapeutic potential of Ezh2 inhibition in reducing AA and other autoimmune
diseases.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4075972
PMID: 24760151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jul;13(7):1750-7. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0930. Epub 
2014 Apr 22.

Metronomic docetaxel in PRINT nanoparticles and EZH2 silencing have synergistic
antitumor effect in ovarian cancer.

Gharpure KM(1), Chu KS(2), Bowerman CJ(3), Miyake T(4), Pradeep S(4), Mangala
SL(5), Han HD(6), Rupaimoole R(7), Armaiz-Pena GN(4), Rahhal TB(2), Wu SY(4),
Luft JC(3), Napier ME(8), Lopez-Berestein G(9), DeSimone JM(10), Sood AK(11).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Gynecology Oncology, Experimental
Therapeutics Program and. (2)Pharmaceutical Sciences, and. (3)Chemistry,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center; (4)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of 
Gynecology Oncology. (5)Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNAs, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC); (6)Authors' Affiliations: 
Departments of Gynecology Oncology, Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding
RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC); Department of
Immunology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, South Korea. (7)Authors'
Affiliations: Departments of Gynecology Oncology, Cancer Biology Program, The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
Texas; Departments of. (8)Frank Hawkins Kenan Institute of Private Enterprises;
(9)Experimental Therapeutics, and Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding
RNAs, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC); (10)Chemistry,
Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; and Department of Pharmacology, Eshelman
School of Pharmacy; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center; Carolina Center of
Cancer Nanotechnology Excellence; Institute for Nanomedicine; and Institute for
Advanced Materials, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina; and. (11)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Gynecology
Oncology, Cancer Biology; Center for RNA Interference and Non-Coding RNAs, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC); asood@mdanderson.org.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the antitumor effects of a
combination of metronomic doses of a novel delivery vehicle, PLGA-PRINT
nanoparticles containing docetaxel, and antiangiogenic mEZH2 siRNA incorporated
into chitosan nanoparticles. In vivo dose-finding studies and therapeutic
experiments were conducted in well-established orthotopic mouse models of
epithelial ovarian cancer. Antitumor effects were determined on the basis of
reduction in mean tumor weight and number of metastatic tumor nodules in the
animals. The tumor tissues from these in vivo studies were stained to evaluate
the proliferation index (Ki67), apoptosis index (cleaved caspase 3), and
microvessel density (CD31). The lowest dose of metronomic regimen (0.5 mg/kg)
resulted in significant reduction in tumor growth. The combination of
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel and CH-mEZH2 siRNA showed significant antitumor effects in
the HeyA8 and SKOV3ip1 tumor models (P < 0.05). Individual as well as combination
therapies showed significant antiangiogenic, antiproliferative, and proapoptotic 
effects, and combination therapy had additive effects. Metronomic delivery of
PLGA-PRINT-docetaxel combined with CH-mEZH2 siRNA has significant antitumor
activity in preclinical models of ovarian cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4090269
PMID: 24755199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 15;135(12):2783-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28922. Epub 2014 May 
2.

An intragenic long noncoding RNA interacts epigenetically with the RUNX1 promoter
and enhancer chromatin DNA in hematopoietic malignancies.

Wang H(1), Li W, Guo R, Sun J, Cui J, Wang G, Hoffman AR, Hu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, People's Republic of China; VA Palo Alto Health Care System and
Stanford University Medical School, Palo Alto, CA.

RUNX1, a master regulator of hematopoiesis, is the most commonly perturbed target
of chromosomal abnormalities in hematopoietic malignancies. The t(8;21)
translocation is found in 30-40% of cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recent
whole-exome sequencing also reveals mutations and deletions of RUNX1 in some
solid tumors. We describe a RUNX1-intragenic long noncoding RNA RUNXOR that is
transcribed as unspliced transcript from an upstream overlapping promoter. RUNXOR
was upregulated in AML samples and in response to Ara-C treatment in vitro.
RUNXOR utilizes its 3'-terminal fragment to directly interact with the RUNX1
promoter and enhancers and participates in the orchestration of an
intrachromosomal loop. The 3' region of RUNXOR also participates in long-range
interchromosomal interactions with chromatin regions that are involved in
multiple RUNX1 translocations. These data suggest that RUNXOR noncoding RNA may
function as a previously unidentified candidate component that is involved in
chromosomal translocation in hematopoietic malignancies.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24752773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:348728. doi: 10.1155/2014/348728. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

EZH2 silencing with RNA interference induces G2/M arrest in human lung cancer
cells in vitro.

Xia H(1), Zhang W(1), Li Y(1), Guo N(1), Yu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic-Cardio Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of PLA
General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China.

Nonsmall-cell lung cancer has a high mortality rate and poor prognosis. In the
present study, we silenced EZH2 and explored the consequent cell cycle changes.
The expression of cell-cycle-related proteins, including p53, p21, Cdc2, and
cyclin B1, was detected with western blotting, and the cell cycle distribution
was determined with flow cytometry. Inhibition of EZH2 expression changed the
cell cycle distribution, in particular inducing G2/M arrest. Expression of Cdc2
and cyclin B1 was significantly decreased in A549 and HTB-56 cells after
EZH2-siRNA treatment. In addition, p53 expression was increased by 21% and 18%,
and p21 expression was increased by 31% and 23%, in A549 and HTB-56 cells,
respectively, in the presence of EZH2-siRNA. This study clearly demonstrates that
modulation of EZH2 expression with siRNA affects the cell cycle and the
expression levels of p53 and p21, thereby changing cyclin B1 and Cdc2 expression 
and inducing G2/M arrest. These results may explain the observed antitumor
activity of EZH2 silencing. Such explorations of the molecular mechanism of EZH2 
will help us develop novel approaches to the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention
of nonsmall-cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3976908
PMID: 24745014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 16;9(4):e95535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095535. eCollection
2014.

De novo peptide design and experimental validation of histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

Smadbeck J, Peterson MB, Zee BM, Garapaty S, Mago A, Lee C, Giannis A, Trojer P, 
Garcia BA, Floudas CA.

Histones are small proteins critical to the efficient packaging of DNA in the
nucleus. DNAprotein complexes, known as nucleosomes, are formed when the DNA
winds itself around the surface of the histones. The methylation of histone
residues by enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) maintains gene repression over
successive cell generations. Overexpression of EZH2 can silence important tumor
suppressor genes leading to increased invasiveness of many types of cancers. This
makes the inhibition of EZH2 an important target in the development of cancer
therapeutics. We employed a three-stage computational de novo peptide design
method to design inhibitory peptides of EZH2. The method consists of a sequence
selection stage and two validation stages for fold specificity and approximate
binding affinity. The sequence selection stage consists of an integer linear
optimization model that was solved to produce a rank-ordered list of amino acid
sequences with increased stability in the bound peptide-EZH2 structure. These
sequences were validated through the calculation of the fold specificity and
approximate binding affinity of the designed peptides. Here we report the
discovery of novel EZH2 inhibitory peptides using the de novo peptide design
method. The computationally discovered peptides were experimentally validated in 
vitro using dose titrations and mechanism of action enzymatic assays. The peptide
with the highest in vitro response, SQ037, was validated in nucleo using
quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics. This peptide had an IC50 of 13.5
mM, demonstrated greater potency as an inhibitor when compared to the native and 
K27A mutant control peptides, and demonstrated competitive inhibition versus the 
peptide substrate. Additionally, this peptide demonstrated high specificity to
the EZH2 target in comparison to other histone methyltransferases. The validated 
peptides are the first computationally designed peptides that directly inhibit
EZH2. These inhibitors should prove useful for further chromatin biology
investigations.

PMCID: PMC3989331
PMID: 24740276  [PubMed]


209. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 17;5:3661. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4661.

IKKa restoration via EZH2 suppression induces nasopharyngeal carcinoma
differentiation.

Yan M(1), Zhang Y(2), He B(1), Xiang J(3), Wang ZF(3), Zheng FM(3), Xu J(3), Chen
MY(3), Zhu YL(4), Wen HJ(3), Wan XB(5), Yue CF(3), Yang N(3), Zhang W(3), Zhang
JL(3), Wang J(3), Wang Y(6), Li LH(6), Zeng YX(3), Lam EW(7), Hung MC(8), Liu
Q(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou
510060, China [2]. (2)1] Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer 
Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China [2] Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, First
Affiliated Hospital Collaborative Innovation Center of Oncology, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116044, China [3]. (3)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center 
of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China. (4)Department of Radiotherapy,
Zhongshan Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Zhongshan 528403, China.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510635, China. (6)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, First
Affiliated Hospital Collaborative Innovation Center of Oncology, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116044, China. (7)Division of Cancer, Department of Surgery
and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 ONN,
UK. (8)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas 
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Graduate Institute of 
Cancer Biology and Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University,
Taichung 404, Taiwan. (9)1] Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer 
Medicine, Guangzhou 510060, China [2] Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, First
Affiliated Hospital Collaborative Innovation Center of Oncology, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116044, China.

Lack of cellular differentiation is a key feature of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), but it also presents as a unique opportunity for intervention by
differentiation therapy. Here using RNA-seq profiling analysis and functional
assays, we demonstrate that reduced IKKa expression is responsible for the
undifferentiated phenotype of NPC. Conversely, overexpression of IKKa induces
differentiation and reduces tumorigenicity of NPC cells without activating NF-<U+03BA>B 
signalling. Importantly, we describe a mechanism whereby EZH2 directs IKKa
transcriptional repression via H3K27 histone methylation on the IKKa promoter.
The differentiation agent, retinoic acid, increases IKKa expression by
suppressing EZH2-mediated H3K27 histone methylation, resulting in enhanced
differentiation of NPC cells. In agreement, an inverse correlation between IKKa
(low) and EZH2 (high) expression is associated with a lack of differentiation in 
NPC patient samples. Collectively, these findings demonstrate a role for IKKa in 
NPC differentiation and reveal an epigenetic mechanism for IKKa regulation,
unveiling a new avenue for differentiation therapy.

PMID: 24739462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cell Prolif. 2014 Jun;47(3):211-8. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12103. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Inhibition enhancer of zeste homologue 2 promotes senescence and apoptosis
induced by doxorubicin in p53 mutant gastric cancer cells.

Bai J(1), Ma M, Cai M, Xu F, Chen J, Wang G, Shuai X, Tao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
Province, 430022, China.

OBJECTIVES: Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is crucially involved in
epigenetic silencing by acting as a histone methyltransferase. Although EZH2 is
overexpressed in many cancers and is involved in malignant cell proliferation and
invasion, the role of EZH2 in senescence induced by DNA damage has up to now
remained largely unknown. In this study, we sought to explore the outcome of EZH2
depletion along with exposure of doxorubicin (DOX), and related mechanisms, in
gastric cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, senescence induced by DNA damage was achieved in
gastric cancer cells by DOX treatment. EZH2 was downregulated by transfection
with siRNA or treated with (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a targeted inhibitor. 
Senescence-associated ß galactosidase (SA-ß-gal) and formation of
senescence-associated heterochromatin foci were used to identify cell senescence.
To investigate effects of EZH2 depletion on the cell cycle, apoptosis and
proliferation, flow cytometry and MTT analysis were employed. Changes in p53-p21 
axis activation were detected by Western blotting.
RESULTS: We found that cell proliferative arrest caused by DOX could be promoted 
by EZH2 depletion. Mechanistically, EZH2 depletion not only worked in
coordination with DNA damage during the progression of cell senescence but also
promoted apoptosis in p53 mutant cells. However, it had no cooperative
relationship with DOX in p53 wild-type cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data help unravel a crucial role for EZH2 in senescence and
apoptosis in gastric cancer cells and that p53 genomic status was associated with
different cell responses to EZH2 silencing.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24738879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Mar 31;13(1):2231-9. doi: 10.4238/2014.March.31.3.

EZH2 suppresses hepatocellular differentiation of mouse bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells.

Lu T(1), Sun H(1), Lv J(1), Yang MF(1), Zhang F(1), Qian Y(1), Dong XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Center of Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of
Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, China.

Our previous studies have indicated that mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(mBMMSCs) have potential to differentiate into hepatocytes with high efficiency. 
Our study aimed to evaluate the role of the mouse histone methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 gene (EZH2) in the hepatocellular differentiation of 
mBMMSCs. The mBMMSCs isolated from femurs and tibias were cultured in Iscove's
modified Eagle's medium (IMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Hepatocellular differentiation was induced by 20 ng/mL hepatocyte growth factor
and 10 ng/mL fibroblast growth factor 4. The mouse histone methyltransferase EZH2
gene was introduced via PLenti-eGFP-EZH2 or PLenti-eGFP-NEO as a control.
Hepatocellular-induced mBMMSCs showed lower expression of EZH2 and lower level of
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) in the AFP and FOXa2 gene promoter
regions compared to uninduced mBMMSCs. Introduction of EZH2 inhibited
hepatocellular induction, reduced both the mRNA and protein levels of AFP and
FOXa2, and increased the level of histone H3K27me3 in the AFP and FOXa2 gene
promoter regions. In summary, the mouse histone methyltransferase EZH2 gene could
suppress hepatocellular differentiation of mBMMSCs by increasing the level of
H3K27me3 in the AFP and FOXa2 gene promoter regions.

PMID: 24737471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(5):834-44. doi: 10.4161/cc.27757.

MLL fusion-driven activation of CDK6 potentiates proliferation in MLL-rearranged 
infant ALL.

van der Linden MH(1), Willekes M(1), van Roon E(1), Seslija L(1), Schneider P(1),
Pieters R(1), Stam RW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology; Erasmus MC - Sophia Children's
Hospital; Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in infants (< 1 year-of-age) is characterized by a
high incidence of MLL rearrangements. Recently, direct targets of the MLL fusion 
protein have been identified. However, functional validation of the identified
targets remained unacknowledged. In this study, we identify CDK6 as a direct
target of the MLL fusion protein and an important player in the proliferation
advantage of MLL-rearranged leukemia. CDK6 mRNA was significantly higher
expressed in MLL-rearranged infant ALL patients compared with MLL wild-type ALL
patients (P < 0.001). Decrease of MLL-AF4 and MLL-ENL fusion mRNA expression by
siRNAs resulted in downregulation of CDK6, affirming a direct relationship
between the presence of the MLL fusion and CDK6 expression. Knockdown of CDK6
itself significantly inhibited proliferation in the MLL-AF4-positive cell line
SEM, whereas knockdown of the highly homologous gene CDK4 had virtually no effect
on the cell cycle. Furthermore, we show in vitro sensitivity of MLL-rearranged
leukemia cell lines to the CDK4/6-inhibitor PD0332991, inducing a remarkable G 1 
arrest, and downregulation of its downstream targets pRB1 and EZH2. We therefore 
conclude that CDK6 is indeed a direct target of MLL fusion proteins, playing an
important role in the proliferation advantage of MLL-rearranged ALL cells.

PMCID: PMC3979919
PMID: 24736461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Histopathology. 2014 Nov;65(5):631-41. doi: 10.1111/his.12436. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

High tricellulin expression is associated with better survival in human
hepatoblastoma.

Schlachter K(1), Gyugos M, Halász J, Lendvai G, Baghy K, Garami M, Gyöngyösi B,
Schaff Z, Kiss A.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

AIMS: The more differentiated fetal component of hepatoblastoma (HB) is
characterized by increased expression of tight junction (TJ) proteins claudin-1
and -2 when compared with embryonal component. Expression patterns of the
recently identified TJ protein tricellulin and the epigenetic regulator enzyme
EZH2 were investigated in epithelial subtypes of HB and related to survival.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twenty-one cases of epithelial HBs subtyped as pure fetal
(n = 12) and embryonal/fetal (n = 9), along with 16 non-tumorous samples from
surrounding liver, were analysed by immunohistochemistry for tricellulin,
ß-catenin and EZH2 expression. No significant differences were revealed in
overall survival between fetal and embryonal/fetal types of HBs. The fetal
component, however, showed considerably increased tricellulin expression while
the embryonal component displayed significantly increased nuclear EZH2
positivity, in comparison to other epithelial subtypes and non-tumorous
surrounding hepatocytes. Strong nuclear ß-catenin staining was notably more
frequent in embryonal than in fetal types. High tricellulin expression was
associated with significantly increased overall survival (P = 0.03), while
elevated EZH2 expression was linked to the presence of distant metastases
(P = 0.013).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that patients with treated HBs showing high
expression of tricellulin have significantly better overall survival, independent
of histological subtype. Increased nuclear expression of EZH2 was associated with
the presence of distant metastases.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24735023  [PubMed - in process]


214. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Aug 15;23(16):1947-58. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0551. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

Differentially expressed miRNAs in cancer-stem-like cells: markers for tumor cell
aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer.

Bao B(1), Ali S, Ahmad A, Li Y, Banerjee S, Kong D, Aboukameel A, Mohammad R, Van
Buren E, Azmi AS, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University ,
Detroit, Michigan.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) is one of the most deadly cancers. The higher mortality is
in part due to treatment resistance and early onset of metastasis. The existence 
of cancer-stem-like cells (CSLCs) has been widely accepted to be responsible for 
tumor aggressiveness in PC. Emerging evidence suggests that CSLCs have the
capacity for increased cell growth, cell migration/invasion, metastasis, and
treatment resistance, which leads to poor clinical outcome. However, the
molecular role of CSLCs in tumor development and progression is poorly
understood. Therefore, mechanistic understanding, and targeted killing of CSLCs
may provide a newer therapeutic strategy for the treatment of PC. It has been
well accepted that microRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles during tumor
development and progression through deregulation of multiple genes. Moreover,
deregulated expression of miRNAs may also play a key role in the regulation of
CSLC characteristics and functions. Here we show that isolated
CD44(+)/CD133(+)/EpCAM(+) cells (triple-marker-positive cells) from human PC cell
lines, MiaPaCa-2 and L3.6pl cells, display aggressive characteristics, such as
increased cell growth, clonogenicity, cell migration, and self-renewal capacity, 
which is consistent with overexpression of CSLC signatures/markers. We also found
deregulated expression of over 400 miRNAs, including let-7, miR-30, miR-125b, and
miR-335, in CSLCs. As a proof-of-concept, knockdown of miR-125b resulted in the
inhibition of tumor cell aggressiveness of CSLCs (triple-marker-positive cells), 
consistent with the downregulation of CD44, EpCAM, EZH2, and snail. These results
clearly suggest the importance of miRNAs in the regulation of CSLC
characteristics, and may serve as novel targets for therapy.

PMID: 24734907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jun;15(6):580-7. doi: 10.1038/ni.2868. Epub 2014 Apr 13.

Inflammation-induced repression of chromatin bound by the transcription factor
Foxp3 in regulatory T cells.

Arvey A(1), van der Veeken J(1), Samstein RM(1), Feng Y(2), Stamatoyannopoulos
JA(3), Rudensky AY(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York, USA. [2] Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA. [3]. (2)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [2] Immunology
Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA. (4)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, USA. [2] Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [3] Ludwig Center, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. [4].

The transcription factor Foxp3 is indispensable for the ability of regulatory T
cells (Treg cells) to suppress fatal inflammation. Here we characterized the role
of Foxp3 in chromatin remodeling and the regulation of gene expression in
actively suppressive Treg cells in an inflammatory setting. Although genome-wide 
occupancy of regulatory elements in DNA by Foxp3 was similar in resting Treg
cells and those activated in vivo, Foxp3-bound enhancer elements in the DNA were 
poised for repression only in activated Treg cells. Following activation,
Foxp3-bound sites showed diminished accessibility of chromatin and selective
deposition of histone H3 trimethylated at Lys27 (H3K27me3), which was associated 
with recruitment of the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 and downregulation of the 
expression of nearby genes. Thus, Foxp3 poises its targets for repression by
facilitating the formation of repressive chromatin in Treg cells upon their
activation in response to inflammatory cues.

PMCID: PMC4112080
PMID: 24728351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. FEBS Lett. 2014 May 2;588(9):1850-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.03.057. Epub
2014 Apr 12.

MIR146A inhibits JMJD3 expression and osteogenic differentiation in human
mesenchymal stem cells.

Huszar JM(1), Payne CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Driskill Graduate Program, Departments of Pediatrics and Obstetrics &
Gynecology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, and Human
Molecular Genetics Program, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago 
Research Center, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Driskill Graduate Program,
Departments of Pediatrics and Obstetrics & Gynecology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, and Human Molecular Genetics Program, Ann & Robert
H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago Research Center, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 
Electronic address: c-payne@northwestern.edu.

Chromatin remodeling is important for cell differentiation. Histone
methyltransferase EZH2 and histone demethylase JMJD3 (KDM6B) modulate levels of
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). Interplay between the two
modulators influence lineage specification in stem cells. Here, we identified
microRNA MIR146A to be a negative regulator of JMJD3. In the osteogenic
differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), we observed an
upregulation of JMJD3 and a downregulation of MIR146A. Blocking JMJD3 activity in
differentiating hMSCs reduced transcript levels of osteogenic gene RUNX2.
H3K27me3 levels decreased at the RUNX2 promoter during cell differentiation.
Modulation of MIR146A levels in hMSCs altered JMJD3 and RUNX2 expression and
affected osteogenic differentiation. We conclude that JMJD3 promotes osteogenesis
in differentiating hMSCs, with MIR146A regulating JMJD3.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4083811
PMID: 24726732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Anim Reprod Sci. 2014 Jun 10;147(1-2):39-46. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2014.03.012. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Passage number of porcine embryonic germ cells affects epigenetic status and
blastocyst rate following somatic cell nuclear transfer.

Li J(1), Gao Y(2), Petkov S(3), Purup S(4), Hyttel P(2), Callesen H(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing Weigang No. 1, Jiangsu Province, China. Electronic address:
juanli@njau.edu.cn. (2)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Institute for Farm Animal Genetics,
Neustadt, Germany. (4)Department of Animal Science, Aarhus University, Tjele,
Denmark.

Epigenetic instability of donor cells due to long-term in vitro culture may
influence the success rate of subsequent somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT).
Therefore, the present study was designed (1) to investigate the epigenetic
changes after prolonged culture in vitro of porcine embryonic germ (EG) cells,
including differences in expression levels of both DNA methylation and
demethylation-related genes and catalyses of histone modifications, and (2) to
assess the efficiency of SCNT using EG cells from different passages. Results
showed that genes either associated with DNA demethylation including DNMTs and
TET1 or genes related to histone acetylation including HDACs were highly
expressed in EG cells at higher passages when compared to EG cells at lower
passages. In addition, the expression level of H3K27me3 functional methylase EZH2
increased while no changes were observed on H3K27me3 demethylase JMJD3 in
relation to passage number. Moreover, the expression levels of both the H3K4me3
methylase MLL1 and the H3K4me3 demethylase RBP2 were increased at high passages. 
By using lower passage (numbers 3-5) EG cells as donor cells, the SCNT efficiency
was significantly lower compared with use of fetal fibroblast donor cells.
However, similar blastocyst rates were achieved when using higher passage
(numbers 9-12) EG cells as donor cells. In conclusion, the present study suggests
that the epigenetic status of EG cells change with increasing passage numbers,
and that higher passage number EG cells are better primed for SCNT.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 9;34(15):5184-99. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4129-13.2014.

Ezh2 regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis and memory.

Zhang J(1), Ji F, Liu Y, Lei X, Li H, Ji G, Yuan Z, Jiao J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Institute of Zoology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China, and Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Adult neurogenesis is thought to be crucial for preserving cognitive functions,
which is tightly controlled by various epigenetic regulators. As the
methyltransferase of histone H3K27, the role of Ezh2 in neurogenesis of adult
mice and its mechanism of action are largely unknown. Here, we show that Ezh2 is 
expressed in actively dividing neural stem cells (NSCs)/progenitor cells as well 
as mature neurons, but not in quiescent NSCs in the subgranular zone. The
deletion of Ezh2 in NSCs/progenitor cells results in a reduction in progenitor
cell proliferation. Furthermore, we found that Ezh2 regulates progenitor cell
proliferation by suppressing Pten expression and promoting the activation of
Akt-mTOR. Moreover, the loss of Ezh2 in progenitor cells leads to a decrease in
the number of neurons, which was observed by long-term tracing. Strikingly,
conditional knockout of Ezh2 ultimately results in impairments in spatial
learning and memory, contextual fear memory, and pattern separation. Our findings
demonstrate the essential role of Ezh2 in the proliferation of progenitor cells, 
thus providing insight into the molecular mechanisms of adult neurogenesis in
preserving cognitive functions.

PMID: 24719098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jun;33(6):1563-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1724. Epub 2014 Apr 
4.

Delivery of EZH2-shRNA with mPEG-PEI nanoparticles for the treatment of prostate 
cancer in vitro.

Wu Y(1), Yu J(2), Liu Y(3), Yuan L(3), Yan H(3), Jing J(3), Xu G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Medical College of Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Urology, Clinical Medical 
College of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

Small interfering RNA (siRNA) is a promising therapeutic approach for
castration-resistant prostate cancer (PCa). For the clinical application of
siRNA, it is vital to find a safe and efficient gene transfer vector.
Nanotechnology can provide a crucial advantage in developing strategies for
cancer management and treatment by helping to improve the safety and efficacy of 
new therapeutic delivery vehicles. In this study, we describe a novel
nanoparticle (mPEG-PEI) as an efficient non-viral carrier and found that this
copolymer displayed enhanced efficiency in the shRNA-mediated knockdown of target
genes. The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is often elevated in
castration-resistant PCa and has been implicated in the progression of human PCa.
Targeting EZH2 may have therapeutic efficacy for the treatment of metastatic,
hormone-refractory PCa. mPEG-PEI binds plasmid DNA yielding nanoparticles and
these complexes exhibit low cytotoxicity and high gene transfection efficiency.
Taken together, mPEG-PEI may be a promising non-viral gene carrier for the
delivery of EZH2 short hairpin (sh)RNA to PC3 cells for advanced PCa therapy.

PMID: 24714818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 8;5:3630. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4630.

The landscape of somatic mutations in epigenetic regulators across 1,000
paediatric cancer genomes.

Huether R(1), Dong L(2), Chen X(3), Wu G(3), Parker M(3), Wei L(3), Ma J(4),
Edmonson MN(3), Hedlund EK(3), Rusch MC(3), Shurtleff SA(4), Mulder HL(5), Boggs 
K(5), Vadordaria B(5), Cheng J(4), Yergeau D(5), Song G(4), Becksfort J(3),
Lemmon G(3), Weber C(4), Cai Z(4), Dang J(4), Walsh M(6), Gedman AL(4), Faber
Z(4), Easton J(5), Gruber T(7), Kriwacki RW(8), Partridge JF(9), Ding L(10),
Wilson RK(10), Mardis ER(10), Mullighan CG(4), Gilbertson RJ(11), Baker SJ(11),
Zambetti G(9), Ellison DW(4), Zhang J(3), Downing JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Computational Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA [2]. (2)1] Department of
Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA [2]. (3)Department of Computational Biology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105,
USA. (4)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny 
Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (5)The Pediatric Cancer Genome
Project Laboratory, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (6)Department of Oncology, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (7)1]
Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas
Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA [2] Department of Oncology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105,
USA. (8)Department of Structural Biology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (9)Department of
Biochemistry, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. (10)1] The Genome Institute, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63108, USA [2] Department of Genetics,
Washington University School of Medicine, 4444 Forest Park Ave, St Louis,
Missouri 63108, USA [3] Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University, St Louis,
Missouri 63108, USA. (11)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude
Children's Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, Tennessee 38105,
USA.

Studies of paediatric cancers have shown a high frequency of mutation across
epigenetic regulators. Here we sequence 633 genes, encoding the majority of known
epigenetic regulatory proteins, in over 1,000 paediatric tumours to define the
landscape of somatic mutations in epigenetic regulators in paediatric cancer. Our
results demonstrate a marked variation in the frequency of gene mutations across 
21 different paediatric cancer subtypes, with the highest frequency of mutations 
detected in high-grade gliomas, T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and
medulloblastoma, and a paucity of mutations in low-grade glioma and
retinoblastoma. The most frequently mutated genes are H3F3A, PHF6, ATRX, KDM6A,
SMARCA4, ASXL2, CREBBP, EZH2, MLL2, USP7, ASXL1, NSD2, SETD2, SMC1A and ZMYM3. We
identify novel loss-of-function mutations in the ubiquitin-specific processing
protease 7 (USP7) in paediatric leukaemia, which result in decreased
deubiquitination activity. Collectively, our results help to define the landscape
of mutations in epigenetic regulatory genes in paediatric cancer and yield a
valuable new database for investigating the role of epigenetic dysregulations in 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4119022
PMID: 24710217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jul;35(7):6649-56. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-1888-y. Epub 2014
Apr 5.

Role of EZH2 protein expression in gastric carcinogenesis among Asians: a
meta-analysis.

Guo L(1), Yang TF, Liang SC, Guo JX, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal and Nutriology Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of
China Medical University, Sanhao Street No. 36, Heping District, Shenyang,
110004, People's Republic of China.

The present meta-analysis aggregated the results of relevant studies to identify 
the role of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression in gastric carcinogenesis among
Asians. Related articles were found by searching the following electronic
databases without language restrictions: PubMed, SpringerLink, Karger Medical and
Scientific Publishers, Chinese Biomedical Database (CBM), Chinese National
Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), and Google Scholar. Meta-analysis was performed 
using STATA statistical software. Crude odds ratios (ORs) or hazard ratios (HRs) 
with their corresponding 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) were calculated. Ten 
relevant studies, which enrolled a total of 872 gastric cancer patients, were
selected for statistical analysis. The most important findings of our
meta-analysis was that cancer tissues exhibited higher expression levels of EZH2 
protein than normal, adjacent and benign tissues (cancer tissues vs normal
tissues: OR = 32.15, 95 % CI 22.58 ~ 45.79, P < 0.001; cancer tissues vs adjacent
tissues: OR = 16.10, 95 % CI 11.35 ~ 22.84, P < 0.001; cancer tissues vs benign
tissues: OR = 2.66, 95 % CI 1.89 ~ 3.75, P < 0.001; respectively). Furthermore,
we observed positive correlations between EZH2 expression and the TNM stage (OR =
2.86, 95 % CI 1.72 ~ 4.75, P < 0.001) as well as lymph node metastasis (OR =
3.02, 95 % CI 2.01 ~ 4.53, P < 0.001) of patients with gastric carcinoma. The
correlation between EZH2 expression and gastric cancer prognosis was also
evaluated in the meta-analysis. Statistical analysis demonstrated that the
overall survival (OS) of EZH2-negative patients was shorter than that of patients
with positive expressions of EZH2 (HR = 0.54, 95 % CI = 0.05 ~ 1.03, P = 0.032). 
Our meta-analysis confirmed the view that EZH2 expression might participate in
the development of gastric carcinogenesis. Thus, EZH2 protein may be a valuable
biomarker for the diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.

PMID: 24705718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e90231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090231. eCollection 
2014.

Dendritic cell-associated miRNAs are modulated via chromatin remodeling in
response to different environments.

Mei S(1), Liu Y(1), Bao Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Min S(1), Liu Y(1), Huang Y(1), Yuan
X(1), Feng Y(1), Shi J(2), Yang R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nankai University School of Medicine, Nankai
University, Tianjin, P. R. China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life 
Science, Nankai University, Tianjin, P. R. China. (3)Department of Immunology,
Nankai University School of Medicine, Nankai University, Tianjin, P. R. China;
Key Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of Education, Tianjin, P. R.
China.

INTRODUCTION: Epigenetic modification plays a critical role in regulating gene
expression. To understand how epigenetic modification alters miRNA expression in 
monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) in different environments, we analyzed
the connections between H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 modification and the expression of
miRNAs in LPS- and TGF-ß-conditioned moDCs.
RESULTS: In moDCs, H3K4me3 modification was strongly associated with the
expression of activating miRNAs, whereas H3K27me3 was related to repressive
miRNAs. The regulation of miRNA expression by H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 was further
confirmed by silencing or inhibiting methyltransferases or methylation-associated
factors in LPS- and TGF-ß-conditioned moDCs. siRNAs targeting H3K4me3-associated 
mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) and retinoblastoma binding protein 5 (RBBP5) reduced
H3K4me3 enrichment and downregulated miRNA expression; conversely, silencing
H3K27me3-associated enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and embryonic ectoderm
development (EED) genes upregulated the DC-associated miRNAs. However,
LPS-mediated miRNAs were often associated with H3K4me3 redistribution from the
transcription start site (TSS) to the miRNA-coding region. Silencing
LPS-associated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and CBP/p300 not only inhibited H3K4m3 redistribution
but also reduced miRNA expression. LPS-upregulated RBBP4 and RBBP7, which are
involved in chromatin remodeling, also affected the redistribution of H3K4me3 and
reduced the expression of miRNAs.
CONCLUSION: In LPS- and TGF-ß-conditioned moDCs, miRNAs may be modulated not only
by H3K4m3 and H3K27me3 modification but also by redistribution of H3K4me3 around 
the transcriptional start site of miRNAs. Thus, H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 epigenetic
modification may play an important role in regulating DC differentiation and
function in the presence of tumor or inflammatory environments.

PMCID: PMC3974670
PMID: 24699235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Sep;171(17):4010-25. doi: 10.1111/bph.12708. Epub 2014 Jul
25.

YC-1 inhibits proliferation of breast cancer cells by down-regulating EZH2
expression via activation of c-Cbl and ERK.

Chang LC(1), Lin HY, Tsai MT, Chou RH, Lee FY, Teng CM, Hsieh MT, Hung HY, Huang 
LJ, Yu YL, Kuo SC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, China Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: YC-1 exhibits potent anticancer activity via numerous
actions in many cancer cell lines. Hence, we investigated the in vivo antitumour 
efficacy of YC-1 in an MDA-MB-468 xenograft model and elucidated the mechanism of
down-regulation of enhancer of zeste homology 2 (EZH2) by YC-1 in breast cancer
cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: In YC-1-treated breast cancer cells and tumour specimens
from YC-1-treated MDA-MB-468 xenografts, EZH2 expression was analysed by Western 
blotting. Pharmacological inhibitors and short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown
were applied to identify possible signalling pathways involved in EZH2
down-regulation by YC-1.
KEY RESULTS: YC-1 reduced the viability of breast cancer cells and tumour growth 
in MDA-MB-468 xenografts. In breast cancer cells, YC-1 down-regulated EZH2
expression in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. Depletion of EZH2
reduced the proliferation and susceptibility of breast cancer cells to
YC-1-induced apoptosis. EZH2 expression was suppressed in tumour specimens from
YC-1-treated MDA-MB-468 xenograft mice. YC-1 enhanced both the degradation rate
and ubiquitination of EZH2. The down-regulation of EZH2 by YC-1 was associated
with activation of PKA and Src-Raf-ERK-mediated signalling pathways. Furthermore,
depletion of Casitas B-lineage lymphoma (c-Cbl), an E3 ubiquitin ligase,
abolished YC-1-induced apoptosis and suppression of EZH2. YC-1 rapidly activated 
c-Cbl to induce signalling associated with ERK and EZH2.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: We discovered that YC-1 induces apoptosis and
inhibits tumour growth of breast cancer cells via down-regulation of EZH2 by
activating c-Cbl and ERK. These data suggest that YC-1 is a potential anticancer 
drug candidate for triple-negative breast cancer.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4243975
PMID: 24697523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 1;9(4):e93635. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093635. eCollection 
2014.

Impact of EZH2 polymorphisms on urothelial cell carcinoma susceptibility and
clinicopathologic features.

Yu YL(1), Su KJ(2), Hsieh MJ(3), Wang SS(4), Wang PH(5), Weng WC(6), Yang SF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, and Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and
Drug Discovery, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. (2)The Ph.D. Program for Cancer
Biology and Drug Discovery, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Cancer
Research Center, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (4)Institute of
Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Division of Urology,
Department of Surgery, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan. (6)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Tungs' Taichung 
MetroHarbor Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (7)Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Medical Research, Chung Shan 
Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The gene EZH2, the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste 2,
encodes a transcriptional repressor that also serves as a histone
methyltransferase that is associated with progression to more advanced disease in
a variety of malignancies. EZH2 expression level in urothelial cell carcinoma
(UCC) is highly correlated with tumor aggressiveness, but it has not been
determined if specific EZH2 genetic variants are associated with UCC risk. This
study investigated the potential associations of EZH2 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms with UCC susceptibility and its clinicopathologic characteristics.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 233 UCC patients and 552 cancer-free
controls, all of whom were from Taiwan, were analyzed for four EZH2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs6950683, rs2302427, rs3757441, and rs41277434)
using real-time PCR genotyping. After adjusting for other co-variants, we found
that individuals carrying at least one C allele at EZH2 rs6950683 had a lower
risk of developing UCC than did major allele carriers. The CCCA or TGTA haplotype
among the four EZH2 sites was also associated with a reduced risk of UCC.
Furthermore, UCC patients who carried at least one G allele at rs2302427 had a
lower invasive tumor stage than did patients carrying the major allele.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs6950683 SNPs of EZH2 might contribute to the prediction of UCC
susceptibility. This is the first study to provide insight into risk factors
associated with EZH2 variants in carcinogenesis of UCC in Taiwan.

PMCID: PMC3972169
PMID: 24691023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Haematologica. 2014 Apr;99(4):613-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.099549.

Why methylation is not a marker predictive of response to hypomethylating agents.

Voso MT(1), Santini V, Fabiani E, Fianchi L, Criscuolo M, Falconi G, Guidi F,
Hohaus S, Leone G.

Author information: 
(1)mtvoso@rm.unicatt.it.

The azanucleotides azacitidine and decitabine have been shown to induce
hematologic response and prolong survival in higher-risk myelodysplastic
syndromes. They are inhibitors of DNA methyltransferase-1 and induce
DNA-hypomethylation. Induction of apoptosis is also clinically relevant, in
particular during the first treatment cycles, when cytopenia is a frequent
side-effect. Since the hypomethylating effect is reversible, and the malignant
clone has been shown to persist in most responding patients, several cycles are
necessary to achieve and maintain responses, while treatment interruption is
associated with rapid relapse. Methylation studies have shown global and
gene-specific hypermethylation in myelodysplastic syndromes, but there seems to
be little relation between the degree of demethylation following hypomethylating 
treatment and hematologic response. The presence of concurrent genomic
hypermethylation and hypomethylation may impair the predictive power of current
detection techniques. This scenario has been complicated by the identification of
epigenetic enzyme mutations, including TET2, IDH1/2, DNMT3A and EZH2, which are
important for response to hypomethylating treatment. Changes in azanucleotide
metabolism genes may also play a role. In the future, methylation analysis
concentrating not only on promoters, but also on gene bodies and intergenic
regions, may identify key genes in patients with the highest probability of
response to azanucleotides and allow a patient-tailored approach.

PMCID: PMC3971070
PMID: 24688109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2014 May;33(3):218-24. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e31829c6574.

Increased EZH2 expression is associated with proliferation and progression of
cervical cancer and indicates a poor prognosis.

Liu Y(1), Liu T, Bao X, He M, Li L, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, P.R.
China.

The objective of this study was to illustrate the role of enhancer zeste homolog 
2 (EZH2) overexpression in the proliferation, progression, and prognosis of
cervical cancer. We detected EZH2 and Ki-67 expression levels using
immunohistochemical (IHC) studies in 20 normal cervical tissues, 50 cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia (including 25 low-grade intraepithelial lesions and 25 
high-grade intraepithelial lesions), and 101 cervical cancer tissues. The
relationships between EZH2 expression and Ki-67 expression, conventional
clinicopathologic characteristics of cervical cancer, and patient outcomes were
evaluated. The effect of EZH2 expression on cancer-specific survival was assessed
by multivariate Cox regression analysis. Positive expression of EZH2 was detected
in 10% (2/20) of the normal cervical tissues, 52% (13/25) of the low-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions, 64% (16/25) of the high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions, and 68.3% (69/101) of the cervical cancer tissues. The
expression of Ki-67 was positively correlated with EZH2 expression: 5% (1/20) in 
normal cervical tissues, 48% (12/25) in low-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions, 52% (13/25) in high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, and 57.4%
(58/101) in cervical cancer tissues. Overexpression of EZH2 was adversely
associated with clinical stage, histologic differentiation, infiltration depth,
and lymph node metastasis (P<0.05). Patients with EZH2-positive expression showed
a decreased overall survival compared with those with EZH2-negative expression
(P=0.003, log-rank test). Multivariate Cox regression analysis suggested that
overexpression of EZH2 was an independent predictor of poor prognosis in cervical
cancer. Overexpression of EZH2 was closely associated with the carcinogenesis,
proliferation, clinical and biologic behaviors, and the prognosis of cervical
cancer, suggesting that it might be used as a potential predictor of prognosis in
cervical cancer.

PMID: 24681730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. BMC Physiol. 2014 Mar 28;14:3. doi: 10.1186/1472-6793-14-3.

Reductions in expression of growth regulating genes in skeletal muscle with age
in wild type and myostatin null mice.

Jones JC, Kroscher KA, Dilger AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. adilger2@illinois.edu.

BACKGROUND: Genes that decline in expression with age and are thought to
coordinate growth cessation have been identified in various organs, but their
expression in skeletal muscle is unknown. Therefore, our objective was to
determine expression of these genes (Ezh2, Gpc3, Mdk, Mest, Mycn, Peg3, and
Plagl1) in skeletal muscle from birth to maturity. We hypothesized that
expression of these genes would decline with age in skeletal muscle but differ
between sexes and between wild type and myostatin null mice.
RESULTS: Female and male wild type and myostatin null mice (C57BL/6J background) 
were sacrificed by carbon dioxide asphyxiation followed by decapitation at d -7, 
0, 21, 42, and 70 days of age. Whole bodies at d -7, all muscles from both hind
limbs at d 0, and bicep femoris muscle from d 21, 42 and 70 were collected. Gene 
expression was determined by quantitative real-time PCR. In general, expression
of these growth-regulating genes was reduced at d 21 compared with day 0 and d
-7. Expression of Gpc3, Mest, and Peg3 was further reduced at d 42 and 70
compared with d 21, however the expression of Mycn increased from d 21 to d 42
and 70. Myostatin null mice, as expected, were heavier with increased biceps
femoris weight at d 70. However, with respect to sex and genotype, there were few
differences in expression. Expression of Ezh2 was increased at d 70 and
expression of Mdk was increased at d 21 in myostatin null mice compared with wild
type, but no other genotype effects were present. Expression of Mdk was increased
in females compared to males at d 70, but no other sex effects were present.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these data suggest the downregulation of these
growth-regulating genes with age might play a role in the coordinated cessation
of muscle growth similar to organ growth but likely have a limited role in the
differences between sexes or genotypes.

PMCID: PMC3986603
PMID: 24678801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Neurosci. 2014 Mar 26;34(13):4494-508. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3647-13.2014.

Coordinated regulation of dendrite arborization by epigenetic factors CDYL and
EZH2.

Qi C(1), Liu S, Qin R, Zhang Y, Wang G, Shang Y, Wang Y, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, Department of Neurobiology, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Key Laboratory for Neuroscience, Ministry of Education/National
Health and Family Planning Commission and Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191,
China, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300070, China, and PKU-IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Peking 
University, Beijing 100871, China.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 4;35(5):2321.

Dendritic arborization is one of the key determinants of precise circuits for
information processing in neurons. Unraveling the molecular mechanisms underlying
dendrite morphogenesis is critical to understanding the establishment of neuronal
connections. Here, using gain- and loss-of-function approaches, we defined the
chromodomain protein and transcription corepressor chromodomain Y-like (CDYL)
protein as a negative regulator of dendrite morphogenesis in rat/mouse
hippocampal neurons both in vitro and in vivo. Overexpressing CDYL decreased,
whereas knocking it down increased, the dendritic complexity of the primary
cultured rat neurons. High-throughput DNA microarray screening identified a
number of CDYL downstream target genes, including the brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF). Knock-down of CDYL in neuronal cells led to increased expression
of BDNF, which is primarily responsible for CDYL's effects on dendrite patterns. 
Mechanistically, CDYL interacts with EZH2, the catalytic subunit of Polycomb
Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), directly and recruits the H3K27 methyltransferase
activity to the promoter region of the BDNF gene. In doing so, CDYL and EZH2
coordinately restrict dendrite morphogenesis in an interdependent manner.
Finally, we found that neural activity increased dendritic complexity through
degradation of CDYL protein to unleash its inhibition on BDNF. These results
link, for the first time, the epigenetic regulators CDYL and EZH2 to dendrite
morphogenesis and might shed new light on our understanding of the regulation of 
the neurodevelopment.

PMID: 24671995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Mar 26;6(229):229ra41. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008326.

Epigenetic reprogramming of HOXC10 in endocrine-resistant breast cancer.

Pathiraja TN(1), Nayak SR, Xi Y, Jiang S, Garee JP, Edwards DP, Lee AV, Chen J,
Shea MJ, Santen RJ, Gannon F, Kangaspeska S, Jelinek J, Issa JP, Richer JK, Elias
A, McIlroy M, Young LS, Davidson NE, Schiff R, Li W, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Resistance to aromatase inhibitors (AIs) is a major clinical problem in the
treatment of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer. In two breast cancer 
cell line models of AI resistance, we identified widespread DNA hyper- and
hypomethylation, with enrichment for promoter hypermethylation of developmental
genes. For the homeobox gene HOXC10, methylation occurred in a CpG shore, which
overlapped with a functional ER binding site, causing repression of HOXC10
expression. Although short-term blockade of ER signaling caused relief of HOXC10 
repression in both cell lines and breast tumors, it also resulted in concurrent
recruitment of EZH2 and increased H3K27me3, ultimately transitioning to increased
DNA methylation and silencing of HOXC10. Reduced HOXC10 in vitro and in
xenografts resulted in decreased apoptosis and caused antiestrogen resistance.
Supporting this, we used paired primary and metastatic breast cancer specimens to
show that HOXC10 was reduced in tumors that recurred during AI treatment. We
propose a model in which estrogen represses apoptotic and growth-inhibitory genes
such as HOXC10, contributing to tumor survival, whereas AIs induce these genes to
cause apoptosis and therapeutic benefit, but long-term AI treatment results in
permanent repression of these genes via methylation and confers resistance.
Therapies aimed at inhibiting AI-induced histone and DNA methylation may be
beneficial in blocking or delaying AI resistance.

PMCID: PMC4277862
PMID: 24670685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2014 Mar;34(3):368-72.

[Screening of novel miRNAs targeting EZH2 3' untranslated region using
lentivirus miRNAs library and their expressions in breast cancer cells and
tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu C(1), Wang L, Zhao W, Peng Y, Wang Y, Sun Z, Feng J.

Author information: 
(1)Third Clinical College, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China. 
E-mail: lcc19891105@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To screen novel miRNAs targeting EZH2 3' untranslated region (UTR) in 
recombinational MCF-7 breast cancer cells over-expressing EZH2 3' UTR and
quantitative analyze the expressions of the screened miRNA in breast cancer cells
and tissues.
METHODS: A lentiviral library was transfected into the recombinant cell line
MCF-7. The cells were screened with cytotoxic agents before extraction of the
genome for amplification of the miRNA precursors using PCR. The screened miRNAs
were identified with sequence analysis and their expressions were analyzed
quantitatively with real-time PCR in breast cancer cells and tissues.
RESULTS: Seven miRNAs were screened from the recombinant MCF-7 cells, namely
miR-15b, miR-16-2, miR-181b2, miR-217, miR-224, miR-329-1, and miR-487b, all of
which failed to be predicted by bioinformatics software. Real-time PCR showed
that miR-217, miR-329-1, and miR-487b were over-expressed in MCF-7 cells, and the
expression of miR-15b and miR-16-2 was significantly increased in cancer tissues 
compared with the adjacent tissues (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Novel targeted miRNAs that can not be predicted by bioinformatics
software were successfully screened from MCF-7 breast cancer cells
over-expressing EZH2 3' UTR. These miRNAs are expressed differentially between
normal breast cells and breast cancer tissues.

PMID: 24670451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Cancer. 2014 Nov 1;135(9):2223-31. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28865. Epub 2014 Apr 5.

SGI-110 and entinostat therapy reduces lung tumor burden and reprograms the
epigenome.

Tellez CS(1), Grimes MJ, Picchi MA, Liu Y, March TH, Reed MD, Oganesian A,
Taverna P, Belinsky SA.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Cancer Program, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, NM.

The DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitor vidaza (5-Azacytidine) in combination 
with the histone deacetylase inhibitor entinostat has shown promise in treating
lung cancer and this has been replicated in our orthotopic lung cancer model.
However, the effectiveness of DNMT inhibitors against solid tumors is likely
impacted by their limited stability and rapid inactivation by cytidine deaminase 
(CDA) in the liver. These studies were initiated to test the efficacy of SGI-110,
a dinucleotide containing decitabine that is resistant to deamination by CDA, as 
a single agent and in combination with entinostat. Evaluation of in vivo plasma
concentrations and pharmacokinetic properties of SGI-110 showed rapid conversion 
to decitabine and a plasma half-life of 4 hr. SGI-110 alone or in combination
with entinostat reduced tumor burden of a K-ras/p53 mutant lung adenocarcinoma
cell line (Calu6) engrafted orthotopically in nude rats by 35% and 56%,
respectively. SGI-110 caused widespread demethylation of more than 300 gene
promoters and microarray analysis revealed expression changes for 212 and 592
genes with SGI-110 alone or in combination with entinostat. Epigenetic therapy
also induced demethylation and expression of cancer testis antigen genes that
could sensitize tumor cells to subsequent immunotherapy. In the orthotopically
growing tumors, highly significant gene expression changes were seen in key
cancer regulatory pathways including induction of p21 and the apoptotic gene BIK.
Moreover, SGI-110 in combination with entinostat caused widespread epigenetic
reprogramming of EZH2-target genes. These preclinical in vivo findings
demonstrate the clinical potential of SGI-110 for reducing lung tumor burden
through reprogramming the epigenome.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 24668305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Jul;392(1-2):153-9.

MicroRNA-124 inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis by directly repressing 
EZH2 in gastric cancer.

Xie L, Zhang Z, Tan Z, He R, Zeng X, Xie Y, Li S, Tang G, Tang H, He X.

MicroRNA-124 (miR-124), a pivotal member of the p53 network, was found to be
down-regulated in multiple types of tumors and further reported as tumor
suppressor microRNA. In this study, we found that miR-124 was down-regulated in
gastric cancer cell lines and specimens. Restoration of miR-124 expression
inhibited the proliferation and colony formation of gastric cancer cells. EZH2
(enhancer of zeste homolog 2), which has been shown to be an important
transcription factor involved in the proliferation and metastasis of tumor cells,
was here confirmed to be a direct target gene of miR-124. On the other hand,
silencing EZH2 also inhibits cell proliferation of gastric cancer cells.
Furthermore, the treatment combining miR-124 with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
significantly showed more efficient anti-tumor effects than single treatment of
miR-124 or 5-FU, and over-expression of miR-124 suppresses the tumor growth in
vivo. Our study indicate that miR-124 can suppress gastric cancer cell growth by 
directly targeting the EZH2 gene and sensitize the treatment effect of 5-FU.
Therefore, miR-124 shows tumor-suppressive activity and may be a new and useful
approach of gastric cancer therapy.

PMID: 24658854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genome Biol. 2014 Mar 21;15(3):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-3-r52.

Genomic occupancy of Runx2 with global expression profiling identifies a novel
dimension to control of osteoblastogenesis.

Wu H, Whitfield TW, Gordon JA, Dobson JR, Tai PW, van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein 
GS, Lian JB.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis is a highly regulated developmental process and
continues during the turnover and repair of mature bone. Runx2, the master
regulator of osteoblastogenesis, directs a transcriptional program essential for 
bone formation through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. While individual Runx2 
gene targets have been identified, further insights into the broad spectrum of
Runx2 functions required for osteogenesis are needed.
RESULTS: By performing genome-wide characterization of Runx2 binding at the three
major stages of osteoblast differentiation--proliferation, matrix deposition and 
mineralization--we identify Runx2-dependent regulatory networks driving bone
formation. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput
sequencing over the course of these stages, we identify approximately 80,000
significantly enriched regions of Runx2 binding throughout the mouse genome.
These binding events exhibit distinct patterns during osteogenesis, and are
associated with proximal promoters and also non-promoter regions: upstream,
introns, exons, transcription termination site regions, and intergenic regions.
These peaks were partitioned into clusters that are associated with genes in
complex biological processes that support bone formation. Using Affymetrix
expression profiling of differentiating osteoblasts depleted of Runx2, we
identify novel Runx2 targets including Ezh2, a critical epigenetic regulator;
Crabp2, a retinoic acid signaling component; Adamts4 and Tnfrsf19, two remodelers
of the extracellular matrix. We demonstrate by luciferase assays that these novel
biological targets are regulated by Runx2 occupancy at non-promoter regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data establish that Runx2 interactions with chromatin across the
genome reveal novel genes, pathways and transcriptional mechanisms that
contribute to the regulation of osteoblastogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4056528
PMID: 24655370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. FASEB J. 2014 Jul;28(7):3183-96. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-241760. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

A central role for G9a and EZH2 in the epigenetic silencing of cyclooxygenase-2
in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Coward WR(1), Feghali-Bostwick CA(2), Jenkins G(1), Knox AJ(1), Pang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine and Nottingham Respiratory Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Nottingham, City Hospital, Nottingham, UK; and.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)Division of
Respiratory Medicine and Nottingham Respiratory Biomedical Research Unit,
University of Nottingham, City Hospital, Nottingham, UK; and
linhua.pang@nottingham.ac.uk.

Selective silencing of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) gene with the loss of the
antifibrotic mediator prostaglandin E2 contributes to the fibrotic process in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). This study explored the role of G9a- and
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)-mediated methylation of histone H3 lysine 9
(H3K9me3) and histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in COX-2 silencing in IPF.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and re-ChIP assays demonstrated marked
increases in H3K9me3, H3K27me3, and DNA methylation, together with their
respective modifying enzymes G9a, EZH2, and DNA methyltransferases (Dnmts) and
respective binding proteins heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), polycomb protein
complex 1 (PRC1) and methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), at the COX-2 promoter 
in lung fibroblasts from patients with IPF (F-IPFs) compared with fibroblasts
from nonfibrotic lungs. HP1, EZH2, and MeCP2 in turn were associated with
additional repressive chromatin modifiers in F-IPFs. G9a and EZH2 inhibitors and 
small interfering RNAs and the Dnmt1 inhibitor markedly reduced H3K9me3 (49-79%),
H3K27me3 (44-81%), and DNA methylation (61-97%) at the COX-2 promoter. These
reductions were correlated with increased histone H3 and H4 acetylation,
resulting in COX-2 mRNA and protein reexpression in F-IPFs. Our results support a
central role for G9a- and EZH2-mediated histone hypermethylation and a model of
bidirectional, mutually reinforcing, and interdependent crosstalk between histone
hypermethylation and DNA methylation in COX-2 epigenetic silencing in
IPF.-Coward, W. R., Feghali-Bostwick, C. A., Jenkins, G., Knox, A. J., Pang, L. A
central role for G9a and EZH2 in the epigenetic silencing of cyclooxygenase-2 in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4062820
PMID: 24652950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;20(12):3078-86. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1597. 
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

EZH2 mutations in follicular lymphoma from different ethnic groups and associated
gene expression alterations.

Guo S(1), Chan JK(2), Iqbal J(2), McKeithan T(2), Fu K(2), Meng B(2), Pan Y(2),
Cheuk W(2), Luo D(2), Wang R(2), Zhang W(2), Greiner TC(2), Chan WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of Pathology,
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology, Tianjin
Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NebraskaAuthors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska jochan@coh.org.

PURPOSE: Gain-of-function mutations of enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) occur
frequently in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and in follicular lymphomas.
However, the frequency of EZH2 mutation in Chinese follicular lymphomas and the
potential targets affected by this mutation are unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We determined EZH2 codon 641 mutations in Chinese follicular
lymphomas (n = 124) and compared them with Western follicular lymphomas (n = 70) 
using a sensitive pyrosequencing assay. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was
performed to determine differential gene expression between the mutated versus
unmutated subgroups, and selected genes were validated using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Our results showed similar frequencies of EZH2 codon 641 mutations in
Chinese and Western follicular lymphoma cohorts (16.9% vs. 18.6%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 
0.773), including all five reported mutation variants. We observed significant
association of EZH2 mutation with low morphologic grade follicular lymphomas
(grade 1-2, 23.6% vs. grade 3, 7.7%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.02). EZH2 mutations also
showed significant association with BCL2 rearrangement in the Chinese cohort
(26.8% vs. 8.8%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.008) and combined cohorts (26.3% vs. 9.1%, <U+03C7>(2)
test, P = 0.002). GEP analysis identified several genes, including TCF4, FOXP1,
TCL1A, BIK, and RASSF6P, with significantly lower mRNA expression (P < 0.01) in
mutated cases, and the potential target TCL1A showed consistent results at the
protein level.
CONCLUSION: Similar prevalence of EZH2 mutation in two ethnic groups suggests
shared pathogenetic mechanisms. The much lower frequency of EZH2 mutation in
cases without BCL2 translocation suggests a different pattern of evolution of
this subtype of follicular lymphoma. GEP studies showed a set of differentially
expressed genes and suggested that EZH2 mutation may help to lock the tumor cells
at the germinal center stage of differentiation.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24634383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Clin Immunol. 2014 May-Jun;152(1-2):48-57. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.02.015. Epub 
2014 Mar 12.

The cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor (R)-roscovitine mediates selective
suppression of alloreactive human T cells but preserves pathogen-specific and
leukemia-specific effectors.

Nellore A(1), Liu B(1), Patsoukis N(1), Boussiotis VA(2), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of
Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
vboussio@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Graft versus host disease (GvHD), mediated by donor T cells, remains the primary 
cause of non-relapse mortality after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation and novel therapeutic approaches are required. Cdk2 is a critical
node of signal integration and programming of T cell responses towards immunity
versus anergy but is dispensable for hematopoiesis and thymocyte development. We 
examined the effects of pharmacologic Cdk2 inhibition on alloreactive human T
cells. Inhibition of Cdk2 blocked expansion of alloreactive T cells upon culture 
with HLA-mismatched dendritic cells and prevented generation of IFN-<U+03B3>-producing
alloantigen-specific effectors. In contrast, Cdk2 inhibition preserved effectors 
specific for Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) leukemia antigen and for CMV as determined by
WT1-specific and CMV-specific pentamers. Cdk2 inhibition preserved Treg cells,
which have the ability to prevent GvHD while maintaining GvL. Thus, Cdk
inhibitors may improve allogeneic HSCT by reducing alloreactivity and GvHD
without loss of pathogen-specific and leukemia-specific immunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4082337
PMID: 24631965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gastroenterology. 2014 Jun;146(7):1714-26.e5. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.03.002. 
Epub 2014 Mar 12.

Increased levels of the long intergenic non-protein coding RNA POU3F3 promote DNA
methylation in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells.

Li W(1), Zheng J(1), Deng J(1), You Y(1), Wu H(1), Li N(1), Lu J(2), Zhou Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. 
(2)The Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis, The State Key Lab of Respiratory
Disease, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of
Genetics, Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China. Electronic
address: zhouyifeng@suda.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Thousands of long intergenic non-protein coding RNAs
(lincRNAs) have been identified in mammals via genome-wide sequencing studies.
Many are functional, but are expressed aberrantly by cancer cells. We
investigated whether levels of lincRNAs are altered during the development of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: We used quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to measure
levels of 26 highly conserved lincRNAs in ESCC and surrounding nontumor tissues. 
A total of 182 ESCC and paired adjacent nontumor tissue samples were collected
from patients undergoing tylectomy at The First Affiliate Hospital of Soochow
University from 2001 through 2009; another 178 ESCC tissue pairs were collected
from Guangzhou Medical University from 2002 through 2009. LincRNAs were expressed
from lentiviral vectors or knocked down with small hairpin RNAs in Eca-109 and
TE-1 cells.
RESULTS: Levels of a lincRNA encoded by a gene located next to POU3F3
(linc-POU3F3) were significantly higher in ESCC than neighboring nontumor
tissues. In RNA immunoprecipitation assays, linc-POU3F3 was associated with the
EZH2 messenger RNA (mRNA). Overexpression of linc-POU3F3 in cell lines increased 
their proliferation and ability to form colonies, and reduced the expression of
POU3F3 mRNA, whereas knockdown of linc-POU3F3 increased the levels of POU3F3
mRNA. CpG islands in POU3F3 were densely hypermethylated in cell lines that
overexpressed linc-POU3F3; methylation at these sites was reduced by knockdown of
linc-POU3F3. Pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 increased the levels of POU3F3 mRNA
and significantly reduced binding of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)1, DNMT3A, and
DNMT3B to POU3F3. ESCC cells with knockdown of linc-POU3F3 formed xenograft
tumors more slowly in mice than control ESCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of linc-POU3F3 are increased in ESCC samples from patients
compared with nontumor tissues. This noncoding RNA contributes to the development
of ESCC by interacting with EZH2 to promote methylation of POU3F3, which encodes 
a transcription factor.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Curr Opin Urol. 2014 May;24(3):303-10. doi: 10.1097/MOU.0000000000000051.

Genomic analysis in active surveillance: predicting high-risk disease using
tissue biomarkers.

Donovan MJ(1), Cordon-Cardo C.

Author information: 
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mt. Sinai, Department of Pathology, New York, New 
York, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: For patients newly diagnosed with prostate cancer, the most
significant question is whether the 'truly malignant' disease has been
identified. This review will provide an overview of current prostate cancer
genomic and biomarker discovery - validation strategies geared towards
identifying aggressive, clinically significant disease at the time of diagnosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Based on recent findings the prostate cancer aggressive disease 
phenotype develops as a result of mutations (TP53, PTEN), structural events
(TMPRSS2-ETS), epigenetic changes (EZH2, DAB2IP, histone alteration), and
transcriptional modifications (SChLAP, PCAT-1). Copy number variability and
dysregulation of specific pathways including androgen receptor signaling,
PTEN/PAKT and TGF-ß continue to play an important role in invasion and
metastasis.
SUMMARY: Given the current challenges for applying prostate cancer genomics to
clinical management, this review will incorporate some of the current novel
genomic approaches and techniques including systems-based precise pathology
platforms, and the role of fluid-based assays, notably, exosomes and circulating 
tumor cells (liquid biopsy), as tools for future diagnostic-treatment algorithms.

PMID: 24625431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Protein Cell. 2014 Apr;5(4):265-96. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0031-6. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

Driver mutations of cancer epigenomes.

Roy DM(1), Walsh LA, Chan TA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

Epigenetic alterations are associated with all aspects of cancer, from tumor
initiation to cancer progression and metastasis. It is now well understood that
both losses and gains of DNA methylation as well as altered chromatin
organization contribute significantly to cancer-associated phenotypes. More
recently, new sequencing technologies have allowed the identification of driver
mutations in epigenetic regulators, providing a mechanistic link between the
cancer epigenome and genetic alterations. Oncogenic activating mutations are now 
known to occur in a number of epigenetic modifiers (i.e. IDH1/2, EZH2, DNMT3A),
pinpointing epigenetic pathways that are involved in tumorigenesis. Similarly,
investigations into the role of inactivating mutations in chromatin modifiers
(i.e. KDM6A, CREBBP/EP300, SMARCB1) implicate many of these genes as tumor
suppressors. Intriguingly, a number of neoplasms are defined by a plethora of
mutations in epigenetic regulators, including renal, bladder, and adenoid cystic 
carcinomas. Particularly striking is the discovery of frequent histone H3.3
mutations in pediatric glioma, a particularly aggressive neoplasm that has long
remained poorly understood. Cancer epigenetics is a relatively new, promising
frontier with much potential for improving cancer outcomes. Already, therapies
such as 5-azacytidine and decitabine have proven that targeting epigenetic
alterations in cancer can lead to tangible benefits. Understanding how genetic
alterations give rise to the cancer epigenome will offer new possibilities for
developing better prognostic and therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3978161
PMID: 24622842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(6):1077-83.

Expression of a constitutively active prolactin receptor causes histone
trimethylation of the p53 gene in breast cancer.

Tan D(1), Tang P(2), Huang J(2), Zhang J(2), Zhou W(2), Walker AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine/Institute of Medical Sciences/Affiliated Hospital, Jishou 
University, Jishou, Hunan 416000, China. Email: naturet2002@yahoo.com. (2)College
of Medicine/Institute of Medical Sciences/Affiliated Hospital, Jishou University,
Jishou, Hunan 416000, China. (3)Division of Biomedical Sciences, University of
California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prolactin (PRL) is a pituitary polypeptide hormone characterized by
multiple biological actions including stimulation of growth in the prostate and
formation of secretory alveoli and stimulation of milk protein gene expression in
the mammary gland. PRL exerts its effect by dimerizing its receptor (PRLR) on the
plasma membrane and regulating gene expression through the JAK-Stat signal
pathway. We have previously described a natural variant of the PRLR in which the 
S2 subdomain of the extracellular domain is missing (Delta S2). Delta S2 PRLRs
are dimerized in the absence of PRL and have constitutive activity in the
promotion of breast cancer cell growth. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), as
one of the histone-modifying enzymes, is a key factor regulating gene expression 
by epigenetic modification. We hypothesized that these constitutive activated
Delta S2 PRLRs played a pathogenic role in breast cancer in part through
alterations in the expression of EZH2 and the trimethylation of histone 3 on
lysine 27 (H3K27Me3).
METHODS: In order to verify the clinical significance and to establish the link
between Delta S2 PRLR expression and epigenetic change, EZH2, H3K27Me3, and Delta
S2 PRLR were detected in both normal and cancerous human breast tissues. Also,
overexpression of Delta S2 PRLR in breast epithelial cells was achieved by
infection with adenovirus carrying the cDNA. Western blotting and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP assay) and acid histone extraction were applied to
detect the expression of EZH2 and the trimethylation of histone 3, respectively.
RESULTS: In breast tissue, higher EZH2 expression and higher H3K27Me3 were found 
associated with higher Delta S2 expression in breast cancer samples. In breast
epithelial cells, overexpression of Delta S2 PRLR increased EZH2
methyltransferase mRNA and protein, induced EZH2 methyltransferase recruitment to
chromatin, increased the trimethylation of H3K27Me3, and decreased the expression
of p53 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Delta S2 PRLR plays an important pathogenic role in breast cancer
through epigenetic modification. Elevated expression of Delta S2 PRLR, achieved
by alternate splicing of the pre-mRNA of the full-length form, is a new mechanism
contributing to human breast cancer.

PMID: 24622438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BJU Int. 2016 Feb;117(2):351-62. doi: 10.1111/bju.12702. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes tumour cell migration and invasion
via epigenetic repression of E-cadherin in renal cell carcinoma.

Liu L(1), Xu Z(1), Zhong L(1), Wang H(1), Jiang S(1), Long Q(1), Xu J(2), Guo
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism and clinical significance for
an oncogenic role of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in renal cell carcinoma
(RCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry analyses of EZH2, histone H3
trimethyl Lys27 (H3K27me3) and E-cadherin were performed in tumour tissue samples
from 257 patients with RCC. Regulatory effects of EZH2 on E-cadherin expression
were examined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay and immunohistochemical staining. Migration
and invasion assays were performed in RCC cell lines. Tumour xenograft
experiments with RCC cells were carried out in nude mice.
RESULTS: EZH2 promoted migration and invasion in RCC cell lines. Silencing EZH2
with short-hairpin EZH2 (shEZH2) or 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) inhibited
migration and invasion (P < 0.001), up-regulated the expression of E-cadherin
in vitro, inhibited tumour growth, and prolonged survival in vivo (P = 0.022).
EZH2 expression accompanied with E-cadherin repression was associated with
advanced disease stage (P = 0.004) and poor overall (P < 0.001) and disease-free 
survival (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 may contribute to RCC progression and is a potential therapeutic
target for advanced RCC.

© 2014 The Authors BJU International © 2014 BJU International Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24612432  [PubMed - in process]


242. Cancer Sci. 2014 May;105(5):512-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12386. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Inhibition of histone methyltransferase EZH2 depletes leukemia stem cell of mixed
lineage leukemia fusion leukemia through upregulation of p16.

Ueda K(1), Yoshimi A, Kagoya Y, Nishikawa S, Marquez VE, Nakagawa M, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Leukemia stem cells (LSC) are resistant to conventional chemotherapy and
persistent LSC after chemotherapy are supposed to be a major cause of relapse.
However, information on genetic or epigenetic regulation of stem cell properties 
is still limited and LSC-targeted drugs have scarcely been identified. Epigenetic
regulators are associated with many cellular processes including maintenance of
stem cells. Of note are polycomb group proteins, because they potentially control
stemness, and can be pharmacologically targeted by a selective inhibitor (DZNep).
Therefore, we investigated the therapeutic potential of EZH2 inhibition in mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion leukemia. Intriguingly, EZH2 inhibition by DZNep or
shRNA not only suppressed MLL fusion leukemia proliferation but also reduced
leukemia initiating cells (LIC) frequency. Expression analysis suggested that p16
upregulation was responsible for LICs reduction. Knockdown of p16 canceled the
survival advantage of mice treated with DZNep. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrated that EZH2 was highly enriched around the
transcription-start-site of p16, together with H3K27 methylation marks in MLL/ENL
and Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells but not in E2A/HLF transduced cells. Although
high expression of Hoxa9 in MLL fusion leukemia is supposed to be responsible for
the recruitment of EZH2, our data also suggest that there may be some other
mechanisms independent of Hoxa9 activation to suppress p16 expression, because
expression levels of Hoxa9 and p16 were not inversely related between MLL/ENL and
Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells. In summary, our findings show that EZH2 is a
potential therapeutic target of MLL fusion leukemia stem cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317832
PMID: 24612037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Jun;35(6):1389-98. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu057. Epub 2014 Mar
6.

Role of C9orf140 in the promotion of colorectal cancer progression and mechanisms
of its upregulation via activation of STAT5, ß-catenin and EZH2.

Weng YR(1), Yu YN(1), Ren LL(2), Cui Y(1), Lu YY(3), Chen HY(1), Ma X(1), Qin
WX(4), Cao W(5), Hong J(6), Fang JY(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institution of Digestive
Disease. (2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institution of
Digestive Disease, Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Ministry of
Health. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Beijing Institute for Cancer
Research, School of Oncology, Peking University, Hai-Dian District, Beijing,
China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China and. (5)Department of Pathology & Medicine, The Warren Alpert
Medical School of Brown University & Rhode Island Hospital, 55 Claverick St, Room
337, Providence, RI 02903, USA. (6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai
Institution of Digestive Disease, fangjingyuan_new@163.com jiehong97@gmail.com
wcao@hotmail.com. (7)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institution 
of Digestive Disease, fangjingyuan_new@163.com.

C9orf140 is a newly identified and characterized gene which is associated with
cell proliferation and tumorigenicity. Expression of C9orf140 is upregulated in
human gastric cancer and colorectal cancer (CRC); however, little is known about 
its role in CRC progression. We have investigated the clinical significance,
biological effects and mechanisms of C9orf140 signaling. We found that the
expression of C9orf140 is dramatically increased in a subset of CRC and
correlates significantly with vascular invasion and lymph node metastasis. Our
finding showed that knockdown of C9orf140 significantly reduced cell
proliferation and invasion in vitro and dramatically increased overall survival
and decreased lung metastasis in vivo. Conversely, overexpression of C9orf140
significantly increased lung metastasis and shortened overall survival when
compared with control tumors. C9orf140-induced CRC cell invasion may depend on
promoting the epithelial-mesenchymal transition progression. STAT5 may directly
interact with the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and ß-catenin to enhance
C9orf140 gene transactivation. Furthermore, C9orf140 may participate in cell
invasion which is induced by STAT5, EZH2 or ß-catenin activation. We describe the
role of C9orf140 in CRC progression and find that C9orf140 overexpression may be 
regulated by STAT5, EZH2 and ß-catenin interaction.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24608043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;33(6):337-44. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2340. Epub 2014 Mar
3.

Inhibiting enhancer of zeste homolog 2 promotes cellular senescence in gastric
cancer cells SGC-7901 by activation of p21 and p16.

Bai J(1), Chen J, Ma M, Cai M, Xu F, Wang G, Tao K, Shuai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery II, Wuhan Union Hospital, Tongji
Medical College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology , Wuhan, Hubei
Province, People's Republic of China .

Cellular senescence, which can be defined as a stress response preventing the
propagation of cells that have accumulated potentially oncogenic alterations, is 
invariably associated with a permanent cell cycle arrest. Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) as a member of polycomb group proteins and its targets include
cell cycle regulatory proteins, which govern cell cycle progression and cellular 
senescence. In this study, we report that EZH2 depletion promotes the senescent
state in human gastric cancer cells SGC-7901. We found that EZH2 functionally
suppressed the senescent state in human gastric cancer cells SGC-7901. EZH2
depletion inhibited cell proliferation, arrested cellular cycle, restored
features of a cellular senescence phenotype, and promoted doxorubicin-induced
senescence. To prove that EZH2 expression contributes substantially to the change
of key cell cycle regulators, we showed that p21 and p16 were activated to a
certain extent upon EZH2 depletion and activation of p21 was in a p53-independent
manner. Taken together, our data suggest that EZH2 depletion promotes the
progression of senescence by mediating the activation of tumor suppressor genes
p21 and p16, and could serve as a potential epigenetic target for gastric cancer 
therapy.

PMID: 24588771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e90095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090095. eCollection
2014.

De novo peptide design and experimental validation of histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

Smadbeck J(1), Peterson MB(1), Zee BM(2), Garapaty S(3), Mago A(2), Lee C(3),
Giannis A(4), Trojer P(3), Garcia BA(5), Floudas CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular
Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, United States of America.
(3)Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (4)University of Leipzig, Institute of Organic Chemistry, Leipzig,
Germany. (5)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New
Jersey, United States of America ; Department of Chemistry, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, United States of America ; Epigenetics Program, Department
of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(4):e95535.

Histones are small proteins critical to the efficient packaging of DNA in the
nucleus. DNA-protein complexes, known as nucleosomes, are formed when the DNA
winds itself around the surface of the histones. The methylation of histone
residues by enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) maintains gene repression over
successive cell generations. Overexpression of EZH2 can silence important tumor
suppressor genes leading to increased invasiveness of many types of cancers. This
makes the inhibition of EZH2 an important target in the development of cancer
therapeutics. We employed a three-stage computational de novo peptide design
method to design inhibitory peptides of EZH2. The method consists of a sequence
selection stage and two validation stages for fold specificity and approximate
binding affinity. The sequence selection stage consists of an integer linear
optimization model that was solved to produce a rank-ordered list of amino acid
sequences with increased stability in the bound peptide-EZH2 structure. These
sequences were validated through the calculation of the fold specificity and
approximate binding affinity of the designed peptides. Here we report the
discovery of novel EZH2 inhibitory peptides using the de novo peptide design
method. The computationally discovered peptides were experimentally validated in 
vitro using dose titrations and mechanism of action enzymatic assays. The peptide
with the highest in vitro response, SQ037, was validated in nucleo using
quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics. This peptide had an IC50 of 13.5
[Formula: see text]M, demonstrated greater potency as an inhibitor when compared 
to the native and K27A mutant control peptides, and demonstrated competitive
inhibition versus the peptide substrate. Additionally, this peptide demonstrated 
high specificity to the EZH2 target in comparison to other histone
methyltransferases. The validated peptides are the first computationally designed
peptides that directly inhibit EZH2. These inhibitors should prove useful for
further chromatin biology investigations.

PMCID: PMC3938834
PMID: 24587223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 May 1;276(3):165-70. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.02.005. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Reactive oxygen species contribute to arsenic-induced EZH2 phosphorylation in
human bronchial epithelial cells and lung cancer cells.

Li L(1), Qiu P(1), Chen B(1), Lu Y(1), Wu K(1), Thakur C(1), Chang Q(1), Sun
J(1), Chen F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy
and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit, MI 48201, 
USA. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of
Pharmacy and Health Sciences, Wayne State University, 259 Mack Avenue, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA,. Electronic address: fchen@wayne.edu.

Our previous studies suggested that arsenic is able to induce serine 21
phosphorylation of the EZH2 protein through activation of JNK, STAT3, and Akt
signaling pathways in the bronchial epithelial cell line, BEAS-2B. In the present
report, we further demonstrated that reactive oxygen species (ROS) were involved 
in the arsenic-induced protein kinase activation that leads to EZH2
phosphorylation. Several lines of evidence supported this notion. First, the
pretreatment of the cells with N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC), a potent antioxidant,
abolishes arsenic-induced EZH2 phosphorylation along with the inhibition of JNK, 
STAT3, and Akt. Second, H2O2, the most important form of ROS in the cells in
response to extracellular stress signals, can induce phosphorylation of the EZH2 
protein and the activation of JNK, STAT3, and Akt. By ectopic expression of the
myc-tagged EZH2, we additionally identified direct interaction and
phosphorylation of the EZH2 protein by Akt in response to arsenic and H2O2.
Furthermore, both arsenic and H2O2 were able to induce the translocation of
ectopically expressed or endogenous EZH2 from nucleus to cytoplasm. In summary,
the data presented in this report indicate that oxidative stress due to ROS
generation plays an important role in the arsenic-induced EZH2 phosphorylation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4401465
PMID: 24582688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 27;14:139. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-139.

Pharmacological inhibition of EZH2 as a promising differentiation therapy in
embryonal RMS.

Ciarapica R(1), Carcarino E, Adesso L, De Salvo M, Bracaglia G, Leoncini PP,
Dall'agnese A, Verginelli F, Milano GM, Boldrini R, Inserra A, Stifani S,
Screpanti I, Marquez VE, Valente S, Mai A, Puri PL, Locatelli F, Palacios D, Rota
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncohematology, Laboratory of Angiogenesis, Ospedale Pediatrico 
Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Piazza S, Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome, Italy.
roberta.ciarapica@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Embryonal Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a pediatric soft-tissue sarcoma
derived from myogenic precursors that is characterized by a good prognosis in
patients with localized disease. Conversely, metastatic tumors often relapse,
leading to a dismal outcome. The histone methyltransferase EZH2 epigenetically
suppresses skeletal muscle differentiation by repressing the transcription of
myogenic genes. Moreover, de-regulated EZH2 expression has been extensively
implied in human cancers. We have previously shown that EZH2 is aberrantly
over-expressed in RMS primary tumors and cell lines. Moreover, it has been
recently reported that EZH2 silencing in RD cells, a recurrence-derived embryonal
RMS cell line, favors myofiber-like structures formation in a pro-differentiation
context. Here we evaluate whether similar effects can be obtained also in the
presence of growth factor-supplemented medium (GM), that mimics a
pro-proliferative microenvironment, and by pharmacological targeting of EZH2 in
RD cells and in RD tumor xenografts.
METHODS: Embryonal RMS RD cells were cultured in GM and silenced for EZH2 or
treated with either the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) that induces EZH2 degradation, or with a new class of
catalytic EZH2 inhibitors, MC1948 and MC1945, which block the catalytic activity 
of EZH2. RD cell proliferation and myogenic differentiation were evaluated both
in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Here we show that EZH2 protein was abnormally expressed in 19 out of 19 
(100%) embryonal RMS primary tumors and cell lines compared to their normal
counterparts. Genetic down-regulation of EZH2 by silencing in GM condition
reduced RD cell proliferation up-regulating p21Cip1. It also resulted in
myogenic-like differentiation testified by the up-regulation of myogenic markers 
Myogenin, MCK and MHC. These effects were reverted by enforced over-expression of
a murine Ezh2, highlighting an EZH2-specific effect. Pharmacological inhibition
of EZH2 using either DZNep or MC inhibitors phenocopied the genetic knockdown of 
EZH2 preventing cell proliferation and restoring myogenic differentiation both in
vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence that EZH2 function can be
counteracted by pharmacological inhibition in embryonal RMS blocking
proliferation even in a pro-proliferative context. They also suggest that this
approach could be exploited as a differentiation therapy in adjuvant therapeutic 
intervention for embryonal RMS.

PMCID: PMC4016511
PMID: 24575771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Thorac Cancer. 2014 Mar;5(2):139-48. doi: 10.1111/1759-7714.12061. Epub 2014 Mar 
3.

Role of E2F-1 and its involving pathway in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang W(1), Shen L(1), Sun Y(2), Dong B(2), Chen K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Thoracic Surgery I, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute Beijing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational
Research (Ministry of Education), Department of Pathology, Peking University
Cancer Hospital & Institute Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal cancer is a lethal disease and the optimal therapy remains
unclear. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy provides an increased chance of survival;
therefore, we attempted to identify potential molecular markers that might
improve evaluations of individual responses to therapy.
METHODS: We recruited 109 patients with resectable esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma. The patients underwent radical esophagectomy and did not receive any
other perioperative treatment. Expression of E2F-1 and molecules involved in its 
targeted pathways, pERK, Bim, pRb, epidermal growth factor receptor, EZH2 and
pAKT, was investigated immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: Correlations were observed between E2F-1 and pRb expression; EZH2
expression was significantly correlated with the degree of carcinoma
differentiation (P = 0.01). Stage III patients were found to have longer survival
if they did not express pERK than if they did (23 months vs. 11 months, P =
0.01). Patients with E2F-1 not expressing pRb were found to have longer survival 
times than those with E2F-1 who expressed pRb (18.8 months vs. 8.6 months, P =
0.021). Similarly, stage III patients with E2F-1 but not expressing pERK also
survived longer than those expressing pERK (23.5 months vs. 3.9 months, P <
0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A high expression of pERK was significantly associated with poor
survival in patients with locally advanced esophageal cancer. Expression of a
combination of molecules, rather than of individual molecules, was more
predictive of disease prognosis. E2F-1 and molecules of its targeted pathways may
be candidate proteins as markers of chemosensitivity in esophageal cancer
patients.

PMCID: PMC4704324
PMID: 26766991  [PubMed]


249. Front Immunol. 2014 Feb 10;5:45. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2014.00045. eCollection 2014.

Function of YY1 in Long-Distance DNA Interactions.

Atchison ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania , Philadelphia, PA , USA.

During B cell development, long-distance DNA interactions are needed for V(D)J
somatic rearrangement of the immunoglobulin (Ig) loci to produce functional Ig
genes, and for class switch recombination (CSR) needed for antibody maturation.
The tissue-specificity and developmental timing of these mechanisms is a subject 
of active investigation. A small number of factors are implicated in controlling 
Ig locus long-distance interactions including Pax5, Yin Yang 1 (YY1), EZH2,
IKAROS, CTCF, cohesin, and condensin proteins. Here we will focus on the role
of<U+2009>YY1 in controlling these mechanisms. YY1 is a multifunctional transcription
factor involved in transcriptional activation and repression, X chromosome
inactivation, Polycomb Group (PcG) protein DNA recruitment, and recruitment of
proteins required for epigenetic modifications (acetylation, deacetylation,
methylation, ubiquitination, sumoylation, etc.). YY1 conditional knock-out
indicated that YY1 is required for B cell development, at least in part, by
controlling long-distance DNA interactions at the immunoglobulin heavy chain and 
Ig<U+03BA> loci. Our recent data show that YY1 is also required for CSR. The mechanisms 
implicated in YY1 control of long-distance DNA interactions include controlling
non-coding antisense RNA transcripts, recruitment of PcG proteins to DNA, and
interaction with complexes involved in long-distance DNA interactions including
the cohesin and condensin complexes. Though common rearrangement mechanisms
operate at all Ig loci, their distinct temporal activation along with the
ubiquitous nature of<U+2009>YY1 poses challenges for determining the specific mechanisms
of<U+2009>YY1 function in these processes, and their regulation at the tissue-specific
and B cell stage-specific level. The large numbers of post-translational
modifications that control YY1 functions are possible candidates for regulation.

PMCID: PMC3918653
PMID: 24575094  [PubMed]


250. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 11;111(10):3751-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1311480111. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Histone demethylase Jmjd3 is required for the development of subsets of retinal
bipolar cells.

Iida A(1), Iwagawa T, Kuribayashi H, Satoh S, Mochizuki Y, Baba Y, Nakauchi H,
Furukawa T, Koseki H, Murakami A, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Institute of Medical Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Di- and trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me2/3) is an important
gene repression mechanism. H3K27me2/3-specific demethylase, Jmjd3, was expressed 
in the inner nuclear layer during late retinal development. In contrast, H3K27
methyltransferase, Ezh2, was highly expressed in the embryonic retina but its
expression decreased rapidly after birth. Jmjd3 loss of function in the
developing retina resulted in failed differentiation of PKC-positive bipolar cell
subsets (rod-ON-BP) and reduced transcription factor Bhlhb4 expression, which is 
critical for the differentiation of rod-ON-BP cells. Overexpression of Bhlhb4,
but not of other BP cell-related genes, such as transcription factors Neurod and 
Chx10, in Jmjd3-knockdown retina rescued loss of PKC-positive BP cells.
Populations of other retinal cell subsets were not significantly affected. In
addition, proliferation activity and apoptotic cell number during retinal
development were not affected by the loss of Jmjd3. Levels of histone H3
trimethyl Lys27 (H3K27me3) in the Bhlhb4 locus were lower in Islet-1-positive BP 
cells and amacrine cells than in the Islet-1-negative cell fraction. The
Islet-1-negative cell fraction consisted mainly of photoreceptors, suggestive of 
lineage-specific demethylation of H3K27me3 in the Bhlhb4 locus. We propose that
lineage-specific H3K27me3 demethylation of critical gene loci by
spatiotemporal-specific Jmjd3 expression is required for appropriate maturation
of retinal cells.

PMCID: PMC3956141
PMID: 24572572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014 Feb;1309:30-6. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12356.

Targeting epigenetic regulators for cancer therapy.

Wee S(1), Dhanak D, Li H, Armstrong SA, Copeland RA, Sims R, Baylin SB, Liu XS,
Schweizer L.

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Myers Squibb Company, Princeton, New Jersey.

Human gene expression patterns are controlled and coordinated by the activity of 
a diverse array of epigenetic regulators, including histone methyltransferases,
acetyltransferases, and chromatin remodelers. Deregulation of these epigenetic
pathways can lead to genome-wide changes in gene expression, with serious disease
consequences. In recent years, research has suggested that cross talk between
genomic (i.e., for example, mutations, translocations) and epigenomic factors may
drive the etiology of both hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. Current
work in translational research seeks to identify epigenetic regulators whose
aberrant activity contributes to oncogenesis, including the histone
methyltransferases DOT1L and EZH2 and the bromodomain-containing BET family, and 
to develop drugs that inhibit the aberrant activity of these regulators.
Preclinical and clinical studies using small-molecule inhibitors of epigenetic
regulators have underscored their value for therapeutic intervention, and these
inhibitors can also be used to drive further studies into dissecting the
functions of epigenetic factors in normal and cancer cells.

© 2014 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 24571255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr. 2013 Apr;2(2):78-83. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2304-3881.2012.12.12.

Effects of EZH2 gene on the growth and migration of hepatocellular carcinoma
HepG2 cells.

Zhao H(1), Xu Y(2), Mao Y(2), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatobiliary and Intestinal Surgery Research Center, Central South
University, Changsha 410008, China; (2)Department of Liver Surgery, Peking Union 
Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of EZH2 gene on the growth and migration of
hepatocellular carcinoma HepG2 cell in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: EZH2 shRNA plasmid vectors were constructed and transfected into HepG2
cells. A model of EZH2 gene-silencing HepG2 cell lines was constructed, and the
experimental cells were classified into 3 groups: HepG2 blank control group,
HepG2-V vector control group and HepG2-EZH2 (-) group. The mRNA and protein
expressions of EZH2 in these three cells were detected by real-time fluorogenic
quantitative PCR and Western blotting, respectively. Cell proliferation was
analyzed by MTT assay. Cells were inoculated subcutaneously in nude mice, and the
growth of tumor cells in vivo was observed. Transwell chamber assay was performed
to observe any change in the migration ability of cells.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression of HepG2 and HepG2-V was 100% and (95.27±10.87)%,
respectively. Compared with the control group, the mRNA level of HepG2-EZH2 (-)
were significantly decreased to (20.55±13.21)% (P<0.001). Similarly, the EZH2
protein expression were inhibited in HepG2-EZH2 (-) cells. The inhibition rate of
tumor growth was 36.3% in vitro and 52.5% in vivo. The migration rate of the
HepG2-EZH2 (-) group [(7.15±1.13)%] was significantly lower than those in the
HepG2 group [(14.57±4.32)%] and the HepG2-V group [(15.21±5.22)%], with
significant differences (both P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 silencing can effectively inhibit the proliferation and growth 
of HepG2 cells in vitro and in vivo and inhibit cell migration. Therefore, the
EZH2 gene may be a novel target for the treatment of liver cancer.

PMCID: PMC3924663
PMID: 24570920  [PubMed]


253. J Immunol. 2014 Apr 1;192(7):3057-67. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302063. Epub 2014
Feb 24.

Noncoding RNAs and LRRFIP1 regulate TNF expression.

Shi L(1), Song L, Fitzgerald M, Maurer K, Bagashev A, Sullivan KE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104.

Noncoding RNAs have been implicated in the regulation of expression of numerous
genes; however, the mechanism is not fully understood. We identified
bidirectional, long noncoding RNAs upstream of the TNF gene using five different 
methods. They arose in a region where the repressors LRRFIP1, EZH2, and SUZ12
were demonstrated to bind, suggesting a role in repression. The noncoding RNAs
were polyadenylated, capped, and chromatin associated. Knockdown of the noncoding
RNAs was associated with derepression of TNF mRNA and diminished binding of
LRRFIP1 to both RNA targets and chromatin. Overexpression of the noncoding RNAs
led to diminished expression of TNF and recruitment of repressor proteins to the 
locus. One repressor protein, LRRFIP1, bound directly to the noncoding RNAs.
These data place the noncoding RNAs upstream of TNF gene as central to the
transcriptional regulation. They appear to serve as a platform for the assembly
of a repressive complex.

PMCID: PMC3965610
PMID: 24567534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Apr;13(4):842-54. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0773. Epub 
2014 Feb 21.

Selective inhibition of EZH2 by EPZ-6438 leads to potent antitumor activity in
EZH2-mutant non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Knutson SK(1), Kawano S, Minoshima Y, Warholic NM, Huang KC, Xiao Y, Kadowaki T, 
Uesugi M, Kuznetsov G, Kumar N, Wigle TJ, Klaus CR, Allain CJ, Raimondi A, Waters
NJ, Smith JJ, Porter-Scott M, Chesworth R, Moyer MP, Copeland RA, Richon VM,
Uenaka T, Pollock RM, Kuntz KW, Yokoi A, Keilhack H.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Epizyme Inc., Cambridge; Eisai Inc., Andover,
Massachusetts; and Eisai Co. Ltd., Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki, Japan.

Mutations within the catalytic domain of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 have 
been identified in subsets of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). These
genetic alterations are hypothesized to confer an oncogenic dependency on EZH2
enzymatic activity in these cancers. We have previously reported the discovery of
EPZ005678 and EPZ-6438, potent and selective S-adenosyl-methionine-competitive
small molecule inhibitors of EZH2. Although both compounds are similar with
respect to their mechanism of action and selectivity, EPZ-6438 possesses superior
potency and drug-like properties, including good oral bioavailability in animals.
Here, we characterize the activity of EPZ-6438 in preclinical models of NHL.
EPZ-6438 selectively inhibits intracellular lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27)
methylation in a concentration- and time-dependent manner in both EZH2 wild-type 
and mutant lymphoma cells. Inhibition of H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27Me3) leads to
selective cell killing of human lymphoma cell lines bearing EZH2 catalytic domain
point mutations. Treatment of EZH2-mutant NHL xenograft-bearing mice with
EPZ-6438 causes dose-dependent tumor growth inhibition, including complete and
sustained tumor regressions with correlative diminution of H3K27Me3 levels in
tumors and selected normal tissues. Mice dosed orally with EPZ-6438 for 28 days
remained tumor free for up to 63 days after stopping compound treatment in two
EZH2-mutant xenograft models. These data confirm the dependency of EZH2-mutant
NHL on EZH2 activity and portend the utility of EPZ-6438 as a potential treatment
for these genetically defined cancers.

PMID: 24563539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Neurosci. 2014 Feb 19;34(8):2921-30. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2319-13.2014.

NFIB-mediated repression of the epigenetic factor Ezh2 regulates cortical
development.

Piper M(1), Barry G, Harvey TJ, McLeay R, Smith AG, Harris L, Mason S, Stringer
BW, Day BW, Wray NR, Gronostajski RM, Bailey TL, Boyd AW, Richards LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Brain Institute, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, and The School
of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 4069,
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia 4029, and
Department of Biochemistry, Program in Genetics, Genomics and Bioinformatics,
Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14203.

Epigenetic mechanisms are essential in regulating neural progenitor cell
self-renewal, with the chromatin-modifying protein Enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) emerging as a central player in promoting progenitor cell self-renewal
during cortical development. Despite this, how Ezh2 is itself regulated remains
unclear. Here, we demonstrate that the transcription factor nuclear factor IB
(NFIB) plays a key role in this process. Nfib(-/-) mice exhibit an increased
number of proliferative ventricular zone cells that express progenitor cell
markers and upregulation of EZH2 expression within the neocortex and hippocampus.
NFIB binds to the Ezh2 promoter and overexpression of NFIB represses Ezh2
transcription. Finally, key downstream targets of EZH2-mediated epigenetic
repression are misregulated in Nfib(-/-) mice. Collectively, these results
suggest that the downregulation of Ezh2 transcription by NFIB is an important
component of the process of neural progenitor cell differentiation during
cortical development.

PMCID: PMC3931505
PMID: 24553933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jul;96(1):17-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0813457. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Epigenetically modulated LRRC33 acts as a negative physiological regulator for
multiple Toll-like receptors.

Su X(1), Mei S(1), Liang X(1), Wang S(2), Liu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Bao Y(1), Chen
Y(1), Che Y(1), Chunhua Zhao R(2), Zhang Z(3), Yang R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nankai University School of Medicine, and. (2)Center
of Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and
School of Basic Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Peking, China. (3)Department of Immunology, Nankai University
School of Medicine, and ryang@nankai.edu.cn zhang_zhujun@nankai.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Immunology, Nankai University School of Medicine, and Key
Laboratory of Bioactive Materials, Ministry of Education, The College of Life
Sciences, Nankai University, Nankai, China; and ryang@nankai.edu.cn
zhang_zhujun@nankai.edu.cn.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Jul;96(1):4-6.

The members of a LRR family play crucial roles in the activation of innate and
adaptive immune responses. We reported previously that LRRC33, a transmembrane
protein of the LRR family, might potentially affect TLR-mediated activity. Here, 
we demonstrate that LRRC33 is a negative physiological regulator for multiple
TLRs. Lrrc33(-/-) and Lrrc33(+/-) mice were more susceptible to TLR ligand
challenges. The macrophages and DCs from Lrrc33(-/-) mice produced more
proinflammatory cytokines than those of WT mice through increased activation of
MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B. Silencing LRRC33 also promoted multiple TLR-mediated activation
in human moDCs. Notably, LRRC33 expression could be down-regulated by TLR ligands
LPS, poly I:C, or PGN through H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 modification. In
LPS-conditioned moDCs, reduced enrichment of H3K4me3 and increased H3K27me3 could
be observed at the promoter region of LRRC33. Furthermore, silencing
H3K4me3-associated factors MLL and RBBP5 not only decreased the enrichment of
H3K4me3 but also down-regulated expression of LRRC33, whereas the expression of
LRRC33 was up-regulated after silencing H3K27me3-associated factors EZH2 and EED.
Thus, our results suggest that LRRC33 and TLRs may form a negative-feedback loop,
which is important for the maintenance of immune homeostasis.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 24550525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 18;111(7):2488-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1400648111. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Reciprocal interactions of human C10orf12 and C17orf96 with PRC2 revealed by
BioTAP-XL cross-linking and affinity purification.

Alekseyenko AA(1), Gorchakov AA, Kharchenko PV, Kuroda MI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.

Understanding the composition of epigenetic regulators remains an important
challenge in chromatin biology. Traditional biochemical analysis of
chromatin-associated complexes requires their release from DNA under conditions
that can also disrupt key interactions. Here we develop a complementary approach 
(BioTAP-XL), in which cross-linking (XL) enhances the preservation of protein
interactions and also allows the analysis of DNA targets under the same tandem
affinity purification (BioTAP) regimen. We demonstrate the power of BioTAP-XL
through analysis of human EZH2, a core subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2). We identify and validate two strong interactors, C10orf12 and C17orf96,
which display enrichment with EZH2-BioTAP at levels similar to canonical PRC2
components (SUZ12, EED, MTF2, JARID2, PHF1, and AEBP2). ChIP-seq analysis of
BioTAP-tagged C10orf12 or C17orf96 revealed the similarity of each binding
pattern with the location of EZH2 and the H3K27me3-silencing mark, validating
their physical interaction with PRC2 components. Interestingly, analysis by mass 
spectrometry of C10orf12 and C17orf96 interactions revealed that these proteins
may be mutually exclusive PRC2 subunits that fail to interact with each other or 
with JARID2 and AEBP2. C10orf12, in addition, shows a strong and unexpected
association with components of the EHMT1/2 complex, thus potentially connecting
PRC2 to another histone methyltransferase. Similarly, results from CBX4-BioTAP
protein pulldowns are consistent with reports of a diversity of PRC1 complexes.
Our results highlight the importance of reciprocal analyses of multiple subunits 
and suggest that iterative use of BioTAP-XL has strong potential to reveal
networks of chromatin-based interactions in higher organisms.

PMCID: PMC3932854
PMID: 24550272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Leukemia. 2014 Sep;28(9):1804-10. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.76. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

The number of prognostically detrimental mutations and prognosis in primary
myelofibrosis: an international study of 797 patients.

Guglielmelli P(1), Lasho TL(2), Rotunno G(1), Score J(3), Mannarelli C(1),
Pancrazzi A(1), Biamonte F(1), Pardanani A(2), Zoi K(4), Reiter A(5), Duncombe
A(6), Fanelli T(1), Pietra D(7), Rumi E(7), Finke C(2), Gangat N(2), Ketterling
RP(8), Knudson RA(8), Hanson CA(9), Bosi A(1), Pereira A(10), Manfredini R(11),
Cervantes F(12), Barosi G(13), Cazzola M(14), Cross NC(15), Vannucchi AM(1),
Tefferi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Congiunto MMPC, Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (2)Division of Hematology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (3)Wessex Reg Genetics Lab,
Salisbury, UK. (4)Haematology Research Laboratory, Biomedical Research
Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece. (5)III. Medizinische Klinik,
Universitätsmedizin Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany. (6)Department of Haematology,
Southampton University Hospital, Southampton, UK. (7)Department of Hematology
Oncology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy. (8)Division of Cytogenetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (9)Division of Hematopathology, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (10)Hemotherapy &
Hemostasis, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain. (11)Centre for Regenerative
Medicine 'Stefano Ferrari', University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena,
Italy. (12)Hematology Department, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (13)Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis, IRCCS
Policlinico S.Matteo Foundation, Pavia, Italy. (14)Department of Hematology
Oncology, IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation & University of Pavia, Pavia,
Italy. (15)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

We recently defined a high-molecular risk category (HMR) in primary myelofibrosis
(PMF), based on the presence of at least one of the five 'prognostically
detrimental' mutated genes (ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH1/2). Herein, we evaluate
the additional prognostic value of the 'number' of mutated genes. A total of 797 
patients were recruited from Europe (n=537) and the Mayo Clinic (n=260). In the
European cohort, 167 (31%) patients were HMR: 127 (23.6%) had one and 40 (7.4%)
had two or more mutated genes. The presence of two or more mutations predicted
the worst survival: median 2.6 years (hazard ratio (HR) 3.8, 95% confidence
interval (CI) 2.6-5.7) vs. 7.0 years (HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.4-2.6) for one mutation vs
12.3 years for no mutations. The results were validated in the Mayo cohort and
prognostic significance in both cohorts was independent of International
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS; HR 2.4, 95% CI 1.6-3.6) and dynamic IPSS
(DIPSS)-plus (HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.2-3.1), respectively. Two or more mutations were
also associated with shortened leukemia-free survival (HR 6.2, 95% CI 3.5-10.7), 
also Mayo validated. Calreticulin mutations favorably affected survival,
independently of both number of mutations and IPSS/DIPSS-plus. We conclude that
the 'number' of prognostically detrimental mutations provides added value in the 
combined molecular and clinical prognostication of PMF.

PMID: 24549259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 May;12(5):639-53. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0546. Epub
2014 Feb 13.

EZH2: not EZHY (easy) to deal.

Deb G(1), Singh AK, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Urology, University Hospitals Case
Medical Center; 2Department of Nutrition, Case Western Reserve University;
3Division of General Medical Sciences, Case Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Cleveland, Ohio; 4Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology,
Guwahati, Assam; and 5Biochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research
Institute, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Seminal discoveries have established that epigenetic modifications are important 
for driving tumor progression. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are highly conserved
epigenetic effectors that maintain, by posttranslational modification of
histones, the silenced state of genes involved in critical biologic processes,
including cellular development, stem cell plasticity, and tumor progression. PcG 
proteins are found in two multimeric protein complexes called Polycomb repressive
complexes: PRC1 and PRC2. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), catalytic core
subunit of PRC2, epigenetically silences several tumor-suppressor genes by
catalyzing the trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27, which serves as a
docking site for DNA methyltransferases and histone deacetylases. Evidence
suggests that overexpression of EZH2 is strongly associated with cancer
progression and poor outcome in disparate cancers, including hematologic and
epithelial malignancies. The regulatory circuit and molecular cues causing EZH2
deregulation vary in different cancer types. Therefore, this review provides a
comprehensive overview on the oncogenic role of EZH2 during tumorigenesis and
highlights the multifaceted role of EZH2, as either a transcriptional activator
or repressor depending on the cellular context. Additional insight is provided on
the recent understanding of the causes and consequences of EZH2 overexpression in
specific cancer types. Finally, evidence is discussed on how EZH2 has emerged as 
a promising target in anticancer therapy and the prospects for targeting EZH2
without affecting global methylation status. Thus, a better understanding of the 
complex epigenetic regulatory network controlling EZH2 expression and target
genes facilitates the design of novel therapeutic interventions.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4020974
PMID: 24526064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Radiat Res. 2014 Jul;55(4):613-28. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrt227. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Chromatin-regulating proteins as targets for cancer therapy.

Oike T(1), Ogiwara H(2), Amornwichet N(3), Nakano T(4), Kohno T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1,
Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan Department of Radiation Oncology,
Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-39-22, Showa-machi, Maebashi,
Gunma 371-8511, Japan. (2)Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, 1-1, Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, 3-39-22, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan Department of
Radiology, Chulalongkorn University, 1873, Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330,
Thailand. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-22, Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. (5)Division
of Genome Biology, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 1-1, Tsukiji
5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan tkkohno@ncc.go.jp.

Chromatin-regulating proteins represent a large class of novel targets for cancer
therapy. In the context of radiotherapy, acetylation and deacetylation of
histones by histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs)
play important roles in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks generated by
ionizing irradiation, and are therefore attractive targets for
radiosensitization. Small-molecule inhibitors of HATs (garcinol, anacardic acid
and curcumin) and HDACs (vorinostat, sodium butyrate and valproic acid) have been
shown to sensitize cancer cells to ionizing irradiation in preclinical models,
and some of these molecules are being tested in clinical trials, either alone or 
in combination with radiotherapy. Meanwhile, recent large-scale genome analyses
have identified frequent mutations in genes encoding chromatin-regulating
proteins, especially in those encoding subunits of the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex, in various human cancers. These observations have
driven researchers toward development of targeted therapies against cancers
carrying these mutations. DOT1L inhibition in MLL-rearranged leukemia, EZH2
inhibition in EZH2-mutant or MLL-rearranged hematologic malignancies and
SNF5-deficient tumors, BRD4 inhibition in various hematologic malignancies, and
BRM inhibition in BRG1-deficient tumors have demonstrated promising anti-tumor
effects in preclinical models, and these strategies are currently awaiting
clinical application. Overall, the data collected so far suggest that targeting
chromatin-regulating proteins is a promising strategy for tomorrow's cancer
therapy, including radiotherapy and molecularly targeted chemotherapy.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Japan
Radiation Research Society and Japanese Society for Radiation Oncology.

PMCID: PMC4099987
PMID: 24522270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 11;14:82. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-82.

Elevated expression of prostate cancer-associated genes is linked to
down-regulation of microRNAs.

Erdmann K(1), Kaulke K, Thomae C, Huebner D, Sergon M, Froehner M, Wirth MP,
Fuessel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, Fetscherstrasse 
74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. kati.erdmann@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests that the prostate cancer (PCa)-specific
up-regulation of certain genes such as AMACR, EZH2, PSGR, PSMA and TRPM8 could be
associated with an aberrant expression of non-coding microRNAs (miRNA).
METHODS: In silico analyses were used to search for miRNAs being putative
regulators of PCa-associated genes. The expression of nine selected miRNAs
(hsa-miR-101, -138, -186, -224, -26a, -26b, -374a, -410, -660) as well as of the 
aforementioned PCa-associated genes was analyzed by quantitative PCR using 50
malignant (Tu) and matched non-malignant (Tf) tissue samples from prostatectomy
specimens as well as 30 samples from patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH). Then, correlations between paired miRNA and target gene expression levels 
were analyzed. Furthermore, the effect of exogenously administered miR-26a on
selected target genes was determined by quantitative PCR and Western Blot in
various PCa cell lines. A luciferase reporter assay was used for target
validation.
RESULTS: The expression of all selected miRNAs was decreased in PCa tissue
samples compared to either control group (Tu vs Tf: -1.35 to -5.61-fold; Tu vs
BPH: -1.17 to -5.49-fold). The down-regulation of most miRNAs inversely
correlated with an up-regulation of their putative target genes with Spearman
correlation coefficients ranging from -0.107 to -0.551. MiR-186 showed a
significantly diminished expression in patients with non-organ confined PCa and
initial metastases. Furthermore, over-expression of miR-26a reduced the mRNA and 
protein expression of its potential target gene AMACR in vitro. Using the
luciferase reporter assay AMACR was validated as new target for miR-26a.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study indicate that the expression of specific 
miRNAs is decreased in PCa and inversely correlates with the up-regulation of
their putative target genes. Consequently, miRNAs could contribute to oncogenesis
and progression of PCa via an altered miRNA-target gene-interaction.

PMCID: PMC3923006
PMID: 24517338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 25;111(8):3098-103. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1308953111. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

EZH2 expands breast stem cells through activation of NOTCH1 signaling.

Gonzalez ME(1), Moore HM, Li X, Toy KA, Huang W, Sabel MS, Kidwell KM, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

Breast cancer is the second-leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women, but 
the details of how it begins remain elusive. Increasing evidence supports the
association of aggressive triple-negative (TN) breast cancer with heightened
expression of the Polycomb group protein Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) and
increased tumor-initiating cells (TICs). However, mechanistic links between EZH2 
and TICs are unclear, and direct demonstration of a tumorigenic function of EZH2 
in vivo is lacking. Here, we identify an unrecognized EZH2/NOTCH1 axis that
controls breast TICs in TN breast carcinomas. EZH2 overexpression increases
NOTCH1 expression and signaling, and inhibition of NOTCH1 activity prevents
EZH2-mediated stem cell expansion in nontumorigenic breast cells. We uncover a
unique role of EZH2 in activating, rather than repressing, NOTCH1 signaling
through binding to the NOTCH1 promoter in TN breast cancer cells. EZH2 binding is
independent of its catalytic histone H3 lysine 27 methyltransferase activity and 
of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 but corresponds instead to transcriptional
activation marks. In vivo, EZH2 knockdown decreases the onset and volume of
xenografts derived from TN breast TICs. Conversely, transgenic EZH2
overexpression accelerates mammary tumor initiation and increases NOTCH1
activation in mouse mammary tumor virus-neu mice. Consonant with these findings, 
in clinical samples, high levels of EZH2 are significantly associated with
activated NOTCH1 protein and increased TICs in TN invasive carcinomas. These data
reveal a functional and mechanistic link between EZH2 levels, NOTCH1 signaling
activation, and TICs, and provide previously unidentified evidence that EZH2
enhances breast cancer initiation.

PMCID: PMC3939892
PMID: 24516139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Epigenetics. 2014 May;9(5):704-17. doi: 10.4161/epi.28006. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Deregulation of an imprinted gene network in prostate cancer.

Ribarska T(1), Goering W(1), Droop J(1), Bastian KM(1), Ingenwerth M(2), Schulz
WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Department of Urology; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany;
Institute for Anatomy II; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany.

Multiple epigenetic alterations contribute to prostate cancer progression by
deregulating gene expression. Epigenetic mechanisms, especially differential DNA 
methylation at imprinting control regions (termed DMRs), normally ensure the
exclusive expression of imprinted genes from one specific parental allele. We
therefore wondered to which extent imprinted genes become deregulated in prostate
cancer and, if so, whether deregulation is due to altered DNA methylation at
DMRs. Therefore, we selected presumptive deregulated imprinted genes from a
previously conducted in silico analysis and from the literature and analyzed
their expression in prostate cancer tissues by qRT-PCR. We found significantly
diminished expression of PLAGL1/ZAC1, MEG3, NDN, CDKN1C, IGF2, and H19, while
LIT1 was significantly overexpressed. The PPP1R9A gene, which is imprinted in
selected tissues only, was strongly overexpressed, but was expressed
biallelically in benign and cancerous prostatic tissues. Expression of many of
these genes was strongly correlated, suggesting co-regulation, as in an imprinted
gene network (IGN) reported in mice. Deregulation of the network genes also
correlated with EZH2 and HOXC6 overexpression. Pyrosequencing analysis of all
relevant DMRs revealed generally stable DNA methylation between benign and
cancerous prostatic tissues, but frequent hypo- and hyper-methylation was
observed at the H19 DMR in both benign and cancerous tissues. Re-expression of
the ZAC1 transcription factor induced H19, CDKN1C and IGF2, supporting its
function as a nodal regulator of the IGN. Our results indicate that a group of
imprinted genes are coordinately deregulated in prostate cancers, independently
of DNA methylation changes.

PMCID: PMC4063830
PMID: 24513574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jun;99(6):E962-70. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3147. Epub 
2014 Feb 10.

PRIMA-1, a mutant p53 reactivator, restores the sensitivity of TP53 mutant-type
thyroid cancer cells to the histone methylation inhibitor 3-Deazaneplanocin A.

Cui B(1), Yang Q, Guan H, Shi B, Hou P, Ji M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology (B.C., Q.Y., B.S., P.H.) and Center for
Translational Medicine (M.J.), The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiao tong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, the People's Republic of China; and 
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism (H.G.), The First Affiliated Hospital 
of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, the People's Republic of China.

CONTEXT: 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) depletes enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2),
a core component of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is frequently
overexpressed in human cancers. DZNep exhibits promising antitumor activity, and 
its responsiveness in cancer cells is determined by certain genetic factors.
OBJECTIVES: Our aims were (1) to test the therapeutic potential of DZNep and
explore the genetic determinants affecting the DZNep response in thyroid cancer
cells and (2) to test the combined therapeutic effect of DZNep and PRIMA-1, a
mutant p53 reactivator, in thyroid cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We evaluated the phenotypic effects of DZNep in thyroid
cancer cells and examined the effects of DZNep alone or in combination with
PRIMA-1 on cell proliferation, the cell cycle, apoptosis, and xenograft tumor
growth.
RESULTS: DZNep induced enhancer of zeste homolog 2 depletion and trimethylated
lysine 27 in H3 histone (H3K27me3) mark reduction in all thyroid cancer cells;
however, only TP53 wild-type cells exhibited growth inhibition with DZNep
treatment. In these cells, DZNep caused p53 protein accumulation through
up-regulation of USP10 expression, resulting in activation of the p53 pathway,
contributing to inhibition of cell growth. Conversely, TP53 mutant-type cells
were resistant to DZNep. Strikingly, the combination of DZNep with PRIMA-1
restored the sensitivity of TP53 mutant-type cells to DZNep. A similar antitumor 
effect of DZNep and PRIMA-1 alone or in combination was also seen in xenograft
tumor models.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that DZNep responsiveness was strongly
associated with TP53 genomic status in thyroid cancer cells. Reactivation of p53 
restored the sensitivity of TP53 mutant-type cells to DZNep. Thus, a combined
therapeutic strategy may be effective in treating thyroid cancer cells (or
patients) harboring mutant p53.

PMID: 24512488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Gastric Cancer. 2013 Dec;13(4):232-41. doi: 10.5230/jgc.2013.13.4.232. Epub
2013 Dec 31.

Gastrokine 1 expression in the human gastric mucosa is closely associated with
the degree of gastritis and DNA methylation.

Choi WS(1), Seo HS(2), Song KY(2), Yoon JH(1), Kim O(1), Nam SW(1), Lee JY(1),
Park WS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Catholic University of Korea, School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of General Surgery, The Catholic University of Korea,
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Gastrokine 1 plays an important role in gastric mucosal defense.
Additionally, the Gastrokine 1-miR-185-DNMT1 axis has been shown to suppress
gastric carcinogenesis through regulation of epigenetic alteration. Here, we
investigated the effects of Gastrokine 1 on DNA methylation and gastritis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of Gastrokine 1, DNMT1, EZH2, and c-Myc
proteins, and the presence of Helicobacter pylori CagA protein were determined in
55 non-neoplastic gastric mucosal tissue samples by western blot analysis. The
CpG island methylation phenotype was also examined using six markers (p16, hMLH1,
CDH1, MINT1, MINT2 and MINT31) by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction.
Histological gastritis was assessed according to the updated Sydney
classification system.
RESULTS: Reduced Gastrokine 1 expression was found in 20 of the 55 (36.4%)
gastric mucosal tissue samples and was closely associated with miR-185
expression. The Gastrokine 1 expression level was inversely correlated with that 
of DNMT1, EZH2, and c-Myc, and closely associated with the degree of gastritis.
The H. pylori CagA protein was detected in 26 of the 55 (47.3%) gastric mucosal
tissues and was positively associated with the expression of DNMT1, EZH2, and
c-Myc. In addition, 30 (54.5%) and 23 (41.9%) of the gastric mucosal tissues
could be classified as CpG island methylation phenotype-low and CpG island
methylation phenotype-high, respectively. Reduced expression of Gastrokine 1 and 
miR-185, and increased expression of DNMT1, EZH2, and c-Myc were detected in the 
CpG island methylation phenotype-high gastric mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Gastrokine 1 has a crucial role in gastric inflammation and DNA
methylation in gastric mucosa.

PMCID: PMC3915185
PMID: 24511419  [PubMed]


266. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2013 Dec;26(4):355-64. doi:
10.1016/j.beha.2014.01.001. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

Somatic mutations and epigenetic abnormalities in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Itzykson R(1), Kosmider O(2), Fenaux P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de 
Paris (AP-HP), France; Université Paris 7, France; INSERM Unit U944, Hôpital St
Louis, Paris, France. (2)Laboratoire d'hématologie, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance
Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), France; Université Paris 5, France.
(3)Hematology Department, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de 
Paris (AP-HP), France; Université Paris 7, France; INSERM UMR-S-940, Hôpital St
Louis, Paris, France. Electronic address: pierre.fenaux@sls.aphp.fr.

During many years, very limited data had been available on specific gene
mutations in MDS in particular due to the fact that balanced chromosomal
translocations (which have allowed to discover many "leukemia" genes) are very
rare in MDS, while chromosomal deletions are generally very large, making it
difficult to identify genes of interest. Recently, the advent of next generation 
sequencing (NGS) techniques has helped identify somatic gene mutations in 75-80% 
of MDS, that cluster mainly in four functional groups, i.e. cytokine signaling
(RAS genes), DNA methylation, (TET2, IDH1/2, DNMT3a genes) histone modifications 
(ASXL1 and EZH2 genes), and spliceosome (SF3B1 and SRSF2 genes) along with
mutations of RUNX1 and TP 53 genes. Most of those mutations, except SF3B1 and
TET2 mutations, are associated with an overall poorer prognosis, while some gene 
mutations (mainly TET2 mutation), may be associated to better response to
hypomethylating agents. The frequent mutations of epigenetic modulators in MDS
appear to largely contribute to the importance of epigenetic deregulation (in
particular gene hypermethylation and histone deacetylation) in MDS progression,
and may account at least partially for the efficacy of hypomethylating agents in 
the treatment of MDS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24507812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):351-62.

ERG induces a mesenchymal-like state associated with chemoresistance in leukemia 
cells.

Mochmann LH(1), Neumann M, von der Heide EK, Nowak V, Kühl AA, Ortiz-Tanchez J,
Bock J, Hofmann WK, Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Medicine Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Overexpression of the oncogene ERG (ETS-related gene) is an adverse prognostic
factor in acute myeloid and T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (AML and T-ALL). We
hypothesize that ERG overexpression is associated with primary drug resistance
thereby influencing the outcome in leukemia. We previously reported a cell-line
based model of ERG overexpression which induced a potentially chemo-resistant
spindle shape cell type. Herein, we report a specific transcriptional gene
signature for the observed spindle shaped morphology. Genes significantly
over-expressed after ERG induction strongly resembled adhesive mesenchymal-like
genes that included integrins (ITGA10, ITGB5, ITGB3, ITGA2B), CD44, and CD24.
Interestingly, the mesenchymal-like signature was accompanied by the repression
of DNA chromatin remodeling and DNA repair genes, such as CHEK1, EZH2, SUZ12, and
DNMT3a. The ERG-induced mesenchymal-like signature positively correlated with
TMPRSS2-ERG prostate tissues and invasive breast cancer mRNA expression datasets 
reflecting a general ERG-driven pattern of malignancy. Furthermore, inhibitors
modulating ERG druggable pathways WNT, PKC, and AKT, and chemotherapeutic agent
cytarabine revealed ERG-induced drug resistance. In particular, PKC412 treatment 
enhanced proliferative rates and promoted spindle shape formation in ERG-induced 
cells. Nilotinib and dasatinib were effective at abolishing ERG-induced cells.
Moreover, ERG overexpression also led to an increase in double strand breaks.
This report provides mechanistic clues into ERG-driven drug resistance in the
poor prognostic group of high ERG expressers, provides insight to improved drug
targeted therapies, and provides novel markers for a mesenchymal-like state in
acute leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3964212
PMID: 24504051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4466-79. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03326-13. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Short-chain fatty acids from periodontal pathogens suppress histone deacetylases,
EZH2, and SUV39H1 to promote Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus replication.

Yu X(1), Shahir AM, Sha J, Feng Z, Eapen B, Nithianantham S, Das B, Karn J,
Weinberg A, Bissada NF, Ye F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Periodontal pathogens such as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Fusobacterium
nucleatum produce five different short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) as metabolic
by-products. We detect significantly higher levels of SCFAs in the saliva of
patients with severe periodontal disease. The different SCFAs stimulate lytic
gene expression of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) dose
dependently and synergistically. SCFAs inhibit class-1/2 histone deacetylases
(HDACs) and downregulate expression of silent information regulator-1 (SIRT1).
SCFAs also downregulate expression of enhancer of zeste homolog2 (EZH2) and
suppressor of variegation 3-9 homolog1 (SUV39H1), which are two histone N-lysine 
methyltransferases (HLMTs). By suppressing the different components of host
epigenetic regulatory machinery, SCFAs increase histone acetylation and decrease 
repressive histone trimethylations to transactivate the viral chromatin. These
new findings provide mechanistic support that SCFAs from periodontal pathogens
stimulate KSHV replication and infection in the oral cavity and are potential
risk factors for development of oral Kaposi's sarcoma (KS).IMPORTANCE: About 20% 
of KS patients develop KS lesions first in the oral cavity, while other patients 
never develop oral KS. It is not known if the oral microenvironment plays a role 
in oral KS tumor development. In this work, we demonstrate that a group of
metabolic by-products, namely, short-chain fatty acids, from bacteria that cause 
periodontal disease promote lytic replication of KSHV, the etiological agent
associated with KS. These new findings provide mechanistic support that
periodontal pathogens create a unique microenvironment in the oral cavity that
contributes to KSHV replication and development of oral KS.

PMCID: PMC3993761
PMID: 24501407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):634-43. doi: 10.4161/epi.27957. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Overexpression of MYC and EZH2 cooperates to epigenetically silence MST1
expression.

Kuser-Abali G(1), Alptekin A(1), Cinar B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology; Biomedical
Sciences, Division of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics; The Uro-Oncology Program; 
Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute; Cedars-Sinai Medical Center; Los
Angeles, CA USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology; 
Biomedical Sciences, Division of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics; The
Uro-Oncology Program; Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute; Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center; Los Angeles, CA USA; Department of Medicine; David Geffen School 
of Medicine; University of California Los Angeles; Los Angeles, CA USA.

Hippo-like MST1 protein kinase regulates cell growth, organ size, and
carcinogenesis. Reduction or loss of MST1 expression is implicated in poor cancer
prognosis. However, the mechanism leading to MST1 silencing remains elusive.
Here, we report that both MYC and EZH2 function as potent suppressors of MST1
expression in human prostate cancer cells. We demonstrated that concurrent
overexpression of MYC and EZH2 correlated with the reduction or loss of MST1
expression, as shown by RT-qPCR and immunoblotting. Methylation sensitive PCR and
bisulfite genomic DNA sequencing showed that DNA methylation caused MST1
silencing. Pharmacologic and RNAi experiments revealed that MYC and EZH2 silenced
MST1 expression by inhibiting its promoter activity, and that EZH2 was a mediator
of the MYC-induced silencing of MST1. In addition, MYC contributed to MST1
silencing by partly inhibiting the expression of microRNA-26a/b, a negative
regulator of EZH2. As shown by ChIP assays, EZH2-induced DNA methylation and
H3K27me3 modification, which was accompanied by a reduced H3K4me3 mark and RNA
polymerase II occupancy on the MST1 promoter CpG region, were the underlying
cause of MST1 silencing. Moreover, potent pharmacologic inhibitors of MYC or EZH2
suppressed prostate cancer cell growth in vitro, and the knockdown of MST1 caused
cells' resistance to MYC and EZH2 inhibitor-induced growth retardation. These
findings indicate that MYC, in concert with EZH2, epigenetically attenuates MST1 
expression and suggest that the loss of MST1/Hippo functions is critical for the 
MYC or EZH2 mediation of cancer cell survival.

PMCID: PMC4121373
PMID: 24499724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):867-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.094342.

Ezh2 is required for neural crest-derived cartilage and bone formation.

Schwarz D(1), Varum S, Zemke M, Schöler A, Baggiolini A, Draganova K, Koseki H,
Schübeler D, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

The emergence of craniofacial skeletal elements, and of the jaw in particular,
was a crucial step in the evolution of higher vertebrates. Most facial bones and 
cartilage are generated during embryonic development by cranial neural crest
cells, while an osteochondrogenic fate is suppressed in more posterior neural
crest cells. Key players in this process are Hox genes, which suppress
osteochondrogenesis in posterior neural crest derivatives. How this specific
pattern of osteochondrogenic competence is achieved remains to be elucidated.
Here we demonstrate that Hox gene expression and osteochondrogenesis are
controlled by epigenetic mechanisms. Ezh2, which is a component of polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), catalyzes trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone 3
(H3K27me3), thereby functioning as transcriptional repressor of target genes.
Conditional inactivation of Ezh2 does not interfere with localization of neural
crest cells to their target structures, neural development, cell cycle
progression or cell survival. However, loss of Ezh2 results in massive
derepression of Hox genes in neural crest cells that are usually devoid of Hox
gene expression. Accordingly, craniofacial bone and cartilage formation is fully 
prevented in Ezh2 conditional knockout mice. Our data indicate that craniofacial 
skeleton formation in higher vertebrates is crucially dependent on epigenetic
regulation that keeps in check inhibitors of an osteochondrogenic differentiation
program.

PMID: 24496623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(4):516-27. doi: 10.4161/cc.27921. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Roles of enhancer of zeste homolog 2: from skeletal muscle differentiation to
rhabdomyosarcoma carcinogenesis.

Marchesi I(1), Giordano A(2), Bagella L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences; Division of Biochemistry and National
Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems; University of Sassari; Sassari, Italy.
(2)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine; Center for
Biotechnology; College of Science and Technology; Temple University;
Philadelphia, PA USA; Human Pathology and Oncology Department; University of
Siena; Siena, Italy. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences; Division of
Biochemistry and National Institute of Biostructures and Biosystems; University
of Sassari; Sassari, Italy; Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine; Center for Biotechnology; College of Science and Technology; Temple
University; Philadelphia, PA USA.

Polycomb group proteins represent a global silencing system involved in embryonic
development and stem-cell maintenance that regulates the transition from
proliferation to differentiation during organogenesis. Two main complexes have
been discovered: the polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 1 and 2, able to induce
gene silencing by a synergistic mechanism or independently by each other.
Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), the catalytic subunit of PRC2, represses gene
transcription through the tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27. EZH2
deregulation is frequently associated with tumorigenesis, metastatic character,
and poor prognosis in various cancer types. This review explores the role of EZH2
in normal development and in carcinogenesis. We reviewed the polycomb-mediated
silencing mechanisms, the regulation of EZH2 activity and its recruitment to
target genes. We also analyzed the role of EZH2 in normal muscle differentiation 
and in rhabdomyosarcoma, considering EZH2 blockade as a new strategy for
developing specific therapies.

PMID: 24496329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 21;289(12):8121-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.548651. Epub 2014
Feb 3.

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an inhibitor of S-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methyltransferase, promotes erythroid differentiation.

Fujiwara T(1), Saitoh H, Inoue A, Kobayashi M, Okitsu Y, Katsuoka Y, Fukuhara N, 
Onishi Y, Ishizawa K, Ichinohasama R, Harigae H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Hematology and Rheumatology.

EZH2, a core component of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), plays a role in
transcriptional repression through histone H3 Lys-27 trimethylation and is
involved in various biological processes, including hematopoiesis. It is well
known that 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an inhibitor of
S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methyltransferase that targets the degradation of 
EZH2, preferentially induces apoptosis in various hematological malignancies,
suggesting that EZH2 may be a new target for epigenetic treatment. Because PRC2
participates in epigenetic silencing of a subset of GATA-1 target genes during
erythroid differentiation, inhibition of EZH2 may influence erythropoiesis. To
explore this possibility, we evaluated the impact of DZNep on erythropoiesis.
DZNep treatment significantly induced erythroid differentiation of K562 cells, as
assessed by benzidine staining and quantitative RT-PCR analysis for
representative erythroid-related genes, including globins. When we evaluated the 
effects of DZNep in human primary erythroblasts derived from cord blood
CD34-positive cells, the treatment significantly induced erythroid-related genes,
as observed in K562 cells, suggesting that DZNep induces erythroid
differentiation. Unexpectedly, siRNA-mediated EZH2 knockdown had no significant
effect on the expression of erythroid-related genes. Transcriptional profiling of
DZNep-treated K562 cells revealed marked up-regulation of SLC4A1 and EPB42,
previously reported as representative targets of the transcriptional corepressor 
ETO2. In addition, DZNep treatment reduced the protein level of ETO2. These data 
suggest that erythroid differentiation by DZNep may not be directly related to
EZH2 inhibition but may be partly associated with reduced protein level of
hematopoietic corepressor ETO2. These data provide a better understanding of the 
mechanism of action of DZNep, which may be exploited for therapeutic applications
for hematological diseases, including anemia.

PMCID: PMC3961643
PMID: 24492606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):477-82. doi: 10.4161/epi.27869. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Synergistic chromatin repression of the tumor suppressor gene RARB in human
prostate cancers.

Moison C(1), Assemat F(2), Daunay A(3), Tost J(4), Guieysse-Peugeot AL(5),
Arimondo PB(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-Pierre Fabre USR3388; Epigenetic Targeting of Cancer (ETaC); Toulouse,
France; MNHN CNRS UMR7196; Paris, France; INSERM U565; Paris, France; Université 
Pierre et Marie Curie; Paris, France. (2)CNRS-Pierre Fabre USR3388; Epigenetic
Targeting of Cancer (ETaC); Toulouse, France. (3)Laboratory for Functional
Genomics; Fondation Jean Dausset - CEPH; Paris, France. (4)Laboratory for
Functional Genomics; Fondation Jean Dausset - CEPH; Paris, France; Laboratory for
Epigenetics and Environment; Centre National de Génotypage; CEA-Institut de
Génomique; Evry, France. (5)MNHN CNRS UMR7196; Paris, France; INSERM U565; Paris,
France.

DNA methylation and polycomb proteins are well-known mediators of epigenetic
silencing in mammalian cells. Usually described as mutually exclusive, this
statement is today controversial and recent in vitro studies suggest the
co-existence of both repressor systems. We addressed this issue in the study of
Retinoic Acid Receptor ß (RARß), a tumor suppressor gene frequently silenced in
prostate cancer. We found that the RARß promoter is hypermethylated in all
studied prostate tumors and methylation levels are positively correlated with
H3K27me3 enrichments. Thus, by using bisulfite conversion and pyrosequencing of
immunoprecipitated H3K27me3 chromatin, we demonstrated that DNA methylation and
polycomb repression co-exist in vivo at this locus. We found this repressive
association in 6/6 patient tumor samples of different Gleason score, suggesting a
strong interplay of DNA methylation and EZH2 to silence RARß during prostate
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4121358
PMID: 24492483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;74(7):2050-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1659. Epub
2014 Feb 3.

CBP loss cooperates with PTEN haploinsufficiency to drive prostate cancer:
implications for epigenetic therapy.

Ding L(1), Chen S, Liu P, Pan Y, Zhong J, Regan KM, Wang L, Yu C, Rizzardi A,
Cheng L, Zhang J, Schmechel SC, Cheville JC, Van Deursen J, Tindall DJ, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Urology, and Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center,
and Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester; Masonic Cancer Center; Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Astar Biotech LLC,
Richmond, Virginia; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana; and College of Life
Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.

Despite the high incidence and mortality of prostate cancer, the etiology of this
disease is not fully understood. In this study, we develop functional evidence
for CBP and PTEN interaction in prostate cancer based on findings of their
correlate expression in the human disease. Cbp(pc-/-);Pten(pc+/-) mice exhibited 
higher cell proliferation in the prostate and an early onset of high-grade
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Levels of EZH2 methyltransferase were
increased along with its Thr350 phosphorylation in both mouse Cbp(-/-); Pten(+/-)
and human prostate cancer cells. CBP loss and PTEN deficiency cooperated to
trigger a switch from K27-acetylated histone H3 to K27-trimethylated bulk
histones in a manner associated with decreased expression of the growth
inhibitory EZH2 target genes DAB2IP, p27(KIP1), and p21(CIP1). Conversely,
treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat reversed this
switch, in a manner associated with tumor suppression in Cbp(pc-/-);Pten(pc+/-)
mice. Our findings show how CBP and PTEN interact to mediate tumor suppression in
the prostate, establishing a central role for histone modification in the
etiology of prostate cancer and providing a rationale for clinical evaluation of 
epigenetic-targeted therapy in patients with prostate cancer.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3975662
PMID: 24491799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Feb;171(3):618-35. doi: 10.1111/bph.12501.

Methyl jasmonate sensitizes human bladder cancer cells to gambogic acid-induced
apoptosis through down-regulation of EZH2 expression by miR-101.

Wang Y(1), Xiang W, Wang M, Huang T, Xiao X, Wang L, Tao D, Dong L, Zeng F, Jiang
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Gambogic acid (GA) and methyl jasmonate (MJ) are
increasingly being recognized as novel natural anticancer compounds. Here, we
investigated the antitumour effects of GA in combination with MJ on human bladder
cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Cell viability was detected by cell counting kit-8 assay. 
Cell apoptosis was assessed by Hoechst 33258 staining and flow cytometry. Protein
levels were determined by immunoblotting and expressions of mRNA and miRNAs by
RT-PCR. Differential expressions of a group of downstream genes were identified
using microarray analysis.
KEY RESULTS: MJ significantly sensitized bladder cancer cells to GA-induced
growth inhibition and apoptosis while sparing normal fibroblasts. MJ enhanced
GA-induced activation of caspase-3 and caspase-9, and down-regulated the
expression of XIAP. Furthermore, treatment of bladder cancer cells with a
combination of GA and MJ induced synergistic inhibition of the enhancer of zeste 
homologue 2 (EZH2) expression, whereas miR-101 expression was up-regulated.
Conversely, knockdown of miR-101 restored this decreased expression of EZH2 and
suppressed the inhibitory effect of GA and MJ on the growth of bladder cancer
cells. Microarray analysis showed that genes closely associated with bladder
cancer development were significantly down-regulated by GA and MJ. In a s.c.
xenograft mouse model of human bladder carcinoma, the combination of GA and MJ
exerted an increased antitumour effect compared with GA alone.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: MJ sensitizes bladder cancer cells to GA-induced
apoptosis by down-regulating the expression of EZH2 induced by miR-101. Thus, the
combination of selective anti-cancer agents MJ and GA could provide a novel
strategy for treating human bladder cancer.

© 2013 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3969076
PMID: 24490857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Med Oncol. 2014 Mar;31(3):874. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0874-y. Epub 2014 Feb 2.

Association between EZH2 polymorphisms and colorectal cancer risk in Han Chinese 
population.

Wang J(1), Ma ZB, Li K, Guo GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical
College, No. 661, Yellow-River Second Street, Binzhou, 256600, China.

The aim of this study is to investigate the associations between EZH2 gene
polymorphisms and colorectal cancer (CRC) risk. We undertook a case-control study
to analyze three EZH2 polymorphisms (148505302C>T, 2110+6A>C and 626-394T>C) in
an Han Chinese population, by extraction of genomic DNA from the peripheral blood
of 512 patients with CRC and 546 control participants, and performed EZH2
genotyping using DNA sequencing. The obtained results indicated that overall, no 
statistically significant association was observed in 2,110+6A>C. Nevertheless,
148505302C>T genotype demonstrated a protective effect in CRCs (P=0.014; odds
ratio (OR) 0.777, CI 95%:0.647-0.933). Furthermore, 148505302 T allele CRC was
more significantly common in patients with tumor size of <4 cm than C allele CRC 
and in cases of good differentiation and lower advanced pathological stage.
However, 626-394T>C genotype was at increased risk of CRCs (P<0.001; odds ratio
(OR) 1.457, CI 95%:1.160-1.829). Moreover, 626-394C/C genotype CRCs were more
significantly common in patients with tumor size of >4 cm than T allele CRC and
in cases of poor differentiation and lower advanced pathological stage. In
conclusion, polymorphism in 626-394T>C was observed to be associated with
susceptibility of CRC. However, 148505302C>T polymorphism indicated to play a
protective role in susceptibility to CRC. Nevertheless, further investigation
with a larger sample size is needed to support our results.

PMID: 24488618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Mar;38(3):364-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000125.

Immunostaining for polycomb group protein EZH2 and senescent marker p16INK4a may 
be useful to differentiate cholangiolocellular carcinoma from ductular reaction
and bile duct adenoma.

Sasaki M(1), Matsubara T, Kakuda Y, Sato Y, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma arising in chronic advanced liver disease
sometimes contains a component of cholangiolocellular carcinoma. Bile duct
adenoma, a benign tumor/tumorous lesion and ductular reaction, is also composed
of bile ductular cells, and the differential diagnosis is sometimes difficult. We
have previously reported that cholangiolocellular carcinoma showed overexpression
of a polycomb group protein EZH2, which participates in bypass/escape from
cellular senescence during carcinogenesis. In contrast, the ductular reaction
showed high expression of senescence-associated p16(INK4a). In this study, we
examined whether immunostaining for EZH2 and p16(INK4a) is useful for
differential diagnosis among cholangiolocellular carcinoma, bile duct adenoma,
and ductular reactions. Subjects included 33 patients with intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma and combined hepatocellular-cholangiocarcinoma with components
of cholangiolocellular carcinoma and 16 patients with bile duct adenoma. The
expressions of EZH2 and p16(INK4a) were examined immunohistochemically. The
expression of EZH2 was seen in all cases of cholangiolocellular carcinomas, but
it was not observed in bile duct adenomas and ductular reactions, which were seen
around carcinomas in 80% of cases. The extensive expression of p16(INK4a) was
seen only in 4 cases of cholangiolocellular carcinomas (12%). In contrast, the
expression of p16(INK4a) was seen in 13 cases (81%) of bile duct adenomas and in 
all cases of ductular reactions. The borderline between the component of
cholangiolocellular carcinoma and the surrounding ductular reaction was clearly
highlighted by the reverse expression pattern of EZH2 and p16(INK4a) in 69% of
cases. In conclusion, immunostaining for EZH2 and p16(INK4a) may be useful for
differential diagnosis among cholangiolocellular carcinomas, bile duct adenomas, 
and ductular reactions.

PMID: 24487593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jun;54(6):485-99. doi: 10.1002/mc.22121. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Epigenetic induction of tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-3 by green
tea polyphenols in breast cancer cells.

Deb G(1), Thakur VS, Limaye AM, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio;
Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam,
India.

Aberrant epigenetic silencing of the tissue inhibitor of matrix
metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) gene that negatively regulates matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) activity has been implicated in the pathogenesis and
metastasis of breast cancer. In the present study, we demonstrate that green tea 
polyphenols (GTP) and its major constituent, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
mediate epigenetic induction of TIMP-3 levels and play a key role in suppressing 
invasiveness and gelatinolytic activity of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in breast cancer
cells. Treatment of MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells with 20 µM EGCG and 
10 µg/mL GTP for 72 h significantly induces TIMP-3 mRNA and protein levels.
Interestingly, investigations into the molecular mechanism revealed that TIMP-3
repression in breast cancer cells is mediated by epigenetic silencing
mechanism(s) involving increased activity of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) and class I histone deacetylases (HDACs), independent of promoter DNA
hypermethylation. Treatment of breast cancer cells with GTP and EGCG
significantly reduced EZH2 and class I HDAC protein levels. Furthermore,
transcriptional activation of TIMP-3 was found to be associated with decreased
EZH2 localization and H3K27 trimethylation enrichment at the TIMP-3 promoter with
a concomitant increase in histone H3K9/18 acetylation. Our findings highlight
TIMP-3 induction as a key epigenetic event modulated by GTPs in restoring the
MMP:TIMP balance to delay breast cancer progression and invasion.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24481780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 28;111(4):1355-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1323226111. Epub 2014 Jan 13.

O-GlcNAcylation regulates EZH2 protein stability and function.

Chu CS(1), Lo PW, Yeh YH, Hsu PH, Peng SH, Teng YC, Kang ML, Wong CH, Juan LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) transferase (OGT) is the only known enzyme 
that catalyzes the O-GlcNAcylation of proteins at the Ser or Thr side chain
hydroxyl group. OGT participates in transcriptional and epigenetic regulation,
and dysregulation of OGT has been implicated in diseases such as cancer. However,
the underlying mechanism is largely unknown. Here we show that OGT is required
for the trimethylation of histone 3 at K27 to form the product H3K27me3, a
process catalyzed by the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) in the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). H3K27me3 is one of the most
important histone modifications to mark the transcriptionally silenced chromatin.
We found that the level of H3K27me3, but not other H3 methylation products, was
greatly reduced upon OGT depletion. OGT knockdown specifically down-regulated the
protein stability of EZH2, without altering the levels of H3K27 demethylases UTX 
and JMJD3, and disrupted the integrity of the PRC2 complex. Furthermore, the
interaction of OGT and EZH2/PRC2 was detected by coimmunoprecipitation and
cosedimentation experiments. Importantly, we identified that serine 75 is the
site for EZH2 O-GlcNAcylation, and the EZH2 mutant S75A exhibited reduction in
stability. Finally, microarray and ChIP analysis have characterized a specific
subset of potential tumor suppressor genes subject to repression via the OGT-EZH2
axis. Together these results indicate that OGT-mediated O-GlcNAcylation at S75
stabilizes EZH2 and hence facilitates the formation of H3K27me3. The study not
only uncovers a functional posttranslational modification of EZH2 but also
reveals a unique epigenetic role of OGT in regulating histone methylation.

PMCID: PMC3910655
PMID: 24474760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Feb 11;111(6):2235-40. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1312951111. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Spatial separation of Xist RNA and polycomb proteins revealed by superresolution 
microscopy.

Cerase A(1), Smeets D, Tang YA, Gdula M, Kraus F, Spivakov M, Moindrot B, Leleu
M, Tattermusch A, Demmerle J, Nesterova TB, Green C, Otte AP, Schermelleh L,
Brockdorff N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, United
Kingdom.

In female mammals, one of the two X chromosomes is transcriptionally silenced to 
equalize X-linked gene dosage relative to XY males, a process termed X chromosome
inactivation. Mechanistically, this is thought to occur via directed recruitment 
of chromatin modifying factors by the master regulator, X-inactive specific
transcript (Xist) RNA, which localizes in cis along the entire length of the
chromosome. A well-studied example is the recruitment of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), for which there is evidence of a direct interaction involving
the PRC2 proteins Enhancer of zeste 2 (Ezh2) and Supressor of zeste 12 (Suz12)
and the A-repeat region located at the 5' end of Xist RNA. In this study, we have
analyzed Xist-mediated recruitment of PRC2 using two approaches, microarray-based
epigenomic mapping and superresolution 3D structured illumination microscopy.
Making use of an ES cell line carrying an inducible Xist transgene located on
mouse chromosome 17, we show that 24 h after synchronous induction of Xist
expression, acquired PRC2 binding sites map predominantly to gene-rich regions,
notably within gene bodies. Paradoxically, these new sites of PRC2 deposition do 
not correlate with Xist-mediated gene silencing. The 3D structured illumination
microscopy was performed to assess the relative localization of PRC2 proteins and
Xist RNA. Unexpectedly, we observed significant spatial separation and absence of
colocalization both in the inducible Xist transgene ES cell line and in normal XX
somatic cells. Our observations argue against direct interaction between Xist RNA
and PRC2 proteins and, as such, prompt a reappraisal of the mechanism for PRC2
recruitment in X chromosome inactivation.

PMCID: PMC3926064
PMID: 24469834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 5;34(6):741-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.604. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

PRC2-independent chromatin compaction and transcriptional repression in cancer.

Vallot C(1), Hérault A(1), Boyle S(2), Bickmore WA(3), Radvanyi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] CNRS, UMR 144 - Cell Biology Department, Institut Curie, Paris, France [2] 
Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris, France. (2)Chromosome and Gene
Expression Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. (3)1] Chromosome
and Gene Expression Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics
and Molecular Medicine at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK [2]
Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Unit, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

The silencing of large chromosomal regions by epigenetic mechanisms has been
reported to occur frequently in cancer. Epigenetic marks, such as histone
methylation and acetylation, are altered at these loci. However, the mechanisms
of formation of such aberrant gene clusters remain largely unknown. Here, we show
that, in cancer cells, the epigenetic remodeling of chromatin into hypoacetylated
domains covered with histone H3K27 trimethylation is paralleled by changes in
higher-order chromatin structures. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, we
demonstrate that regional epigenetic silencing corresponds to the establishment
of compact chromatin domains. We show that gene repression is tightly correlated 
to the state of chromatin compaction and not to the levels of H3K27me3-its
removal through the knockdown of EZH2 does not induce significant gene expression
nor chromatin decompaction. Moreover, transcription can occur with intact
high-H3K27me3 levels; treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors can relieve
chromatin compaction and gene repression, without altering H3K27me3 levels. Our
findings imply that compaction and subsequent repression of large chromatin
domains are not direct consequences of PRC2 deregulation in cancer cells. By
challenging the role of EZH2 in aberrant gene silencing in cancer, these findings
have therapeutical implications, notably for the choice of epigenetic drugs for
tumors with multiple regional epigenetic alterations.

PMID: 24469045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 22;34(4):445-54. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.571. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Oncogenic Y641 mutations in EZH2 prevent Jak2/ß-TrCP-mediated degradation.

Sahasrabuddhe AA(1), Chen X(1), Chung F(1), Velusamy T(1), Lim MS(1),
Elenitoba-Johnson KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.

EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) is a critical enzymatic subunit of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which trimethylates histone H3 (H3K27) to
mediate gene repression. Somatic mutations, overexpression and hyperactivation of
EZH2 have been implicated in the pathogenesis of several forms of cancer. In
particular, recurrent gain-of-function mutations targeting EZH2 Y641 occur most
frequently in follicular lymphoma and aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
and are associated with H3K27me3 hyperactivation, which contributes to lymphoma
pathogenesis. However, the post-translational mechanisms of EZH2 regulation are
not completely understood. Here we show that EZH2 is a novel interactor and
substrate of the SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase ß-TrCP (FBXW1). ß-TrCP ubiquitinates
EZH2 and Jak2-mediated phosphorylation on Y641 directs ß-TrCP-mediated EZH2
degradation. RNA interference-mediated silencing of ß-TrCP or inhibition of Jak2 
results in EZH2 stabilization with attendant increase in H3K27 trimethylation
activity. Importantly, the EZH2(Y641) mutants recurrently implicated in lymphoma 
pathogenesis are unable to bind ß-TrCP. Further, endogenous EZH2(Y641) mutants in
lymphoma cells exhibit increased EZH2 stability and H3K27me3 hyperactivity. Our
studies demonstrate that ß-TrCP has an important role in controlling H3K27
trimethylation activity and lymphoma pathogenesis by targeting EZH2 for
degradation.

PMID: 24469040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Blood. 2014 Apr 3;123(14):2157-60. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-11-536557. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Impact of mutational status on outcomes in myelofibrosis patients treated with
ruxolitinib in the COMFORT-II study.

Guglielmelli P(1), Biamonte F, Rotunno G, Artusi V, Artuso L, Bernardis I,
Tenedini E, Pieri L, Paoli C, Mannarelli C, Fjerza R, Rumi E, Stalbovskaya V,
Squires M, Cazzola M, Manfredini R, Harrison C, Tagliafico E, Vannucchi AM;
COMFORT-II Investigators; Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro Gruppo 
Italiano Malattie Mieloproliferative (AGIMM) Investigators.

Collaborators: Gisslinger H, Greil R, Rumpold H, Wolf D, Knoops L, Bosly A, De
Bock R, Delannoy A, Devos T, Van Droogenbroeck J, Van Eygen K, Zachee P, Demuynck
H, Theunissen K, Kiladjian J-, Cahn J-, Cambier N, Cassadevall N, Dupriez B,
Milpied N, Jourdan E, Leporrier M, Natarajan-Amé S, Récher C, Ribrag V, Vey N,
Aulitzky W, Novotny J, Kindler T, Koschmieder S, Le Coutre P, Niederwieser D,
Al-Ali H, Ottmann O, Scheid C, Sökler M, Lipka D, Barosi G, Passamonti F,
Gambacorti-Passerini C, Cilloni D, Vannucchi AM, Pieri L, Pungolino E, Schaap N, 
Kluin-Nelemans JC, Schouten H, te Boekhorst P, Wijermans P, Cervantes F,
Hernandez-Boluda J-, Ojeda E, Merup M, Johansson P, Harrison C, Green A, McMullin
M, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy;

The JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib produced significant reductions in
splenomegaly and symptomatic burden and improved survival in patients with
myelofibrosis (MF), irrespective of their JAK2 mutation status, in 2 phase III
studies against placebo (COMFORT-I) and best available therapy (COMFORT-II). We
performed a comprehensive mutation analysis to evaluate the impact of 14
MF-associated mutations on clinical outcomes in 166 patients included in
COMFORT-II. We found that responses in splenomegaly and symptoms, as well as the 
risk of developing ruxolitinib-associated anemia and thrombocytopenia, occurred
at similar frequencies across different mutation profiles. Ruxolitinib improved
survival independent of mutation profile and reduced the risk of death in
patients harboring a set of prognostically detrimental mutations (ASXL1, EZH2,
SRSF2, IDH1/2) with an hazard ratio of 0.57 (95% confidence interval: 0.30-1.08) 
vs best available therapy. These data indicate that clinical efficacy and
survival improvement may occur across different molecular subsets of patients
with MF treated with ruxolitinib.

PMID: 24458439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3127. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4127.

The central role of EED in the orchestration of polycomb group complexes.

Cao Q(1), Wang X(2), Zhao M(3), Yang R(3), Malik R(2), Qiao Y(2), Poliakov A(2), 
Yocum AK(4), Li Y(4), Chen W(5), Cao X(6), Jiang X(2), Dahiya A(4), Harris C(7), 
Feng FY(8), Kalantry S(7), Qin ZS(9), Dhanasekaran SM(2), Chinnaiyan AM(10).

Author information: 
(1)1] Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Department of Pathology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [3] Center for
Inflammation and Epigenetics, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA [4] Cancer Center, Houston Methodist Research Institute,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)1] Michigan Center for Translational Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia 30329, USA. (4)Michigan Center for Translational
Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(5)1] Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Department of Radiation Oncology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (6)1]
Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (8)1] Michigan Center for Translational Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2]
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [3] Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. (9)1] Department of
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30329, USA
[2] Center for Comprehensive Informatics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia
30329, USA. (10)1] Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA 
[3] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [4] Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [5] Department of
Urology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Polycomb repressive complexes 1 and 2 (PRC1 and 2) play a critical role in the
epigenetic regulation of transcription during cellular differentiation, stem cell
pluripotency and neoplastic progression. Here we show that the polycomb group
protein EED, a core component of PRC2, physically interacts with and functions as
part of PRC1. Components of PRC1 and PRC2 compete for EED binding. EED functions 
to recruit PRC1 to H3K27me3 loci and enhances PRC1-mediated H2A ubiquitin E3
ligase activity. Taken together, we suggest an integral role for EED as an
epigenetic exchange factor coordinating the activities of PRC1 and 2.

PMCID: PMC4073494
PMID: 24457600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Oncol Rep. 2014 Mar;31(3):1263-70. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.2989. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Downregulation of microRNA-26a is associated with metastatic potential and the
poor prognosis of osteosarcoma patients.

Song QC(1), Shi ZB(1), Zhang YT(1), Ji L(1), Wang KZ(1), Duan DP(2), Dang XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China. (2)Department of Orthopedics,
Shaanxi Provincial People's Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710068, P.R. China.

Accumulating evidence indicates that microRNAs are involved in multiple processes
in cancer development and progression. microRNA-26a (miR-26a) has been identified
as a tumor suppressor and its downregulation is associated with poor prognosis in
several types of human cancer. However, the specific function of miR-26a in
osteosarcoma remains unclear. In the present study, we found that the expression 
of miR-26a in osteosarcoma tissues and cell lines was much lower than that in the
normal controls, respectively. In addition, downregulation of miR-26a more
frequently occurred in osteosarcoma specimens with adverse clinical stage and
with the presence of distant metastasis. Moreover, multivariate survival analyses
demonstrated that loss of miR-26a is an independent prognostic factor for both
disease-free and overall survival in osteosarcoma. In addition, restoration of
miR-26a expression inhibited the invasion and migration in osteosarcoma cells,
and miR-26a directly inhibited enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression by
targeting its 3'-UTR. Moreover, EZH2 was upregulated and inversely correlated
with miR-26a expression in the osteosarcoma tissues. Thus, for the first time, we
provide convincing evidence that downregulation of miR-26a is associated with
tumor aggressiveness and tumor metastasis, and miR-26a inhibits cell migration
and invasion by targeting the EZH2 gene in osteosarcoma. Thus, miR-26a is an
independent prognostic marker for osteosarcoma patients.

PMID: 24452597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;15(2):78. doi: 10.1038/nrm3746.

Gene expression: methyltransferases 'talk' at histone H3.

Wrighton KH.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2014 Jan 23;53(2):277-89.

PMID: 24452467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Virchows Arch. 2014 Apr;464(4):463-71. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1541-6. Epub 2014 
Jan 21.

Clinicopathological and prognostic significance of EZH2 expression in upper
urinary tract carcinoma.

Hayashi A(1), Morikawa T, Kawai T, Kume H, Ishikawa S, Homma Y, Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.

Evidence suggests that overexpression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is 
associated with aggressive behavior in various cancers. However, the clinical,
pathological, and prognostic associations of EZH2 expression in the upper urinary
tract carcinoma have not been reported. This study aimed to investigate the
significance of EZH2 expression in the upper urinary tract carcinoma by
immunohistochemical analysis using a tissue microarray. High EZH2 expression was 
observed in 94 of 171 (55 %) cases and was significantly associated with several 
adverse prognostic factors, including sessile architecture, high histological
grade, presence of lymphovascular invasion, concomitant carcinoma in situ, higher
tumor stage, and higher Ki-67 expression (all P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). EZH2 expression status
in primary and metastatic lesions was concordant in all 13 cases examined.
Survival analyses were performed using the Kaplan-Meier method and multivariate
Cox proportional hazards regression models. High EZH2 expression was
significantly associated with a shorter metastasis-free survival (log-rank
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005; multivariate hazard ratio, 1.85; 95 % confidence interval, 0.93-3.71) 
and cancer-specific survival (log-rank P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006; multivariate hazard ratio,
3.08; 95 % confidence interval, 1.30-7.32) after nephroureterectomy. Our results 
suggest that EZH2 may serve as a novel prognostic biomarker and a potential
therapeutic target in upper urinary tract carcinoma.

PMID: 24446035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cancer J. 2014 Jan-Feb;20(1):61-5. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0000000000000013.

Genetics of myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Viny AD(1), Levine RL.

Author information: 
(1)From the Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY.

In the last decade, genomic studies have identified multiple recurrent somatic
mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs). Beginning with the discovery of
the JAK2 V617F mutation, multiple additional mutations have been found that
constitutively activate cell-signaling pathways, including MPL, CBL, and LNK.
Furthermore, several classes of epigenetic modifiers have also been identified,
in patients with MPN, revealing a requirement for mutations in other pathways to 
cooperate with JAK-STAT pathway mutations in MPN pathogenesis. Mutations in the
de novo DNA methylation protein, DNMT3A, demethylation machinery, TET2 and
related IDH1/2 production of oncometabolite 2-hydroxygluterate, and polycomb
complex proteins EZH2 and ASXL1 have opened new pathophysiologic clues into these
diseases. The prognostic relevance of these novel disease alleles remains an
important area of investigation, and clinical trials are currently underway to
determine if these findings represent tractable therapeutic targets, either
alone, or in combination with JAK2 inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3898518
PMID: 24445766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Jan 17;4:e177. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2013.74.

Dynamics of ASXL1 mutation and other associated genetic alterations during
disease progression in patients with primary myelodysplastic syndrome.

Chen TC(1), Hou HA(2), Chou WC(3), Tang JL(1), Kuo YY(4), Chen CY(1), Tseng
MH(1), Huang CF(1), Lai YJ(1), Chiang YC(1), Lee FY(5), Liu MC(5), Liu CW(6), Liu
CY(7), Yao M(1), Huang SY(1), Ko BS(1), Hsu SC(6), Wu SJ(1), Tsay W(1), Chen
YC(3), Tien HF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (2)1] Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National
Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan [2] Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)1] Division of Hematology,
Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Department of Laboratory
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Oncology, College of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pathology,
National Taiwan University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. (7)Biostatistics Consulting Laboratory, Department of Nursing, National
Taipei University of Nursing and Health Science, Taipei, Taiwan.

Recently, mutations of the additional sex comb-like 1 (ASXL1) gene were
identified in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), but the interaction
of this mutation with other genetic alterations and its dynamic changes during
disease progression remain to be determined. In this study, ASXL1 mutations were 
identified in 106 (22.7%) of the 466 patients with primary MDS based on the
French-American-British (FAB) classification and 62 (17.1%) of the 362 patients
based on the World Health Organization (WHO) classification. ASXL1 mutation was
closely associated with trisomy 8 and mutations of RUNX1, EZH2, IDH, NRAS, JAK2, 
SETBP1 and SRSF2, but was negatively associated with SF3B1 mutation. Most
ASXL1-mutated patients (85%) had concurrent other gene mutations at diagnosis.
ASXL1 mutation was an independent poor prognostic factor for survival. Sequential
studies showed that the original ASXL1 mutation remained unchanged at disease
progression in all 32 ASXL1-mutated patients but were frequently accompanied with
acquisition of mutations of other genes, including RUNX1, NRAS, KRAS, SF3B1,
SETBP1 and chromosomal evolution. On the other side, among the 80 ASXL1-wild
patients, only one acquired ASXL1 mutation at leukemia transformation. In
conclusion, ASXL1 mutations in association with other genetic alterations may
have a role in the development of MDS but contribute little to disease
progression.

PMCID: PMC3913943
PMID: 24442206  [PubMed]


290. Blood. 2014 Mar 6;123(10):1487-98. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-500264. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Mutations in linker histone genes HIST1H1 B, C, D, and E; OCT2 (POU2F2); IRF8;
and ARID1A underlying the pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma.

Li H(1), Kaminski MS, Li Y, Yildiz M, Ouillette P, Jones S, Fox H, Jacobi K,
Saiya-Cork K, Bixby D, Lebovic D, Roulston D, Shedden K, Sabel M, Marentette L,
Cimmino V, Chang AE, Malek SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;

Follicular lymphoma (FL) constitutes the second most common non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
in the western world. FL carries characteristic recurrent structural genomic
aberrations. However, information regarding the coding genome in FL is still
evolving. Here, we describe the results of massively parallel exome sequencing
and single nucleotide polymorphism 6.0 array genomic profiling of 11 highly
purified FL cases, and 1 transformed FL case and the validation of selected
mutations in 102 FL cases. We report the identification of 15 novel recurrently
mutated genes in FL. These include frequent mutations in the linker histone genes
HIST1H1 B-E (27%) and mutations in OCT2 (also known as POU2F2; 8%), IRF8 (6%),
and ARID1A (11%). A subset of the mutations in HIST1H1 B-E affected binding to
DNMT3B, and mutations in HIST1H1 B-E and in EZH2 or ARID1A were largely mutually 
exclusive, implicating HIST1H1 B-E in epigenetic deregulation in FL. Mutations in
OCT2 (POU2F2) affected its transcriptional and functional properties as measured 
through luciferase assays, the biological analysis of stably transduced cell
lines, and global expression profiling. Finally, multiple novel mutated genes
located within regions of acquired uniparental disomy in FL are identified. In
aggregate, these data substantially broaden our understanding of the genomic
pathogenesis of FL.

PMCID: PMC4729540
PMID: 24435047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Platelets. 2014;25(3):207-10. doi: 10.3109/09537104.2013.859664. Epub 2014 Jan
16.

Aberrant histone methylation in the patients with immune thrombocytopenia.

Zhao H(1), Xue F, Xu J, Fang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Key
Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy , Tianjin , PR China .

Abstract The aim of the present study was to investigate alterations in histone
methylation in patients with primary immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). Global
histone H3K4/H3K9 methylation in CD4+ T cells from 35 ITP patients and 15 healthy
controls were measured using the EpiQuik(TM) global histone H3K4/H3K9 methylation
assay kits. The mRNA expression of SUV39H1, SUV39H2 and EZH2 were detected by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The results showed
that global histone H3K9 hypomethylation in CD4+ T cells of active ITP, compared 
with ITP in remission and controls, while the global histone H3K4 methylation
were not significantly different between ITP patients and healthy controls. The
expression of EZH2 and SUV39H2 were significantly down-regulated in active ITP
patients, when compared with ITP in remission and controls. There were not
different between ITP patients and controls in the expression SUV39H1. In
conclusion, the aberrant histone methylation was involved in the pathogenesis of 
ITP.

PMID: 24433164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Leukemia. 2014 Jun;28(6):1348-51. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.25. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Recurrent genetic defects on chromosome 7q in myeloid neoplasms.

Hosono N(1), Makishima H(2), Jerez A(2), Yoshida K(3), Przychodzen B(2), McMahon 
S(4), Shiraishi Y(5), Chiba K(5), Tanaka H(6), Miyano S(7), Sanada M(3),
Gómez-Seguí I(2), Verma AK(8), McDevitt MA(9), Sekeres MA(10), Ogawa S(3),
Maciejewski JP(11).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig
Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA [2] First Department of
Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui,
Japan. (2)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig
Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (3)1] Cancer Genomics
Project, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2]
Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto Japan. (4)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA. (5)Laboratory of DNA Information 
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, Human Genome Center,
Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (7)1]
Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2] Laboratory of Sequence
Analysis, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(9)Divisions of Hematology and Hematological Malignancy, Departments of Internal 
Medicine and Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, USA. (10)1] Leukemia Program, Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland, OH, USA [2] Department of Hematologic Oncology and Blood Disorders,
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (11)1] Department
of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA [2] Department of Hematologic Oncology and
Blood Disorders, Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

PMID: 24429498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 10;9(1):e84925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084925. eCollection
2014.

Alterations of epigenetic signatures in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a deficient
mouse liver determined by improved ChIP-qPCR and (h)MeDIP-qPCR assays.

Zhang Q(1), Lei X(1), Lu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New
York, United States of America.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a liver-enriched transcription factor
essential for liver development and function. In hepatocytes, HNF4a regulates a
large number of genes important for nutrient/xenobiotic metabolism and cell
differentiation and proliferation. Currently, little is known about the
epigenetic mechanism of gene regulation by HNF4a. In this study, the global and
specific alterations at the selected gene loci of representative histone
modifications and DNA methylations were investigated in Hnf4a-deficient female
mouse livers using the improved MeDIP-, hMeDIP- and ChIP-qPCR assay. Hnf4a
deficiency significantly increased hepatic total IPed DNA fragments for histone
H3 lysine-4 dimethylation (H3K4me2), H3K4me3, H3K9me2, H3K27me3 and H3K4
acetylation, but not for H3K9me3, 5-methylcytosine,or 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. At
specific gene loci, the relative enrichments of histone and DNA modifications
were changed to different degree in Hnf4a-deficient mouse liver. Among the
epigenetic signatures investigated, changes in H3K4me3 correlated the best with
mRNA expression. Additionally, Hnf4a-deficient livers had increased mRNA
expression of histone H1.2 and H3.3 as well as epigenetic modifiers Dnmt1, Tet3, 
Setd7, Kmt2c, Ehmt2, and Ezh2. In conclusion, the present study provides
convenient improved (h)MeDIP- and ChIP-qPCR assays for epigenetic study. Hnf4a
deficiency in young-adult mouse liver markedly alters histone methylation and
acetylation, with fewer effects on DNA methylation and 5-hydroxymethylation. The 
underlying mechanism may be the induction of epigenetic enzymes responsible for
the addition/removal of the epigenetic signatures, and/or the loss of HNF4a per
se as a key coordinator for epigenetic modifiers.

PMCID: PMC3888413
PMID: 24427299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Gene. 2014 Mar 10;537(2):197-202. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.006. Epub 2014 Jan 
11.

Role of EZH2 in oral squamous cell carcinoma carcinogenesis.

Zhao L(1), Yu Y(2), Wu J(2), Bai J(2), Zhao Y(2), Li C(1), Sun W(3), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, China. (2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Harbin
Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. (3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics,
Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081, China. Electronic address:
sunwj@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Dentistry, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China. Electronic address: 
hrbwangmei@163.com.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a common human malignancy with high
incidence rate and poor prognosis. Although the polycomb group protein enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays a crucial role in cell proliferation and
differentiation during the occurrence and development progress of several kinds
of malignant tumors, the impact of EZH2 on the development and progression of
OSCC is unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that EZH2 is overexpressed in OSCC
cells and clinical tissue. With in vitro RNAi analysis, we generated stable EZH2 
knocking down cell lines from two OSCC cell lines, with two sh-RNAs targeting to 
EZH2, respectively. We found that knocking down of EZH2 could decrease the
proliferation ability and induce apoptosis of OSCC cells. Moreover, we
demonstrated that of EZH2 inhibition decreased the migration and metastasis of
OSCC cells. In conclusion, the results of the current study demonstrated an
association between EZH2 expression and OSCC cell development. We recommend that 
EZH2 acts as an oncogene and plays an important role in OSCC carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24424512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Dermatol. 2014 Jan-Feb;24(1):41-5. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2013.2219.

Increased expression of enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) differentiates
squamous cell carcinoma from normal skin and actinic keratosis.

Xie Q(1), Wang H(1), Heilman ER(2), Walsh MG(3), Haseeb MA(1), Gupta R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology. (2)Department of Pathology, Department of
Dermatology, College of Medicine. (3)Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, State University of New York, Downstate
Medical Center, 450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is a polycomb group protein that
has been shown to be involved in the progression of multiple human cancers
including melanoma. The expression of EZH2 in normal skin and in pre-malignant
and malignant cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) has not been studied.
OBJECTIVES: We examined the expression of EZH2 in normal skin, actinic keratosis 
(AK), SCC in situ, well-differentiated (SCC-WD), moderately-differentiated
(SCC-MD) and poorly-differentiated SCC (SCC-PD) to ascertain whether EZH2
expression differentiates these conditions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for EZH2 was performed on
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded biopsies and a tissue microarray containing
normal skin, AK, SCC in situ, and SCC of different grades.
RESULTS: In comparison to the normal skin, EZH2 expression in actinic keratosis
was increased (p=0.03). Similarly, EZH2 expression in all of the neoplastic
conditions studied (SCC in situ, SCC-WD, SCC-MD and SCC-PD) was greatly increased
in comparison to both the normal skin and actinic keratosis (p=0.001).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 expression increases incrementally from normal skin to AK and
further to SCC, suggesting a role for EZH2 in the progression and differentiation
of SCC. EZH2 expression may be used as a diagnostic marker for differentiating
SCC from AK or normal skin.

PMID: 24413452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncol Res. 2013;21(2):83-91. doi: 10.3727/096504013X13775486749218.

MiR-138 induces renal carcinoma cell senescence by targeting EZH2 and is
downregulated in human clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Liang J(1), Zhang Y, Jiang G, Liu Z, Xiang W, Chen X, Chen Z, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Union Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

MiR-138 has been shown to be downregulated in various cancers, including head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) and clear cell renal carcinoma (ccRCC). In
the present study, we aimed to reveal the mechanism of miR-138 induction of
senescence in renal carcinoma cells and identify its specific target genes. We
used qRT-PCR to analyze miR-138 expression levels in renal carcinoma cell lines
and ccRCC samples. The activity of ß-galactosidase was measured for functional
analysis after miR-138 mimic transfection. To identify the targets of miR-138, we
used three types of target prediction software to determine three candidate
target genes. Furthermore, a 3'UTR luciferase assay was performed. Western
blotting was used to detect the protein expression levels of candidate target
genes. Additionally, knockdown of EZH2 by its siRNA was performed. The expression
of miR-138 was downregulated in RCC cells lines and in tumor samples compared
with their controls. Transfection of miR-138 mimic induced SN-12 cell senescence,
decreased the protein expression of EZH2, and increased the protein expression of
P16. Furthermore, miR-138 decreased the 3'UTR luciferase activity of EZH2. The
knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA induced SN-12 cell senescence, decreased the protein
expression level of EZH2, and increased the protein expression of P16. MiR-138 is
a tumor-suppressor miRNA in ccRCC that induces SN-12 cell senescence by
downregulating EZH2 expression and upregulating P16 expression.

PMID: 24406044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Mar;230(3):496-503. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24549.

LncRNAs: new players in gliomas, with special emphasis on the interaction of
lncRNAs With EZH2.

Bian EB(1), Li J, Xie YS, Zong G, Li J, Zhao B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China; Cerebral Vascular Disease Research Center, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.

Gliomas are the most common primary malignancy in the brain, accounting for
50-60%. Despite all the efforts of cytoreductive surgery in combination with
intense chemoradiotherapy, glioma remains an incurable disease. Recent studies
have shown that long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are involved in the pathology of
gliomas. LncRNAs are involved in many cellular processes, such as angiogenesis,
invasion, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. In this review we focus on the
dysregulation of lncRNAs in gliomas. We also address that epigenetic modification
such as DNA methylation and microRNAs interact with lncRNAs in gliomas. In
addition, the interaction of lncRNAs with signaling pathways in gliomas is
discussed systematically, with particular emphasis on the interaction of lncRNAs 
with EZH2. Such approaches provide valuable insights into the potential future
applications of lncRNAs in the treatment of gliomas.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., A Wiley Company.

PMID: 24403021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Leukemia. 2014 Jul;28(7):1472-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.3. Epub 2014 Jan 9.

CALR vs JAK2 vs MPL-mutated or triple-negative myelofibrosis: clinical,
cytogenetic and molecular comparisons.

Tefferi A(1), Lasho TL(1), Finke CM(1), Knudson RA(2), Ketterling R(2), Hanson
CH(3), Maffioli M(4), Caramazza D(4), Passamonti F(4), Pardanani A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA. (2)Division of Cytogenetics, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. (3)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (4)Division of Hematology, Ospedale di
Circolo, Fondazione Macchi, Varese, Italy.

Calreticulin (CALR) mutations were recently described in JAK2 and MPL unmutated
primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and essential thrombocythemia. In the current study, 
we compared the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular features of patients with PMF
with or without CALR, JAK2 or MPL mutations. Among 254 study patients, 147 (58%) 
harbored JAK2, 63 (25%) CALR and 21 (8.3%) MPL mutations; 22 (8.7%) patients were
negative for all three mutations, whereas one patient expressed both JAK2 and
CALR mutations. Study patients were also screened for ASXL1 (31%), EZH2 (6%), IDH
(4%), SRSF2 (12%), SF3B1 (7%) and U2AF1 (16%) mutations. In univariate analysis, 
CALR mutations were associated with younger age (P<0.0001), higher platelet count
(P<0.0001) and lower DIPSS-plus score (P=0.02). CALR-mutated patients were also
less likely to be anemic, require transfusions or display leukocytosis.
Spliceosome mutations were infrequent (P=0.0001) in CALR-mutated patients, but no
other molecular or cytogenetic associations were evident. In multivariable
analysis, CALR mutations had a favorable impact on survival that was independent 
of both DIPSS-plus risk and ASXL1 mutation status (P=0.001; HR 3.4 for
triple-negative and 2.2 for JAK2-mutated). Triple-negative patients also
displayed inferior LFS (P=0.003). The current study identifies 'CALR(-)ASXL1(+)' 
and 'triple-negative' as high-risk molecular signatures in PMF.

PMID: 24402162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):E364-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1304840111. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Network of mutually repressive metastasis regulators can promote cell
heterogeneity and metastatic transitions.

Lee J(1), Lee J, Farquhar KS, Yun J, Frankenberger CA, Bevilacqua E, Yeung K, Kim
EJ, Balázsi G, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637.

The sources and consequences of nongenetic variability in metastatic progression 
are largely unknown. To address these questions, we characterized a
transcriptional regulatory network for the metastasis suppressor Raf kinase
inhibitory protein (RKIP). We previously showed that the transcription factor
BACH1 is negatively regulated by RKIP and promotes breast cancer metastasis. Here
we demonstrate that BACH1 acts in a double-negative (overall positive) feedback
loop to inhibit RKIP transcription in breast cancer cells. BACH1 also negatively 
regulates its own transcription. Analysis of the BACH1 network reveals the
existence of an inverse relationship between BACH1 and RKIP involving both
monostable and bistable transitions that can potentially give rise to nongenetic 
variability. Single-cell analysis confirmed monostable and bistable-like
behavior. Treatment with histone deacetylase inhibitors or depletion of the
polycomb repressor enhancer of zeste homolog 2 altered relative RKIP and BACH1
levels in a manner consistent with a prometastatic state. Together, our results
suggest that the mutually repressive relationship between metastatic regulators
such as RKIP and BACH1 can play a key role in determining metastatic progression 
in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3903259
PMID: 24395801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Cell Biol. 2014 Jan 6;204(1):61-75. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201304152.

Long noncoding RNA-mediated intrachromosomal interactions promote imprinting at
the Kcnq1 locus.

Zhang H(1), Zeitz MJ, Wang H, Niu B, Ge S, Li W, Cui J, Wang G, Qian G, Higgins
MJ, Fan X, Hoffman AR, Hu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Center, First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun 130061, People's Republic of China.

Kcnq1ot1 is a long noncoding ribonucleic acid (RNA; lncRNA) that participates in 
the regulation of genes within the Kcnq1 imprinting domain. Using a novel
RNA-guided chromatin conformation capture method, we demonstrate that the 5'
region of Kcnq1ot1 RNA orchestrates a long-range intrachromosomal loop between
KvDMR1 and the Kcnq1 promoter that is required for maintenance of imprinting.
PRC2 (polycomb repressive complex 2), which participates in the allelic
repression of Kcnq1, is also recruited by Kcnq1ot1 RNA via EZH2. Targeted
suppression of Kcnq1ot1 lncRNA prevents the creation of this long-range
intrachromosomal loop and causes loss of Kcnq1 imprinting. These observations
delineate a novel mechanism by which an lncRNA directly builds an
intrachromosomal interaction complex to establish allele-specific transcriptional
gene silencing over a large chromosomal domain.

PMCID: PMC3882787
PMID: 24395636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Dig Dis. 2014 Apr;15(4):166-73. doi: 10.1111/1751-2980.12129.

Expression of B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus integration site 1
mRNA and protein in gastric cancer.

Liu PW(1), Lin Y, Chen XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Division of Gastrointestinal Pathology, 
Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia
virus integration site 1 (Bmi-1) in gastric cancer (GC) and its relationship with
the clinicopathological features of GC.
METHODS: Laser capture microdissection combined with real-time polymerase chain
reaction and Western blot were used to determine the expressions of Bmi-1, the
cellular homologue of avian myelocytomatosis virus (c-Myc), enhancer of Zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2), phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) and epithelial cadherin
(E-cadherin) in 20 GC specimens and the adjacent non-cancerous gastric tissues.
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein expressions of Bmi-1 in GC were increased compared 
with those of the non-cancerous gastric tissues (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.012 and P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.000,
respectively). Bmi-1 mRNA expression was positively correlated with tumor size,
degree of tumor differentiation, invasion and lymph node metastasis. At both mRNA
and protein levels, Bmi-1 was positively correlated with c-Myc and EZH2, but
negatively correlated with PTEN and E-cadherin.
CONCLUSION: Bmi-1 might be involved in GC at both transcription and translation
levels.

© 2014 Chinese Medical Association Shanghai Branch, Chinese Society of
Gastroenterology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24393364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell. 2014 Jan 23;53(2):277-89. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.12.005. Epub 2014 
Jan 2.

The histone H3 lysine 9 methyltransferases G9a and GLP regulate polycomb
repressive complex 2-mediated gene silencing.

Mozzetta C(1), Pontis J(2), Fritsch L(2), Robin P(2), Portoso M(3), Proux C(4),
Margueron R(3), Ait-Si-Ali S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Laboratoire Epigénétique et
Destin Cellulaire, UMR7216, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique CNRS, 35
rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris, France. Electronic address:
chiara.mozzetta@univ-paris-diderot.fr. (2)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Laboratoire Epigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, UMR7216, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique CNRS, 35 rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris,
France. (3)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; UMR3215 CNRS, 26
rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France; U934 INSERM, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75005 Paris, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, PF2 Plate-forme Transcriptome et Epigénome, 28 rue du Dr
Roux, Paris, 75015 France. (5)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Laboratoire Epigénétique et Destin Cellulaire, UMR7216, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique CNRS, 35 rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris, France. Electronic
address: slimane.aitsiali@univ-paris-diderot.fr.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Feb;15(2):78.

G9a/GLP and Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) are two major epigenetic
silencing machineries, which in particular methylate histone H3 on lysines 9 and 
27 (H3K9 and H3K27), respectively. Although evidence of a crosstalk between H3K9 
and H3K27 methylations has started to emerge, their actual interplay remains
elusive. Here, we show that PRC2 and G9a/GLP interact physically and
functionally. Moreover, combining different genome-wide approaches, we
demonstrate that Ezh2 and G9a/GLP share an important number of common genomic
targets, encoding developmental and neuronal regulators. Furthermore, we show
that G9a enzymatic activity modulates PRC2 genomic recruitment to a subset of its
target genes. Taken together, our findings demonstrate an unanticipated interplay
between two main histone lysine methylation mechanisms, which cooperate to
maintain silencing of a subset of developmental genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jan;124(1):64-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI71605. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

Cancer epigenetics drug discovery and development: the challenge of hitting the
mark.

Campbell RM, Tummino PJ.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2014 Mar 3;124(3):1419.

Over the past several years, there has been rapidly expanding evidence of
epigenetic dysregulation in cancer, in which histone and DNA modification play a 
critical role in tumor growth and survival. These findings have gained the
attention of the drug discovery and development community, and offer the
potential for a second generation of cancer epigenetic agents for patients
following the approved "first generation" of DNA methylation (e.g., Dacogen,
Vidaza) and broad-spectrum HDAC inhibitors (e.g., Vorinostat, Romidepsin). This
Review provides an analysis of prospects for discovery and development of novel
cancer agents that target epigenetic proteins. We will examine key examples of
epigenetic dysregulation in tumors as well as challenges to epigenetic drug
discovery with emerging biology and novel classes of drug targets. We will also
highlight recent successes in cancer epigenetics drug discovery and consider
important factors for clinical success in this burgeoning area.

PMCID: PMC3871251
PMID: 24382391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Curr Opin Hematol. 2014 Mar;21(2):114-22. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000015.

Allogeneic transplantation for myelofibrosis: for whom, when, and what are the
true benefits?

Babushok D(1), Hexner E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology and Abramson Cancer Center, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is
the only potentially curative therapy for myelofibrosis. Despite improved
outcomes, morbidity and mortality of HSCT remain high. Here we examine recent
data on patient selection, timing, and outcomes of HSCT in myelofibrosis.
RECENT FINDINGS: While there is a general effort to restrict HSCT to
transplant-eligible intermediate-2 and high-risk patients, this group has
comparatively worse HSCT outcomes, largely driven by their high
transplant-related mortality (TRM). When adjusted for age, reduced intensity
conditioning (RIC) has shown superior outcomes compared with myeloablative
conditioning (MAC), making RIC-HSCT a viable option for older patients. Emerging 
concepts include the use of ruxolitinib pretransplant, optimizing MAC to decrease
toxicity, and use of posttransplant JAK2-mutant allele burden to guide
prophylactic immunotherapy to prevent relapse. The recognition of prognostic
significance of somatic mutations in the ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2, and IDH1/2 genes,
and the improved assessment of risk of leukemic transformation have added a new
dimension to risk stratification.
SUMMARY: Improving our understanding of molecular genetics and leukemic
transformation holds promise for more precise patient selection for HSCT.
Although RIC-HSCT may reduce TRM, further studies are needed to optimize
conditioning regimens and to define the optimal timing of HSCT.

PMCID: PMC4104209
PMID: 24378706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 20;8(12):e84324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084324.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of a population of epidermal squamous cell carcinoma cells with
enhanced potential for tumor formation.

Adhikary G(1), Grun D(1), Kerr C(1), Balasubramanian S(1), Rorke EA(2), Vemuri
M(3), Boucher S(3), Bickenbach JR(4), Hornyak T(5), Xu W(1), Fisher ML(1), Eckert
RL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. (2)Department 
of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. (3)Life Technologies, Inc. Stem
Cell Technologies, Frederick, Maryland, United States of America. (4)Department
of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa, United States of America. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, The University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America ; Department of Dermatology, The University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. (6)Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America ; Department of
Dermatology, The University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America ; Department of Reproductive Biology, The University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America ;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America ; The Marlene and Stewart
Greenebaum Cancer Center, The University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Epidermal squamous cell carcinoma is among the most common cancers in humans.
These tumors are comprised of phenotypically diverse populations of cells that
display varying potential for proliferation and differentiation. An important
goal is identifying cells from this population that drive tumor formation. To
enrich for tumor-forming cells, cancer cells were grown as spheroids in
non-attached conditions. We show that spheroid-selected cells form faster growing
and larger tumors in immune-compromised mice as compared to non-selected cells.
Moreover, spheroid-selected cells gave rise to tumors following injection of as
few as one hundred cells, suggesting these cells have enhanced tumor-forming
potential. Cells isolated from spheroid-selected tumors retain an enhanced
ability to grow as spheroids when grown in non-attached culture conditions. Thus,
these tumor-forming cells retain their phenotype following in vivo passage as
tumors. Detailed analysis reveals that spheroid-selected cultures are highly
enriched for expression of epidermal stem cell and embryonic stem cell markers,
including aldehyde dehydrogenase 1, keratin 15, CD200, keratin 19, Oct4, Bmi-1,
Ezh2 and trimethylated histone H3. These studies indicate that a subpopulation of
cells that possess stem cell-like properties and express stem cell markers can be
derived from human epidermal cancer cells and that these cells display enhanced
ability to drive tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC3869846
PMID: 24376802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Prostate. 2014 May;74(5):488-96. doi: 10.1002/pros.22768. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Validation of stem cell markers in clinical prostate cancer: a6-integrin is
predictive for non-aggressive disease.

Hoogland AM(1), Verhoef EI, Roobol MJ, Schröder FH, Wildhagen MF, van der Kwast
TH, Jenster G, van Leenders GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Stem cells are postulated to mediate prostate cancer progression, and
represent a small fraction of the entire tumor. Various proteins (a2-integrin,
a6-integrin, CD117, CD133, EZH2, OCT3/4) are associated with a prostate cancer
stem cell phenotype in cell lines and xenografts. Our objective was to
investigate expression of stem cell markers in clinical prostate cancer in
relation to outcome.
METHODS: We validated immunohistochemical expression of stem cell markers in 481 
prostate cancer patients and correlated expression with clinicopathologic
parameters.
RESULTS: Sporadic expression of a2-integrin was present in a fraction of tumor
cells (<5%) in 94.7% of tumors and associated with PSA<U+2009>><U+2009>10<U+2009>ng/ml (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04).
a6-Integrin expression (<5%) occurred in 28.4% patients, while =5% a6-integrin
expression was associated with PSA=10<U+2009>ng/ml (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), Gleason score <7
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) and pT2-disease (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). a6-integrin was predictive for biochemical
recurrence (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), local recurrence (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03) and disease specific death
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). EZH2 expression was generally low with 2.6% of tumors showing =1%
positive cells. EZH2 was associated with Gleason score =7 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01) and
biochemical recurrence (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). We did not identify expression of CD117,
CD133, and OCT3/4 in prostate cancer samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of a2-integrin and EZH2 in a small fraction of prostate
cancer cells is supportive for their role as stem cell marker. Although
a6-integrin was not a unique stem cell marker, it was predictive for prostate
cancer biochemical and local recurrence, and disease specific death. The validity
of CD117, CD133, and OCT3/4 as prostate cancer stem cell marker is questionable
since these proteins were not expressed in clinical prostate cancer.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24375374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Mol Cell. 2014 Jan 23;53(2):290-300. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.11.012. Epub 2013
Dec 26.

Interactions between JARID2 and noncoding RNAs regulate PRC2 recruitment to
chromatin.

Kaneko S(1), Bonasio R(1), Saldaña-Meyer R(1), Yoshida T(2), Son J(1), Nishino
K(3), Umezawa A(2), Reinberg D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and NYU School of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Biochemistry, New York, NY 10016, USA. (2)National
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Department of Reproductive
Biology, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. (3)University of Miyazaki, Faculty of
Agriculture, Laboratory of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Miyazaki 889-2192, Japan. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and NYU School of
Medicine, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biochemistry, New York,
NY 10016, USA. Electronic address: Danny.Reinberg@nyumc.org.

JARID2 is an accessory component of Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2) required
for the differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). A role for JARID2 in the 
recruitment of PRC2 to target genes silenced during differentiation has been put 
forward, but the molecular details remain unclear. We identified a 30-amino-acid 
region of JARID2 that mediates interactions with long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs)
and found that the presence of lncRNAs stimulated JARID2-EZH2 interactions
in vitro and JARID2-mediated recruitment of PRC2 to chromatin in vivo. Native and
crosslinked RNA immunoprecipitations of JARID2 revealed that Meg3 and other
lncRNAs from the imprinted Dlk1-Dio3 locus, an important regulator of
development, interacted with PRC2 via JARID2. Lack of MEG3 expression in human
induced pluripotent cells altered the chromatin distribution of JARID2, PRC2, and
H3K27me3. Our findings show that lncRNAs facilitate JARID2-PRC2 interactions on
chromatin and suggest a mechanism by which lncRNAs contribute to PRC2
recruitment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4026005
PMID: 24374312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Genome Biol. 2013 Dec 24;14(12):R144. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-12-r144.

Architecture of epigenetic reprogramming following Twist1-mediated
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Malouf GG, Taube JH, Lu Y, Roysarkar T, Panjarian S, Estecio MR, Jelinek J,
Yamazaki J, Raynal NJ, Long H, Tahara T, Tinnirello A, Ramachandran P, Zhang XY, 
Liang S, Mani SA, Issa JP.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is known to impart metastasis
and stemness characteristics in breast cancer. To characterize the epigenetic
reprogramming following Twist1-induced EMT, we characterized the epigenetic and
transcriptome landscapes using whole-genome transcriptome analysis by RNA-seq,
DNA methylation by digital restriction enzyme analysis of methylation (DREAM) and
histone modifications by CHIP-seq of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 in immortalized human
mammary epithelial cells relative to cells induced to undergo EMT by Twist1.
RESULTS: EMT is accompanied by focal hypermethylation and widespread global DNA
hypomethylation, predominantly within transcriptionally repressed gene bodies. At
the chromatin level, the number of gene promoters marked by H3K4me3 increases by 
more than one fifth; H3K27me3 undergoes dynamic genomic redistribution
characterized by loss at half of gene promoters and overall reduction of peak
size by almost half. This is paralleled by increased phosphorylation of EZH2 at
serine 21. Among genes with highly altered mRNA expression, 23.1% switch between 
H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks, and those point to the master EMT targets and
regulators CDH1, PDGFRa and ESRP1. Strikingly, Twist1 increases the number of
bivalent genes by more than two fold. Inhibition of the H3K27 methyltransferases 
EZH2 and EZH1, which form part of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2),
blocks EMT and stemness properties.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the EMT program requires epigenetic
remodeling by the Polycomb and Trithorax complexes leading to increased cellular 
plasticity. This suggests that inhibiting epigenetic remodeling and thus decrease
plasticity will prevent EMT, and the associated breast cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4053791
PMID: 24367927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e84147. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084147.
eCollection 2013.

Structural context of disease-associated mutations and putative mechanism of
autoinhibition revealed by X-ray crystallographic analysis of the EZH2-SET
domain.

Antonysamy S(1), Condon B(1), Druzina Z(1), Bonanno JB(2), Gheyi T(1), Zhang
F(1), MacEwan I(3), Zhang A(1), Ashok S(1), Rodgers L(1), Russell M(1), Gately
Luz J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Biotechnology Center San Diego, San Diego, California, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
University, Jack and Pearl Resnik Campus, Bronx, New York, United States of
America. (3)Department of Radiology, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma
Linda, California, United States of America.

The enhancer-of-zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene product is an 87 kDa polycomb group
(PcG) protein containing a C-terminal methyltransferase SET domain. EZH2, along
with binding partners, i.e., EED and SUZ12, upon which it is dependent for
activity forms the core of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). PRC2
regulates gene silencing by catalyzing the methylation of histone H3 at lysine
27. Both overexpression and mutation of EZH2 are associated with the incidence
and aggressiveness of various cancers. The novel crystal structure of the SET
domain was determined in order to understand disease-associated EZH2 mutations
and derive an explanation for its inactivity independent of complex formation.
The 2.00 Å crystal structure reveals that, in its uncomplexed form, the EZH2
C-terminus folds back into the active site blocking engagement with substrate.
Furthermore, the S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) binding pocket observed in the
crystal structure of homologous SET domains is notably absent. This suggests that
a conformational change in the EZH2 SET domain, dependent upon complex formation,
must take place for cofactor and substrate binding activities to be
recapitulated. In addition, the data provide a structural context for clinically 
significant mutations found in the EZH2 SET domain.

PMCID: PMC3868555
PMID: 24367637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 19;8(12):e83737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083737.
eCollection 2013.

Structure of the catalytic domain of EZH2 reveals conformational plasticity in
cofactor and substrate binding sites and explains oncogenic mutations.

Wu H(1), Zeng H(1), Dong A(1), Li F(1), He H(1), Senisterra G(1), Seitova A(1),
Duan S(2), Brown PJ(1), Vedadi M(3), Arrowsmith CH(4), Schapira M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Department of Medical Biophysics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Structural Genomics
Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada ; Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada ; Princess Margaret Cancer Centre and Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is an important regulator of cellular
differentiation and cell type identity. Overexpression or activating mutations of
EZH2, the catalytic component of the PRC2 complex, are linked to
hyper-trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) in many cancers.
Potent EZH2 inhibitors that reduce levels of H3K27me3 kill mutant lymphoma cells 
and are efficacious in a mouse xenograft model of malignant rhabdoid tumors.
Unlike most SET domain methyltransferases, EZH2 requires PRC2 components, SUZ12
and EED, for activity, but the mechanism by which catalysis is promoted in the
PRC2 complex is unknown. We solved the 2.0 Å crystal structure of the EZH2
methyltransferase domain revealing that most of the canonical structural features
of SET domain methyltransferase structures are conserved. The site of methyl
transfer is in a catalytically competent state, and the structure clarifies the
structural mechanism underlying oncogenic hyper-trimethylation of H3K27 in tumors
harboring mutations at Y641 or A677. On the other hand, the I-SET and post-SET
domains occupy atypical positions relative to the core SET domain resulting in
incomplete formation of the cofactor binding site and occlusion of the substrate 
binding groove. A novel CXC domain N-terminal to the SET domain may contribute to
the apparent inactive conformation. We propose that protein interactions within
the PRC2 complex modulate the trajectory of the post-SET and I-SET domains of
EZH2 in favor of a catalytically competent conformation.

PMCID: PMC3868588
PMID: 24367611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e82241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082241.
eCollection 2013.

Online survival analysis software to assess the prognostic value of biomarkers
using transcriptomic data in non-small-cell lung cancer.

Gyorffy B(1), Surowiak P(2), Budczies J(3), Lánczky A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Pediatrics and Nephrology, Hungarian Academy of
Sciences, Budapest, Hungary. (2)Department of Histology and Embryology, Wroclaw
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland. (3)Institut für Pathologie, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e111842.

In the last decade, optimized treatment for non-small cell lung cancer had lead
to improved prognosis, but the overall survival is still very short. To further
understand the molecular basis of the disease we have to identify biomarkers
related to survival. Here we present the development of an online tool suitable
for the real-time meta-analysis of published lung cancer microarray datasets to
identify biomarkers related to survival. We searched the caBIG, GEO and TCGA
repositories to identify samples with published gene expression data and survival
information. Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis, Kaplan-Meier
survival plot with hazard ratio and logrank P value are calculated and plotted in
R. The complete analysis tool can be accessed online at: www.kmplot.com/lung. All
together 1,715 samples of ten independent datasets were integrated into the
system. As a demonstration, we used the tool to validate 21 previously published 
survival associated biomarkers. Of these, survival was best predicted by CDK1
(p<1E-16), CD24 (p<1E-16) and CADM1 (p = 7E-12) in adenocarcinomas and by CCNE1
(p = 2.3E-09) and VEGF (p = 3.3E-10) in all NSCLC patients. Additional genes
significantly correlated to survival include RAD51, CDKN2A, OPN, EZH2, ANXA3,
ADAM28 and ERCC1. In summary, we established an integrated database and an online
tool capable of uni- and multivariate analysis for in silico validation of new
biomarker candidates in non-small cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC3867325
PMID: 24367507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Mar;12(2):323-37. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.008. Epub 2013
Nov 28.

Cardiomyogenesis is controlled by the miR-99a/let-7c cluster and epigenetic
modifications.

Coppola A(1), Romito A(2), Borel C(3), Gehrig C(3), Gagnebin M(3), Falconnet
E(3), Izzo A(4), Altucci L(1), Banfi S(5), Antonarakis SE(3), Minchiotti G(6),
Cobellis G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and General Pathology, Seconda
Università di Napoli, 80138 Napoli, Italy. (2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and 
Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 Napoli, Italy. (3)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, Università Federico II,
80131 Napoli, Italy. (5)Department of Biophysics, Biochemistry and General
Pathology, Seconda Università di Napoli, 80138 Napoli, Italy; Telethon Institute 
of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 Napoli, Italy. (6)Institute of Genetics
and Biophysics "A. Buzzati-Traverso", CNR, 80131 Napoli, Italy. (7)Department of 
Biophysics, Biochemistry and General Pathology, Seconda Università di Napoli,
80138 Napoli, Italy. Electronic address: g.cobellis@unina2.it.

Understanding the molecular basis of cardiomyocyte development is critical for
understanding the pathogenesis of pre- and post-natal cardiac disease. MicroRNAs 
(miRNAs) are post-transcriptional modulators of gene expression that play an
important role in many developmental processes. Here, we show that the
miR-99a/let-7c cluster, mapping on human chromosome 21, is involved in the
control of cardiomyogenesis by altering epigenetic factors. By perturbing miRNA
expression in mouse embryonic stem cells, we find that let-7c promotes
cardiomyogenesis by upregulating genes involved in mesoderm specification (T/Bra 
and Nodal) and cardiac differentiation (Mesp1, Nkx2.5 and Tbx5). The action of
let-7c is restricted to the early phase of mesoderm formation at the expense of
endoderm and its late activation redirects cells toward other mesodermal
derivatives. The Polycomb complex group protein Ezh2 is a direct target of
let-7c, which promotes cardiac differentiation by modifying the H3K27me3 marks
from the promoters of crucial cardiac transcription factors (Nkx2.5, Mef2c,
Tbx5). In contrast, miR-99a represses cardiac differentiation via the
nucleosome-remodeling factor Smarca5, attenuating the Nodal/Smad2 signaling. We
demonstrated that the identified targets are underexpressed in human Down
syndrome fetal heart specimens. By perturbing the expression levels of these
miRNAs in embryonic stem cells, we were able to demonstrate that these miRNAs
control lineage- and stage-specific transcription factors, working in concert
with chromatin modifiers to direct cardiomyogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24365598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nat Genet. 2014 Feb;46(2):176-81. doi: 10.1038/ng.2856. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Integrated genomic analysis identifies recurrent mutations and evolution patterns
driving the initiation and progression of follicular lymphoma.

Okosun J(1), Bödör C(2), Wang J(3), Araf S(4), Yang CY(5), Pan C(6), Boller S(5),
Cittaro D(7), Bozek M(8), Iqbal S(4), Matthews J(4), Wrench D(4), Marzec J(9),
Tawana K(4), Popov N(4), O'Riain C(4), O'Shea D(4), Carlotti E(4), Davies A(10), 
Lawrie CH(11), Matolcsy A(12), Calaminici M(4), Norton A(13), Byers RJ(14), Mein 
C(8), Stupka E(7), Lister TA(4), Lenz G(15), Montoto S(4), Gribben JG(4), Fan
Y(6), Grosschedl R(5), Chelala C(9), Fitzgibbon J(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University 
of London, London, UK. [2]. (2)1] Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer
Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. [2] 1st Department of
Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary. [3]. (3)1] Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, UK. [2]. (4)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts
Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. (5)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and
Epigenetics, Freiburg, Germany. (6)1] School of Biology, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. [2] Parker H. Petit Institute for
Bioengineering and Biosciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA. (7)Centre for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. (8)Genome Centre, Barts and the
London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, UK. (9)Centre for Molecular
Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(10)Cancer Sciences Division, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(11)Oncology Department, Biodonostia Research Institute, San Sebastian, Spain.
(12)1st Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary. (13)Department of Histopathology, Christie
National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK. (14)Department of
Histopathology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, UK. (15)Department of
Hematology, Oncology and Tumor Immunology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,
Germany.

Follicular lymphoma is an incurable malignancy, with transformation to an
aggressive subtype representing a critical event during disease progression. Here
we performed whole-genome or whole-exome sequencing on 10 follicular
lymphoma-transformed follicular lymphoma pairs followed by deep sequencing of 28 
genes in an extension cohort, and we report the key events and evolutionary
processes governing tumor initiation and transformation. Tumor evolution occurred
through either a 'rich' or 'sparse' ancestral common progenitor clone (CPC). We
identified recurrent mutations in linker histone, JAK-STAT signaling, NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling and B cell developmental genes. Longitudinal analyses identified early 
driver mutations in chromatin regulator genes (CREBBP, EZH2 and KMT2D (MLL2)),
whereas mutations in EBF1 and regulators of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling (MYD88 and TNFAIP3)
were gained at transformation. Collectively, this study provides new insights
into the genetic basis of follicular lymphoma and the clonal dynamics of
transformation and suggests that personalizing therapies to target key genetic
alterations in the CPC represents an attractive therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3907271
PMID: 24362818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2014 Feb;35(2):161-74. doi: 10.1038/aps.2013.161. Epub 2013
Dec 23.

EZH2: biology, disease, and structure-based drug discovery.

Tan JZ(1), Yan Y(1), Wang XX(1), Jiang Y(1), Xu HE(2).

Author information: 
(1)VARI-SIMM Center, Center for Structure and Function of Drug Targets, Key
Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (2)1] VARI-SIMM Center, Center for
Structure and Function of Drug Targets, Key Laboratory of Receptor Research,
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai
201203, China [2] Laboratory of Structural Sciences, Center for Structural
Biology and Drug Discovery, Van Andel Research Institute, 333 Bostwick Ave, NE,
Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which 
is a highly conserved histone methyltransferase that methylates lysine 27 of
histone 3. Overexpression of EZH2 has been found in a wide range of cancers,
including those of the prostate and breast. In this review, we address the
current understanding of the oncogenic role of EZH2, including its PRC2-dependent
transcriptional repression and PRC2-independent gene activation. We also discuss 
the connections between EZH2 and other silencing enzymes, such as DNA
methyltransferase and histone deacetylase. We comprehensively address the
architecture of the PRC2 complex and the crucial roles of each subunit. Finally, 
we summarize new progress in developing EZH2 inhibitors, which could be a new
epigenetic therapy for cancers.

PMCID: PMC3914023
PMID: 24362326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Gene. 2014 Feb 25;536(2):308-15. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.006. Epub 2013 Dec
16.

Identification and characterization of microRNAs in the crab-eating macaque
(Macaca fascicularis) using transcriptome analysis.

Yang H(1), Zhang R(1), Jing Y(1), Zhu L(2), Zhang W(1), Liu C(1), Wang J(1), Yang
J(1), Zhang J(1), Zen K(3), Zhang C(4), Li D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for microRNA Biology and Biotechnology,
State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences,
Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, China. (2)Institute of
Discovery Biology, Jiangsu Simcere Pharmaceutical R&D Co., Ltd, 699-18 Xuan Wu
Avenue, Nanjing 210042, China. (3)Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for
microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road,
Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address: kzen@nju.edu.cn. (4)Jiangsu
Engineering Research Center for microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Nanjing
University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, China. Electronic address:
cyzhang@nju.edu.cn. (5)Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for microRNA Biology
and Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School
of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road, Nanjing 210093, China.
Electronic address: donghaili@nju.edu.cn.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), with an average length between 16 nt and 26 nt, are small
non-coding RNAs that can repress gene expression on the post-transcriptional
level. Macaca fascicularis (M. fascicularis), one of the most important nonhuman 
primate animal models, is widely used in basic and applied preclinical research, 
especially in studies that involve neuroscience and disease. However, due to the 
lack of a complete genome sequence, the miRNAs in M. fascicularis have not been
completely characterized. In this study, 86 putative M. fascicularis miRNAs were 
identified using a strategy of our design. The expression of some of these miRNAs
in the tissue was confirmed by qRT-PCR. The function and pathway of their
targeted genes were analyzed to reveal the potential relevance of miRNA
regulation on diseases and physiological processes. The current study provides
insight into potential miRNAs and forms a useful knowledge base for the future
understanding of the function of miRNAs in M. fascicularis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24355555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2451-61.

Dietary protein restriction inhibits tumor growth in human xenograft models.

Fontana L(1), Adelaiye RM, Rastelli AL, Miles KM, Ciamporcero E, Longo VD, Nguyen
H, Vessella R, Pili R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University in St. Louis, MO, USA.

PURPOSE: Data from epidemiological and experimental studies suggest that dietary 
protein intake may play a role in inhibiting prostate and breast cancer by
modulating the IGF/AKT/mTOR pathway. In this study we investigated the effects of
diets with different protein content or quality on prostate and breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To test our hypothesis we assessed the inhibitory effect of 
protein diet restriction on prostate and breast cancer growth, serum PSA and
IGF-1 concentrations, mTOR activity and epigenetic markers, by using human
xenograft cancer models.
RESULTS: Our results showed a 70% inhibition of tumor growth in the
castrate-resistant LuCaP23.1 prostate cancer model and a 56% inhibition in the
WHIM16 breast cancer model fed with a 7% protein diet when compared to an
isocaloric 21% protein diet. Inhibition of tumor growth correlated, in the
LuCaP23.1 model, with decreased serum PSA and IGF-1 levels, down-regulation of
mTORC1 activity, decreased cell proliferation as indicated by Ki67 staining, and 
reduction in epigenetic markers of prostate cancer progression, including the
histone methyltransferase EZH2 and the associated histone mark H3K27me3. In
addition, we observed that modifications of dietary protein quality,
independently of protein quantity, decreased tumor growth. A diet containing 20% 
plant protein inhibited tumor weight by 37% as compared to a 20% animal dairy
protein diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that a reduction in dietary protein intake is
highly effective in inhibiting tumor growth in human xenograft prostate and
breast cancer models, possibly through the inhibition of the IGF/AKT/mTOR pathway
and epigenetic modifications.

PMCID: PMC3926840
PMID: 24353195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Genes Dev. 2013 Dec 15;27(24):2663-77. doi: 10.1101/gad.225888.113.

Nucleosome-binding activities within JARID2 and EZH1 regulate the function of
PRC2 on chromatin.

Son J(1), Shen SS, Margueron R, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016,
USA;

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 15;28(8):921.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) comprises specific members of the Polycomb
group of epigenetic modulators. PRC2 catalyzes methylation of histone H3 at Lys
27 (H3K27me3) through its Enhancer of zeste (Ezh) constituent, of which there are
two mammalian homologs: Ezh1 and Ezh2. Several ancillary factors, including
Jarid2, modulate PRC2 function, with Jarid2 facilitating its recruitment to
target genes. Jarid2, like Ezh2, is present in poorly differentiated and actively
dividing cells, while Ezh1 associates with PRC2 in all cells, including resting
cells. We found that Jarid2 exhibits nucleosome-binding activity that contributes
to PRC2 stimulation. Moreover, such nucleosome-binding activity is exhibited by
PRC2 comprising Ezh1 (PRC2-Ezh1), in contrast to PRC2-Ezh2. The presence of Ezh1 
helps to maintain PRC2 occupancy on its target genes in myoblasts where Jarid2 is
not expressed. Our findings allow us to propose a model in which PRC2-Ezh2 is
important for the de novo establishment of H3K27me3 in dividing cells, whereas
PRC2-Ezh1 is required for its maintenance in resting cells.

PMCID: PMC3877756
PMID: 24352422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Dec 12;14(12):24154-68. doi: 10.3390/ijms141224154.

EZH2 down-regulation exacerbates lipid accumulation and inflammation in in vitro 
and in vivo NAFLD.

Vella S, Gnani D, Crudele A, Ceccarelli S, De Stefanis C, Gaspari S, Nobili V,
Locatelli F, Marquez VE, Rota R(1), Alisi A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncohematology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome
00165, Italy. rossella.rota@opbg.net. (2)Department of Oncohematology, Bambino
Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome 00165, Italy. anna.alisi@opbg.net.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is one of the most prevalent, chronic
liver diseases, worldwide. It is a multifactorial disease caused by complex
interactions between genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors. Recently,
several microRNAs, some of which epigenetically regulated, have been found to be 
up- and/or down-regulated during NAFLD development. However, in NAFLD, the
essential role of the Polycomb Group protein Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), 
which controls the epigenetic silencing of specific genes and/or microRNAs by
trimethylating Lys27 on histone H3, still remains unknown. In this study, we
demonstrate that the nuclear expression/activity of the EZH2 protein is
down-regulated both in livers from NAFLD rats and in the free fatty acid-treated 
HepG2. The drop in EZH2 is inversely correlated with: (i) lipid accumulation;
(ii) the expression of pro-inflammatory markers including TNF-a and TGF-ß; and
(iii) the expression of miR-200b and miR-155. Consistently, the pharmacological
inhibition of EZH2 by 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) significantly reduces EZH2
expression/activity, while it increases lipid accumulation, inflammatory
molecules and microRNAs. In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that
the defective activity of EZH2 can enhance the NAFLD development by favouring
steatosis and the de-repression of the inflammatory genes and that of specific
microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3876102
PMID: 24351808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 13;8(12):e83244. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083244.
eCollection 2013.

Whole exome sequencing identifies novel recurrently mutated genes in patients
with splenic marginal zone lymphoma.

Parry M(1), Rose-Zerilli MJ(1), Gibson J(2), Ennis S(2), Walewska R(3), Forster
J(1), Parker H(1), Davis Z(3), Gardiner A(3), Collins A(2), Oscier DG(4),
Strefford JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, 
United Kingdom. (2)Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Pathology, Royal
Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth, United Kingdom. (4)Cancer Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom ; Department of 
Pathology, Royal Bournemouth Hospital, Bournemouth, United Kingdom.

The pathogenesis of splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) remains largely
unknown. Recent high-throughput sequencing studies have identified recurrent
mutations in key pathways, most notably NOTCH2 mutations in >25% of patients.
These studies are based on small, heterogeneous discovery cohorts, and therefore 
only captured a fraction of the lesions present in the SMZL genome. To identify
further novel pathogenic mutations within related biochemical pathways, we
applied whole exome sequencing (WES) and copy number (CN) analysis to a
biologically and clinically homogeneous cohort of seven SMZL patients with 7q
abnormalities and IGHV1-2*04 gene usage. We identified 173 somatic non-silent
variants, affecting 160 distinct genes. In additional to providing independent
validation of the presence of mutation in several previously reported genes
(NOTCH2, TNFAIP3, MAP3K14, MLL2 and SPEN), our study defined eight additional
recurrently mutated genes in SMZL; these genes are CREBBP, CBFA2T3, AMOTL1, FAT4,
FBXO11, PLA2G4D, TRRAP and USH2A. By integrating our WES and CN data we
identified three mutated putative candidate genes targeted by 7q deletions (CUL1,
EZH2 and FLNC), with FLNC positioned within the well-characterized 7q minimally
deleted region. Taken together, this work expands the reported directory of
recurrently mutated cancer genes in this disease, thereby expanding our
understanding of SMZL pathogenesis. Ultimately, this work will help to establish 
a stratified approach to care including the possibility of targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC3862727
PMID: 24349473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Front Genet. 2013 Dec 3;4:258. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00258.

Epigenetic alteration and microRNA dysregulation in cancer.

Suzuki H(1), Maruyama R(1), Yamamoto E(1), Kai M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo Medical University Sapporo, Japan.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play pivotal roles in numerous biological processes, and their
dysregulation is a common feature of human cancer. Thanks to recent advances in
the analysis of the cancer epigenome, we now know that epigenetic alterations,
including aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications, are major causes of
miRNA dysregulation in cancer. Moreover, the list of miRNA genes silenced in
association with CpG island hypermethylation is rapidly growing, and various
oncogenic miRNAs are now known to be upregulated via DNA hypomethylation. Histone
modifications also play important roles in the dysregulation of miRNAs, and
histone deacetylation and gain of repressive histone marks are strongly
associated with miRNA gene silencing. Conversely, miRNA dysregulation is causally
related to epigenetic alterations in cancer. Thus aberrant methylation of miRNA
genes is a potentially useful biomarker for detecting cancer and predicting its
outcome. Given that many of the silenced miRNAs appear to act as tumor
suppressors through the targeting of oncogenes, re-expression of the miRNAs could
be an effective approach to cancer therapy, and unraveling the relationship
between epigenetic alteration and miRNA dysregulation may lead to the discovery
of new therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3847369
PMID: 24348513  [PubMed]


321. ScientificWorldJournal. 2013 Nov 17;2013:948617. doi: 10.1155/2013/948617.
eCollection 2013.

Feature-based classification of amino acid substitutions outside conserved
functional protein domains.

Gemovic B(1), Perovic V(1), Glisic S(1), Veljkovic N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Multidisciplinary Research and Engineering, Vinca Institute of
Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, 12-14 Mihajla Petrovica Alasa, 11001
Belgrade, Serbia.

There are more than 500 amino acid substitutions in each human genome, and
bioinformatics tools irreplaceably contribute to determination of their
functional effects. We have developed feature-based algorithm for the detection
of mutations outside conserved functional domains (CFDs) and compared its
classification efficacy with the most commonly used phylogeny-based tools,
PolyPhen-2 and SIFT. The new algorithm is based on the informational spectrum
method (ISM), a feature-based technique, and statistical analysis. Our dataset
contained neutral polymorphisms and mutations associated with myeloid
malignancies from epigenetic regulators ASXL1, DNMT3A, EZH2, and TET2. PolyPhen-2
and SIFT had significantly lower accuracies in predicting the effects of amino
acid substitutions outside CFDs than expected, with especially low sensitivity.
On the other hand, only ISM algorithm showed statistically significant
classification of these sequences. It outperformed PolyPhen-2 and SIFT by 15% and
13%, respectively. These results suggest that feature-based methods, like ISM,
are more suitable for the classification of amino acid substitutions outside CFDs
than phylogeny-based tools.

PMCID: PMC3855963
PMID: 24348198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Cancer. 2014 Dec 1;135(11):2528-36. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28672. Epub 2014 Jan
6.

Statins inhibit tumor progression via an enhancer of zeste homolog 2-mediated
epigenetic alteration in colorectal cancer.

Ishikawa S(1), Hayashi H, Kinoshita K, Abe M, Kuroki H, Tokunaga R, Tomiyasu S,
Tanaka H, Sugita H, Arita T, Yagi Y, Watanabe M, Hirota M, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto City, Japan; Department of Surgery,
Kumamoto Regional Medical Center, Kumamoto City, Japan.

While statin intake has been proven to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer
(CRC), the mechanism of antitumor effects and clinical significance in survival
benefits remain unclear. Statin-induced antiproliferative effects and its
underlying mechanism were examined using six CRC cell lines. Statins except
pravastatin showed antiproliferative effects (simvastatin = fluvastatin >
atorvastatin) even though both of simvastatin and pravastatin could activate
mevalonate pathways, suggesting the statin-mediated antiproliferative effects
depended on non-mevalonate pathway. Indeed, statin induced p27(KIP1) expression
by downregulation of histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2), which acts as an epigenetic gene silencer. Additionally, the use of
simvastatin plus classII histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor (MC1568) induced
further overexpression of p27(KIP1) by inhibiting HDAC5 induction originated from
downregulated EZH2 in CRC cells and synergistically led to considerable
antiproliferative effects. In the clinical setting, Statin intake (except
pravastatin) displayed the downregulated EZH2 expression and inversely
upregulated p27(KIP1) expression in the resected CRC by immunohistochemical
staining and resulted in the significantly better prognoses both in overall
survival (p = 0.02) and disease free survival (p < 0.01) compared to patients
without statin intake. Statins may inhibit tumor progression via an EZH2-mediated
epigenetic alteration, which results in survival benefits after resected CRC.
Furthermore, statin plus classII HDAC inhibitor could be a novel anticancer
therapy by their synergistic effects in CRC.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of UICC.

PMCID: PMC4233976
PMID: 24346863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2532-49.

The polycomb group protein EZH2 is a novel therapeutic target in tongue cancer.

Li Z(1), Wang Y, Qiu J, Li Q, Yuan C, Zhang W, Wang D, Ye J, Jiang H, Yang J,
Cheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Head Neck Cancer Center, Institute of Stomatology, Affiliated Stomatological
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Jiangsu, China PRC.

EZH2, a core member of the Polycomb Repressor Complex 2 (PRC2), mediates
transcriptional silencing by catalyzing the trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27
(H3K27), which plays key roles in cancer initiation and progression. Here, we
investigated the expression pattern and biological roles of EZH2 in tongue
tumorigenesis by loss-of-function assays using small interference RNA and EZH2
inhibitor DZNep. Also we determined the therapeutic efficiency of DZNep against
tongue cancer in vivo. We found that aberrantly overexpressed EZH2 was associated
with pathological grade, cervical nodes metastasis and Ki-67 expression in tongue
cancers. Elevated EZH2 correlated with shorter overall survival and showed
significant and independent prognostic importance in patients with tongue cancer.
Both genetic and pharmacological depletion of EZH2 inhibited cell proliferation, 
migration, invasion and colony formation and decreased CD44+ subpopulation
probably in part through modulating p16, p21 and E-caherin. Moreover, DZNep
enhanced the anticancer effects of 5-Fluorouracil. Furthermore, intratumoral EZH2
inhibition induced by DZNep intraperitoneal administration significantly
attenuated tumor growth in a tongue cancer xenograft model. Taken together, our
results indicate that EZH2 serves as a key driver with multiple oncogenic
functions during tongue tumorigenesis and a new biomarker for tongue cancer
diagnosis and prognostic prediction. These findings open up possibilities for
therapeutic intervention against EZH2 in tongue cancer.

PMCID: PMC3926847
PMID: 24345883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J BUON. 2013 Oct-Dec;18(4):879-85.

Prognostic value of EZH2, paxillin expression and DNA ploidy of breast
adenocarcinoma: correlation to pathologic predictors.

Panousis D(1), Xepapadakis G, Lagoudianakis E, Karavitis G, Salemis N, Koronakis 
N, Patsouris E, Koronarchis D, Grosomanidis D, Chryssikos G, Ntasiou P,
Kyriakidou V, Athanassiadou AM, Athanassiadou P.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Unit, Iaso General Hospiral, Athens, Greece.

PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to examine the association of EZH2 and
paxillin expression and DNA ploidy status with pathological parameters of breast 
cancer, aiming to correlate tumor phenotype with its malignant behavior.
METHODS: EZH2 and paxillin expression and DNA ploidy were evaluated in imprint
smear samples obtained from 105 breast tumors after surgical removal.
RESULTS: Increased expression of paxillin was associated with p53 expression
(p=0.005), Ki-67 expression (p=0.018) and EZH2 expression (p<0.0001). EZH2
expression correlated with estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) 
status (p=0.01 and p=0.035, respectively), and expression of p53 and Ki-67
(p=0.007 and p<0.0001, respectively). Aneuploid tumors were significantly
correlated with poor differentiation (p=0.000), stage of disease (p=0.000), size 
of the primary tumor (p=0.015), presence of nodal metastasis (p=0.001), ER status
(p=0.008), cerbB2 status (p=0.012), and expression of Ki-67 (p=0.001) and EGFR
(p=0.018). Multivariate analysis of ploidy results using paxillin and EZH2
expression as dependent variables revealed that aneuploid tumors were associated 
with disease stage and grade of differentiation, cerbB2 expression and EZH2
expression.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that aneuploid tumors, EZH2 expression and paxillin 
expression correlate with more aggressive phenotype of breast cancer.

PMID: 24344012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Neoplasia. 2013 Nov;15(11):1251-61.

The oncogenic polycomb histone methyltransferase EZH2 methylates lysine 120 on
histone H2B and competes ubiquitination.

Kogure M(1), Takawa M, Saloura V, Sone K, Piao L, Ueda K, Ibrahim R, Tsunoda T,
Sugiyama M, Atomi Y, Nakamura Y, Hamamoto R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan ; Department of
Surgery, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka, Tokyo, Japan.

The histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) is known to be a
polycomb protein homologous to Drosophila enhancer of zeste and catalyzes the
addition of methyl groups to histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27). We previously
reported that EZH2 was overexpressed in various types of cancer and plays a
crucial role in the cell cycle regulation of cancer cells. In the present study, 
we demonstrated that EZH2 has the function to monomethylate lysine 120 on histone
H2B (H2BK120). EZH2-dependent H2BK120 methylation in cancer cells was confirmed
with an H2BK120 methylation-specific antibody. Overexpression of EZH2
significantly attenuated the ubiquitination of H2BK120, a key posttranslational
modification of histones for transcriptional regulation. Concordantly, knockdown 
of EZH2 increased the ubiquitination level of H2BK120, suggesting that the
methylation of H2BK120 by EZH2 may competitively inhibit the ubiquitination of
H2BK120. Subsequent chromatin immunoprecipitation-Seq and microarray analyses
identified downstream candidate genes regulated by EZH2 through the methylation
of H2BK120. This is the first report to describe a novel substrate of EZH2,
H2BK120, unveiling a new aspect of EZH2 functions in human carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3858897
PMID: 24339737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Oncol Rep. 2014 Feb;31(2):983-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2922. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Epigenetic therapy with the histone methyltransferase EZH2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A inhibits the growth of cholangiocarcinoma cells.

Nakagawa S(1), Sakamoto Y(1), Okabe H(1), Hayashi H(1), Hashimoto D(1), Yokoyama 
N(1), Tokunaga R(1), Sakamoto K(1), Kuroki H(1), Mima K(1), Beppu T(1), Baba
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is involved in malignant transformation and
the biological aggressiveness of several human malignancies. Growing evidence
indicates that EZH2 may be an appropriate therapeutic target for malignancies,
including cholangiocarcinoma. Recently, an S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase
inhibitor, 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) was shown to deplete and inhibit EZH2. The
aim of this study was to determine the effect of DZNep and the combination of
gemcitabine and DZNep in cholangiocarcinoma cells. The effects of DZNep and its
combination with gemcitabine were assessed in the cholangiocarcinoma cell lines
RBE and TFK-1. DZNep depleted the cellular levels of EZH2 and inhibited the
associated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. DZNep treatment resulted in the
inhibition of proliferation in the cholangiocarcinoma cell lines, and the
combination of DZNep and gemcitabine showed synergistic inhibition of cell
proliferation. DZNep induced apoptosis and G1 phase cell cycle arrest in
cholangiocarcinoma cells, and the combination of DZNep and gemcitabine enhanced
the induced apoptosis and G1 arrest when compared with gemcitabine alone.
Inhibition of cell proliferation by DZNep was partially associated with
upregulation of p16INK4a and p17KIP1. The present study shows that DZNep inhibits
cell proliferation by inducing G1 arrest and apoptosis. These results indicate
that an epigenetic therapy that pharmacologically targets EZH2 via DZNep may
constitute a novel approach for the treatment of cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 24337160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014 Mar 1;15(3):271-8. doi: 10.4161/cbt.27306. Epub 2013 Dec
12.

EZH2 participates in malignant biological behavior of epithelial ovarian cancer
through regulating the expression of BRCA1.

Li T(1), Cai J(1), Ding H(1), Xu L(1), Yang Q(1), Wang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology; Union Hospital; Tongji Medical
College; Huazhong University of Science and Technology; Wuhan, PR China.

Aberrant overexpression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone
methyltransferase inhibiting targets expression via epigenetic mechanisms, is
associated with an invasive phenotype and drug resistance in ovarian cancer.
Breast cancer 1 (BRCA1) gene is a well-recognized tumor suppressor, whose
downregulation plays a key role in the development of ovarian cancer. In the
present study, we found depletion of EZH2 increased BRCA1 protein expression and 
promoted its nuclear translocation, but decreased BRCA1 mRNA expression.
Treatment with the Akt-1 activator insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) prevented
EZH2-induced BRCA1 nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling. Loss of BRCA1 partially rescued
the effects of EZH2 downregulation on proliferation, G 2/M transition, and
migration in ovarian cancer cells. However, in a cisplatin-resistant sub-line of 
A2780 (A2780/DDP), both EZH2 and BRCA1 were overexpressed compared with parental 
A2780 cells and depletion of EZH2 reduced BRCA1 expression at both mRNA and
protein levels. Downregulation of EZH2 or BRCA1 sensitized A2780/DDP cells to
cisplatin, whereas simultaneous inhibition of them only resulted in modest
resensitization instead of showing any synergistic effect because EZH2 expression
was reactivated when BRCA1 expression was very low. Accordingly, our results
suggest the expression of BRCA1 is modulated by EZH2 in epithelial ovarian cancer
and BRCA1 is required for the effects of EZH2 downregulation on biological
behaviors of tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC3974828
PMID: 24335192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Sci Signal. 2013 Dec 10;6(305):ra107. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004633.

Interferon-<U+03B3> resets muscle cell fate by stimulating the sequential recruitment of
JARID2 and PRC2 to promoters to repress myogenesis.

Londhe P(1), Davie JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Simmons Cancer Institute,
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.

The inflammatory cytokine interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) orchestrates a diverse array of
fundamental physiological processes. IFN-<U+03B3> and the class II transactivator
(CIITA) play essential roles in inhibiting muscle development during the
inflammatory response. We describe the mechanism through which IFN-<U+03B3> and CIITA
inhibit myogenesis by repressing gene expression in muscle cells subjected to
inflammation. In mice, the presence of increased amounts of circulating IFN-<U+03B3>
resulted in the increased abundance of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in
muscle fibers, a tissue in which PRC2 is not normally present in the adult. We
showed that CIITA first interacted with the Jumonji family protein JARID2, a
noncatalytic subunit of PRC2, which caused an RNA polymerase II (RNAPII),
phosphorylated at serine-5, to pause at target promoters. Additional subunits of 
the PRC2 complex, including the catalytic subunit EZH2, were then recruited in a 
JARID2-dependent manner that was concurrent with the loss of RNAPII and the
methylation of Lys(27) of histone H3 (H3K27), which is associated with gene
repression. IFN-<U+03B3> and CIITA act to both promote the abundance of PRC2 subunits,
which are not normally present during muscle differentation, and recruit the PRC2
complex to block myogenesis. Together, these data indicate that increased amounts
of IFN-<U+03B3> reset myogenic cell fate through a multistep mechanism that culminates
in the recruitment of PRC2 to silence muscle-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC4000160
PMID: 24327761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Feb;53(2):144-53. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22126. Epub
2013 Nov 5.

Targetable activating mutations are very frequent in GCB and ABC diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Bohers E(1), Mareschal S, Bouzelfen A, Marchand V, Ruminy P, Maingonnat C, Ménard
AL, Etancelin P, Bertrand P, Dubois S, Alcantara M, Bastard C, Tilly H, Jardin F.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U918, Centre Henri Becquerel, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine, University of Rouen, Rouen, France.

Diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive and heterogeneous
malignancy that can be divided in two major subgroups, germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like (ABC). Activating mutations of genes 
involved in the BCR and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways (CD79A, CD79B, MYD88, and CARD11) or in
epigenetic regulation (EZH2) have been recently reported, preferentially in one
of the two DLBCL subtypes. We analyzed the mutational status of these five
recurrently mutated genes in a cohort of 161 untreated de novo DLBCL. Overall, 93
mutations were detected, in 61 (38%) of the patients. The L265P MYD88 mutation
was the most frequent MYD88 variant (n = 18), observed exclusively in the ABC
subtype. CD79A/CD79B ITAM domains were targeted in ABC DLBCL (12/77; 16%),
whereas CARD11 mutations were equally distributed in the two subtypes. The EZH2
Y641 substitution was found almost exclusively in the GCB subgroup (15/62; 24%). 
Twenty cases (12%) displayed two activating mutations, including the most
frequent CD79/MYD88 variants combination (n = 8) which is observed exclusively in
the ABC subtype. When considering only ABC DLBCL patients treated by rituximab
plus chemotherapy, the presence of an activating NF-<U+03BA>B mutation was associated
with an unfavorable outcome (3-years OS 26% for mutated cases versus 67% for the 
cases without mutations, P = 0.0337). Our study demonstrates that activating and 
targetable mutations are observed at a very high frequency in DLBCL at the time
of diagnosis, indicating that sequencing of a limited number of genes could help 
tailor an optimal treatment strategy in DLBCL.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24327543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec;30(6):687-92. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2013.06.012.

[Research on molecular markers for epigenetic changes in myeloid malignancies].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Sun XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jiangsu Province Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R.
China. wokibb@gmail.com.

Novel recurrent somatic mutations have been identified in patients with myeloid
malignancies including myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Mutations of tet methylcytosine
dioxygenase 2 (TET2), DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDH)1/2, enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and additional sex combs-like 1
(ASXL1) have been shown to play important roles in the regulation of epigenetic
patterning, and may be used as molecular predictors for pathogenesis and clinical
outcome for patients with myeloid malignancies.

PMID: 24327148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 May 1;23(9):931-40. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0267. Epub 2014
Jan 21.

The polycomb protein Ezh2 impacts on induced pluripotent stem cell generation.

Ding X(1), Wang X, Sontag S, Qin J, Wanek P, Lin Q, Zenke M.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Biomedical Engineering, RWTH
Aachen University Medical School , Aachen, Germany .

Reprogramming of somatic cells toward pluripotency involves extensive chromatin
reorganization and changes in gene expression. Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are 
key regulators of chromatin structure, cell identity, and development. In this
study, we investigated the impact of Ezh2, a core subunit of Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), on the generation of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. We
found that Ezh2 expression is induced during iPS cell generation and iPS cells
contain high levels of Ezh2 mRNA and protein. Importantly, shRNA knockdown of
Ezh2 during reprogramming severely impairs iPS cell generation. Mechanistically, 
Ezh2 acts during reprogramming at least in part through repressing the Ink4a/Arf 
locus, which represents a major roadblock for iPS cell generation. Interestingly,
knockdown of Ezh2 in established pluripotent cells leaves pluripotency and
self-renewal of embryonic stem cells and iPS cells unaffected. Altogether, our
results demonstrate that Ezh2 is critical for efficient iPS cell generation,
whereas it is dispensable for maintaining the reprogrammed iPS cell state.

PMCID: PMC3996971
PMID: 24325319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Biochemistry. 2013 Dec 31;52(52):9519-27. doi: 10.1021/bi401085h. Epub 2013 Dec
17.

Binding interactions between long noncoding RNA HOTAIR and PRC2 proteins.

Wu L(1), Murat P, Matak-Vinkovic D, Murrell A, Balasubramanian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge , Lensfield Road, Cambridge, 
CB2 1EW, United Kingdom.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) play a key role in the epigenetic regulation of
cells. Many of these lncRNAs function by interacting with histone repressive
proteins of the Polycomb group (PcG) family, recruiting them to gene loci to
facilitate silencing. Although there are now many RNAs known to interact with the
PRC2 complex, little is known about the details of the molecular interactions.
Here, we show that the PcG protein heterodimer EZH2-EED is necessary and
sufficient for binding to the lncRNA HOTAIR. We also show that protein
recognition occurs within a folded 89-mer domain of HOTAIR. This 89-mer
represents a minimal binding motif, as further deletion of nucleotides results in
substantial loss of affinity for PRC2. These findings provide molecular insights 
into an important system involved in epigenetic regulation.

PMCID: PMC3964825
PMID: 24320048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2013;2013:538-44. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2013.1.538.

Focus on the epigenome in the myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Kim E(1), Abdel-Wahab O.

Author information: 
(1)1Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and.

The discovery of mutations activating JAK-STAT signaling in the majority of
patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) led to identification of
tyrosine kinase activation as a predominant mechanism driving MPN pathogenesis.
Despite this, the existence of additional genetic events that modify the MPN
phenotype, predate JAK2 mutations, and/or contribute to leukemic transformation
of MPNs has been suggested. Recently, mutations in several epigenetic modifiers
have been described in patients with MPNs, including mutations in ASXL1, DNMT3A, 
EZH2, IDH1, IDH2, and TET2. Moreover, the mutant JAK2 itself has been shown
recently to affect histone posttranslational modifications directly. Here we
review the biological and clinical implications of epigenetic alterations in the 
pathogenesis of MPNs.

PMID: 24319229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):296-308. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 
Nov 16.

Pluripotency factors and Polycomb Group proteins repress aryl hydrocarbon
receptor expression in murine embryonic stem cells.

Ko CI(1), Wang Q(1), Fan Y(1), Xia Y(1), Puga A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA. (2)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental
Genetics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA. Electronic address: Alvaro.Puga@uc.edu.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a transcription factor and environmental
sensor that regulates expression of genes involved in drug-metabolism and cell
cycle regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses, Ahr ablation in mice
and studies with orthologous genes in invertebrates suggest that AHR may also
play a significant role in embryonic development. To address this hypothesis, we 
studied the regulation of Ahr expression in mouse embryonic stem cells and their 
differentiated progeny. In ES cells, interactions between OCT3/4, NANOG, SOX2 and
Polycomb Group proteins at the Ahr promoter repress AHR expression, which can
also be repressed by ectopic expression of reprogramming factors in hepatoma
cells. In ES cells, unproductive RNA polymerase II binds at the Ahr transcription
start site and drives the synthesis of short abortive transcripts. Activation of 
Ahr expression during differentiation follows from reversal of repressive marks
in Ahr promoter chromatin, release of pluripotency factors and PcG proteins,
binding of Sp factors, establishment of histone marks of open chromatin, and
engagement of active RNAPII to drive full-length RNA transcript elongation. Our
results suggest that reversible Ahr repression in ES cells holds the gene poised 
for expression and allows for a quick switch to activation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3896086
PMID: 24316986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 27;8(11):e81484. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081484.
eCollection 2013.

Prognostic value of EZH2 expression and activity in renal cell carcinoma: a
prospective study.

Liu L(1), Xu Z, Zhong L, Wang H, Jiang S, Long Q, Xu J, Guo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

Increased expression of EZH2 correlates with aggressive clinical behavior in
various malignancies. In this study, we aim to investigate the clinical and
prognostic values of EZH2 expression and activity in tumor tissues and improve
the risk stratification in patients with renal cell carcinoma after surgery. We
analyzed EZH2 expression and its activity as indicated by H3K27me3 levels
comprising 373 patients with renal cell carcinoma in our institute. Outcome was
assessed as overall survival and disease free survival using Kaplan-Meier
analysis. Prognostic values of EZH2 and H3K27me3 expression for clinical outcomes
were evaluated by Cox regression analysis. We used receiver operating
characteristic to calculate diagnostic accuracy. High EZH2 expression correlates 
with poor overall survival in all patients, especially in advanced RCC, which is 
an independent prognostic factor in disease free survival and overall survival.
Compared with EZH2, H3K27me3 expression is not an independent prognostic factor. 
The expressions of H3K27me3 and EZH2 are not completely consistent, which might
be due to complicated interaction of Polycomb Repressor Complex 2. A combination 
of EZH2 expression and TNM stage could have better prognostic value than do TNM
stage or EZH2 expression alone in both sets for disease free survival and overall
survival. These results imply that evaluating intratumoral EZH2 density might
improve prognostic value to the TNM staging system and inform treatment decisions
for patients with late-stage renal cell carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3842247
PMID: 24312307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Sep;55(9):2056-63. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.858816. Epub
2014 Feb 24.

Polycomb protein EZH2 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is associated
with better prognosis in patients treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone.

Lee HJ(1), Shin DH, Kim KB, Shin N, Park WY, Lee JH, Choi KU, Kim JY, Lee CH, Sol
MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University ,
Yangsan , Korea.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are evolutionarily conserved regulators of gene
expression that contribute to normal lymphocyte development, and are involved in 
malignant transformation of these cells. Recently, BMI1 and EZH2 have been shown 
to be involved in lymphomagenesis and oncogenesis. We tried to elucidate the role
of EZH2 as a prognostic factor for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
High-level expression of EZH2 (EZH2 = 70%) was associated with superior overall
survival (OS) of 85.8% compared to low expression (EZH2 < 70%), with OS of 44.5% 
(p = 0.005). Subgroup analysis showed that the activated B-cell (ABC) subtype
with high EZH2 expression had the highest overall survival (p = 0.011). In
analysis of EZH2 expression within low International Prognostic Index (IPI)
score, high EZH2 expression had a significant statistical correlation with longer
OS (p = 0.034). With high IPI score, high EZH2 expression tended to be associated
with longer OS (p = 0.130). Our results showed that EZH2 expression had a high
prognostic relevance to survival outcomes. We demonstrated that DLBCL was
associated with increased expression of the EZH2 PcG protein and Ki67. The
distribution of EZH2 expression was wider than that of Ki67. In summary,
increased EZH2 expression of tumor cells was associated with improvements in OS.

PMID: 24304372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. ACS Chem Biol. 2014 Mar 21;9(3):622-9. doi: 10.1021/cb4008748. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Long residence time inhibition of EZH2 in activated polycomb repressive complex
2.

Van Aller GS(1), Pappalardi MB, Ott HM, Diaz E, Brandt M, Schwartz BJ, Miller WH,
Dhanak D, McCabe MT, Verma SK, Creasy CL, Tummino PJ, Kruger RG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology R&D
and Platform Technology and Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, 1250 S. Collegeville
Road, Collegeville, Pennsylvania 19426, United States.

EZH2/PRC2 catalyzes transcriptionally repressive methylation at lysine 27 of
histone H3 and has been associated with numerous cancer types. Point mutations in
EZH2 at Tyr641 and Ala677 identified in non-Hodgkin lymphomas alter substrate
specificity and result in increased trimethylation at histone H3K27.
Interestingly, EZH2/PRC2 is activated by binding H3K27me3 marks on histones, and 
this activation is proposed as a mechanism for self-propagation of gene
silencing. Recent work has identified GSK126 as a potent, selective,
SAM-competitive inhibitor of EZH2 capable of globally decreasing H3K27
trimethylation in cells. Here we show that activation of PRC2 by an H3 peptide
trimethylated at K27 is primarily an effect on the rate-limiting step (kcat) with
no effect on substrate binding (Km). Additionally, GSK126 is shown to have a
significantly longer residence time of inhibition on the activated form of
EZH2/PRC2 as compared to unactivated EZH2/PRC2. Overall inhibition constant (Ki*)
values for GSK126 were determined to be as low as 93 pM and appear to be driven
by slow dissociation of inhibitor from the activated enzyme. The data suggest
that activation of EZH2 allows the enzyme to adopt a conformation that possesses 
greater affinity for GSK126. The long residence time of GSK126 may be beneficial 
in vivo and may result in durable target inhibition after drug systemic
clearance.

PMID: 24304166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 27;32:70. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-70.

EZH2 knockdown suppresses the growth and invasion of human inflammatory breast
cancer cells.

Mu Z, Li H, Fernandez SV, Alpaugh KR, Zhang R, Cristofanilli M.

INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is the most metastatic variant of 
breast cancer with the poorest survival in all types of breast cancer patients
and presently therapeutic targets for IBC are very limited. Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) is frequently expressed in human IBC and its expression
positively correlates with worse clinical outcome. However, the molecular basis
for EZH2 promoting IBC has not been explored. Here, we investigated the
functional role of EZH2 in IBC cells by examining the effects of its knockdown on
the formation of tumor spheroids and invasion of these cells in vitro and in vivo
in an orthotopic xenograft model.
METHODS: SUM149 and a new IBC cell line-FC-IBC-02 derived from pleural effusion
fluid of an IBC patient were used in this study. Specific knockdown of EZH2 was
performed using short hairpin RNA (shRNA) specific to the human EZH2 gene. Cell
growth and the formation of tumor spheroids were examined in vitro. The effects
of EZH2 knockdown on IBC cell migration and invasion were examined by a Boyden
chamber assay. For the in vivo tumor growth studies, IBC cells were
orthotopically transplanted into the mammary fat pads of immunodeficient mice.
RESULTS: The results showed that EZH2 is expressed at higher levels in human IBC 
cell lines compared with normal human mammary epithelial cells, and the knockdown
of EZH2 expression significantly suppressed cell growth and tumor spheroid
formation of human IBC cells in vitro. In addition, EZH2 knockdown inhibited the 
migration and invasion of IBC cells. Significantly, EZH2 knockdown suppressed the
angiogenesis and tumor growth of IBC cells in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide direct evidence that EZH2 is critical for the
formation of tumor spheroids and invasion of human IBC cells and could be a
potential target for developing novel therapeutic strategies for human IBC.

PMCID: PMC3850122
PMID: 24294976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Feb 27;21(2):231-9. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0497. Print
2014 Apr.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2, an oncogene common to benign and malignant
parathyroid tumors.

Svedlund J(1), Barazeghi E, Stålberg P, Hellman P, Åkerström G, Björklund P,
Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Endocrine Unit, Uppsala University, Uppsala
University Hospital, Entrance 70, 3 tr, SE-751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) resulting from parathyroid tumors is a common 
endocrine disorder with incompletely understood etiology. In renal failure,
secondary hyperparathyroidism (sHPT) occurs with multiple tumor development as a 
result of calcium and vitamin D regulatory disturbance. The aim of this study was
to investigate a potential role of the histone 3 lysine 27 methyltransferase EZH2
in parathyroid tumorigenesis. Parathyroid tumors from patients with pHPT included
adenomas and carcinomas. Hyperplastic parathyroid glands from patients with HPT
secondary to uremia and normal parathyroid tissue specimens were included in this
study. Quantitative RT-PCR, western blotting, bisulfite pyrosequencing, colony
formation assay, and RNA interference were used. EZH2 was overexpressed in a
subset of the benign and in all malignant parathyroid tumors as determined by
quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting analyses. Overexpression was explained
by EZH2 gene amplification in a large fraction of tumors. EZH2 depletion by RNA
interference inhibited sHPT-1 parathyroid cell line proliferation as determined
by tritium-thymidine incorporation and colony formation assays. EZH2 depletion
also interfered with the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway by increased expression 
of growth-suppressive AXIN2, a negative regulator of ß-catenin stability. Indeed,
EZH2 contributed to the total level of aberrantly accumulated transcriptionally
active (nonphosphoylated) ß-catenin in the parathyroid tumor cells. To our
knowledge EZH2 gene amplification presents the first genetic aberration common to
parathyroid adenomas, secondary hyperplastic parathyroid glands, and parathyroid 
carcinomas. This supports the possibility of a common pathway in parathyroid
tumor development.

PMID: 24292603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Dermatol Sci. 2014 Mar;73(3):258-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2013.11.003. Epub 
2013 Nov 11.

PGJ2 restores RA sensitivity in melanoma cells by decreasing PRAME and EZH2.

Pierron A(1), Le Pape E(1), Montaudié H(2), Castela E(2), De Donatis GM(1),
Allegra M(3), Bertolotto C(3), Rocchi S(3), Cheli Y(3), Ballotti R(4), Passeron
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire (C3M), team 12,
Nice, France. (2)INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire
(C3M), team 12, Nice, France; University Hospital of Nice, Department of
Dermatology, Nice, France. (3)INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine
Moléculaire (C3M), team 1, Nice, France. (4)University Hospital of Nice,
Department of Dermatology, Nice, France; INSERM, U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de
Médecine Moléculaire (C3M), team 1, Nice, France. (5)INSERM, U1065, Centre
Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire (C3M), team 12, Nice, France; University
Hospital of Nice, Department of Dermatology, Nice, France. Electronic address:
passeron@unice.fr.

PMID: 24289988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(10):5663-9.

Triptolide inhibits histone methyltransferase EZH2 and modulates the expression
of its target genes in prostate cancer cells.

Tamgue O(1), Chai CS, Hao L, Zambe JC, Huang WW, Zhang B, Lei M, Wei YM.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Molecular Biology, College of Life Science,
Northwest A and F University, Yangling, China E-mail : leiming70@hotmail.com,
weiyanming2005@aliyun.com.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) plays critical
roles in prostate cancer (PCa) development and is a potential target for PCa
treatment. Triptolide possesses anti-tumor activity, but it is unknown whether
its therapeutic effect relates with EZH2 in PCa. Here we described EZH2 as a
target for Triptolide in PCa cells. Our data showed that Triptolide suppressed
PCa cell growth and reduced the expression of EZH2. Overexpression of EZH2
attenuated the Triptolide induced cell growth inhibition. Moreover, Triptolide
treatment of PC-3 cells resulted in elevated mRNA levels of target genes (ADRB2, 
CDH1, CDKN2A and DAB2IP) negatively regulated by EZH2 as well as reduced mRNA
levelsan of EZH2 positively regulated gene (cyclin D1). Our findings suggest the 
PCa cell growth inhibition mediated by Triptolide might be associated with
downregulation of EZH2 expression and the subsequent modulation of target genes.

PMID: 24289559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. World J Surg Oncol. 2013 Nov 22;11:299. doi: 10.1186/1477-7819-11-299.

EZH2 expression in invasive lobular carcinoma of the breast.

Roh S(1), Park SY, Ko HS, Sohn JS, Cha EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Konyang University College of Medicine and Konyang
University Myunggok Medical Research Institute, 158 Gwanjeodong-ro, Seo-Gu,
Daejeon 302-718, South Korea. car754@naver.com.

BACKGROUND: Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most common histologic
type of breast cancer, but the prognosis of ILC is still controversial. Enhancer 
of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), the catalytic subunit of the Polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), is frequently overexpressed in various cancers. This study
evaluated the relationship between clinicopathologic characteristics and EZH2
expression.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 54 patients with ILC 
and selected 49 cases of ILC. Immunohistochemistry for EZH2 was undertaken.
RESULTS: We defined ILC as discohesive cells with a linear or nonlinear growth
pattern. No statistically significant difference was found for most variables,
including multifocality, menstrual status, body mass index, tumor stage (pT),
lymph node stage (pN), estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor. In contrast,
nuclear grade was statistically significant and EZH2 expression was associated
with high nuclear grade. In total, 80% of nuclear grade 3 cases had an EZH2 score
of 4, and 86% of nuclear grade 1 cases had EZH2 scores of 1 and 2. Our cases had 
a score of 3 for tubule formation and a score of 1 for mitosis, and so the
histologic grading consisted of grades 1 (7 cases) and 2 (42 cases) depending on 
the nuclear grade.
CONCLUSION: Although EZH2 could not predict survival in our study, EZH2
expression was associated with a high nuclear grade. Most ILCs have histologic
grade 2 with nuclear grade 2 or 3. Therefore, our opinion is that if ILC is
diagnosed by separating the classic type and variants and considering both EZH2
expression and nuclear grade, EZH2 overexpression could help and the Nottingham
grading system would be more accurate prognostic factor.

PMCID: PMC4222266
PMID: 24266940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Neurooncol. 2014 Jan;116(2):237-49. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1313-1. Epub 2013
Nov 22.

Epigenetic repression of the dopamine receptor D4 in pediatric tumors of the
central nervous system.

Unland R(1), Kerl K, Schlosser S, Farwick N, Plagemann T, Lechtape B, Clifford
SC, Kreth JH, Gerss J, Mühlisch J, Richter GH, Hasselblatt M, Frühwald MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.

Epigenetic alterations are common events in cancer. Using a genome wide
methylation screen (Restriction Landmark Genomic Scanning-RLGS) we identified the
gene for the dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) as tumor-specific methylated. As DRD4 is
involved in early brain development and may thus be involved in developmentally
dependent tumors of the CNS in children epigenetic deregulation of DRD4 and its
functional consequences were analyzed in vitro. CpG methylation of DRD4 was
detected in 18/24 medulloblastomas, 23/29 ependymomas, 6/6 high-grade gliomas,
7/10 CNS PNET and 8/8 cell lines by qCOBRA and bisulfite sequencing. Real-time
RT-PCR demonstrated a significantly inferior expression of DRD4 in primary tumors
compared to cell lines and non-malignant control tissues. Epigenetic deregulation
of DRD4 was analyzed in reexpression experiments and restoration of DRD4 was
observed in medulloblastoma (MB) cells treated with 5-Aza-CdR. Reexpression was
not accompanied by demethylation of the DRD4 promoter but by a significant
decrease of H3K27me3 and of bound enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2). Knockdown
of EZH2 demonstrated DRD4 as a direct target for inhibition by EZH2. Stimulation 
of reexpressed DRD4 resulted in an activation of ERK1/2. Our analyses thus
disclose that DRD4 is epigenetically repressed in CNS tumors of childhood. DRD4
is a direct target of EZH2 in MB cell lines. EZH2 appears to dominate over
aberrant DNA methylation in the epigenetic inhibition of DRD4, which eventually
leads to inhibition of a DRD4-mediated stimulation of the ERK1/2 kinase pathway.

PMID: 24264533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 22;32:96. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-32-96.

Regulation of microRNAs by epigenetics and their interplay involved in cancer.

Liu X, Chen X, Yu X, Tao Y, Bode AM, Dong Z, Cao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078,
China. ycao98@vip.sina.com.

Similar to protein-coding genes, miRNAs are also susceptible to epigenetic
modulation. Although numerous miRNAs have been shown to be affected by DNA
methylation, the regulatory mechanism of histone modification on miRNA is not
adequately understood. EZH2 and HDACs were recently identified as critical
histone modifiers of deregulated miRNAs in cancer and can be recruited to a miRNA
promoter by transcription factors such as MYC. Because miRNAs can modulate
epigenetic architecture and can be regulated by epigenetic alteration, they could
reasonably play an important role in mediating the crosstalk between epigenetic
regulators. The complicated network between miRNAs and epigenetic machineries
underlies the epigenetic-miRNA regulatory pathway, which is important in
monitoring gene expression profiles. Regulation of miRNAs by inducing epigenetic 
changes reveals promising avenues for the design of innovative strategies in the 
fight against human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3874662
PMID: 24261995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 15;8(11):e80970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080970.
eCollection 2013.

Altered expression of polycomb group genes in glioblastoma multiforme.

Li G(1), Warden C, Zou Z, Neman J, Krueger JS, Jain A, Jandial R, Chen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, California, United States of America.

The Polycomb group (PcG) proteins play a critical role in histone mediated
epigenetics which has been implicated in the malignant evolution of glioblastoma 
multiforme (GBM). By systematically interrogating The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA),
we discovered widespread aberrant expression of the PcG members in GBM samples
compared to normal brain. The most striking differences were upregulation of
EZH2, PHF19, CBX8 and PHC2 and downregulation of CBX7, CBX6, EZH1 and RYBP.
Interestingly, changes in EZH2, PHF19, CBX7, CBX6 and EZH1 occurred progressively
as astrocytoma grade increased. We validated the aberrant expression of CBX6,
CBX7, CBX8 and EZH2 in GBM cell lines by Western blotting and qRT-PCR, and
further the aberrant expression of CBX6 in GBM tissue samples by
immunohistochemical staining. To determine if there was functional significance
to the diminished CBX6 levels in GBM, CBX6 was overexpressed in GBM cells
resulting in decreased proliferative capacity. In conclusion, aberrant expression
of PcG proteins in GBMs may play a role in the development or maintenance of the 
malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3829908
PMID: 24260522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Epigenetics. 2014 Jan;9(1):101-12. doi: 10.4161/epi.26405. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Interplay of chromatin modifications and non-coding RNAs in the heart.

Mathiyalagan P(1), Keating ST(1), Du XJ(2), El-Osta A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease Laboratory; Baker IDI Heart and
Diabetes Institute; The Alfred Medical Research and Education Precinct;
Melbourne, VIC Australia. (2)Experimental Cardiology Laboratory; Baker IDI Heart 
and Diabetes Institute; Melbourne, VIC Australia. (3)Epigenetics in Human Health 
and Disease Laboratory; Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute; The Alfred
Medical Research and Education Precinct; Melbourne, VIC Australia; Epigenomics
Profiling Facility; Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute; The Alfred Medical
Research and Education Precinct; Melbourne, VIC Australia; Department of
Pathology; The University of Melbourne; Melbourne, VIC Australia; Faculty of
Medicine; Monash University; Melbourne, VIC Australia.

Precisely regulated patterns of gene expression are dependent on the binding of
transcription factors and chromatin-associated determinants referred to as
co-activators and co-repressors. These regulatory components function with the
core transcriptional machinery to serve in critical activities to alter chromatin
modification and regulate gene expression. While we are beginning to understand
that cell-type specific patterns of gene expression are necessary to achieve
selective cardiovascular developmental programs, we still do not know the
molecular machineries that localize these determinants in the heart. With clear
implications for the epigenetic control of gene expression signatures, the ENCODE
(Encyclopedia of DNA Elements) Project Consortium determined that about 90% of
the human genome is transcribed while only 1-2% of transcripts encode proteins.
Emerging evidence suggests that non-coding RNA (ncRNA) serves as a signal for
decoding chromatin modifications and provides a potential molecular basis for
cell type-specific and promoter-specific patterns of gene expression. The
discovery of the histone methyltransferase enzyme EZH2 in the regulation of gene 
expression patterns implicated in cardiac hypertrophy suggests a novel role for
chromatin-associated ncRNAs and is the focus of this article.

PMCID: PMC3928172
PMID: 24247090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Jan 2;14(1):68-80. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.10.001. Epub
2013 Nov 14.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 regulates normal hematopoietic stem cell function
in a developmental-stage-specific manner.

Xie H(1), Xu J(1), Hsu JH(1), Nguyen M(1), Fujiwara Y(2), Peng C(1), Orkin SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of Hematology/Oncology,
Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: stuart_orkin@dfci.harvard.edu.

Recent studies point to a pivotal role of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in
stem cell function and cancer. Loss-of-function approaches targeting individual
PRC2 subunits have, however, generated findings that are difficult to reconcile. 
Here, we prevent assembly of both Ezh1- and Ezh2-containing PRC2 complexes by
conditional deletion of Eed, a core subunit, and assess hematopoiesis. We find
that deletion of Eed exhausts adult bone marrow hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), 
although fetal liver HSCs are produced in normal numbers. Eed-null neonatal HSCs 
express HSC signature genes but are defective in maintenance and differentiation.
Comparative gene expression profiling revealed that neonatal and adult HSCs
lacking Eed upregulated gene sets of conflicting pathways. Deletion of Cdkn2a, a 
PRC2 target gene, in Eed-null mice enhances hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell
(HSPC) survival but fails to restore HSC functions. Taken together, our findings 
define developmental-stage-specific requirements for canonical PRC2 complexes in 
normal HSC function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947409
PMID: 24239285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Immunity. 2013 Nov 14;39(5):819-32. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.09.012.

The polycomb protein Ezh2 regulates differentiation and plasticity of CD4(+) T
helper type 1 and type 2 cells.

Tumes DJ(1), Onodera A, Suzuki A, Shinoda K, Endo Y, Iwamura C, Hosokawa H,
Koseki H, Tokoyoda K, Suzuki Y, Motohashi S, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

After antigen encounter by CD4(+) T cells, polarizing cytokines induce the
expression of master regulators that control differentiation. Inactivation of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2 was found to specifically enhance T helper 1 (Th1)
and Th2 cell differentiation and plasticity. Ezh2 directly bound and facilitated 
correct expression of Tbx21 and Gata3 in differentiating Th1 and Th2 cells,
accompanied by substantial trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3).
In addition, Ezh2 deficiency resulted in spontaneous generation of discrete IFN-<U+03B3>
and Th2 cytokine-producing populations in nonpolarizing cultures, and under these
conditions IFN-<U+03B3> expression was largely dependent on enhanced expression of the
transcription factor Eomesodermin. In vivo, loss of Ezh2 caused increased
pathology in a model of allergic asthma and resulted in progressive accumulation 
of memory phenotype Th2 cells. This study establishes a functional link between
Ezh2 and transcriptional regulation of lineage-specifying genes in terminally
differentiated CD4(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24238339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Exp Med. 2013 Nov 18;210(12):2627-39. doi: 10.1084/jem.20131144. Epub 2013 Nov 
11.

Concurrent loss of Ezh2 and Tet2 cooperates in the pathogenesis of
myelodysplastic disorders.

Muto T(1), Sashida G, Oshima M, Wendt GR, Mochizuki-Kashio M, Nagata Y, Sanada M,
Miyagi S, Saraya A, Kamio A, Nagae G, Nakaseko C, Yokote K, Shimoda K, Koseki H, 
Suzuki Y, Sugano S, Aburatani H, Ogawa S, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine and 2 Department of Clinical
Cell Biology and Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba
260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are essential regulators of hematopoietic stem
cells. Recent extensive mutation analyses of the myeloid malignancies have
revealed that inactivating somatic mutations in PcG genes such as EZH2 and ASXL1 
occur frequently in patients with myelodysplastic disorders including
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) and MDS/myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN)
overlap disorders (MDS/MPN). In our patient cohort, EZH2 mutations were also
found and often coincided with tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2) mutations.
Consistent with these findings, deletion of Ezh2 alone was enough to induce
MDS/MPN-like diseases in mice. Furthermore, concurrent depletion of Ezh2 and Tet2
established more advanced myelodysplasia and markedly accelerated the development
of myelodysplastic disorders including both MDS and MDS/MPN. Comprehensive
genome-wide analyses in hematopoietic progenitor cells revealed that upon
deletion of Ezh2, key developmental regulator genes were kept transcriptionally
repressed, suggesting compensation by Ezh1, whereas a cohort of oncogenic direct 
and indirect polycomb targets became derepressed. Our findings provide the first 
evidence of the tumor suppressor function of EZH2 in myeloid malignancies and
highlight the cooperative effect of concurrent gene mutations in the pathogenesis
of myelodysplastic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3832936
PMID: 24218139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(3):1606-18. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1096. Epub 2013
Nov 11.

Cellular senescence mediated by p16INK4A-coupled miRNA pathways.

Overhoff MG(1), Garbe JC, Koh J, Stampfer MR, Beach DH, Bishop CL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Blizard Institute, Barts and the London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 4 Newark Street,
London, E1 2AT, UK, Life Science Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA and Division of Surgical Sciences, Department of Surgery,
Duke University Medical School, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

p16 is a key regulator of cellular senescence, yet the drivers of this stable
state of proliferative arrest are not well understood. Here, we identify 22
senescence-associated microRNAs (SA-miRNAs) in normal human mammary epithelial
cells. We show that SA-miRNAs-26b, 181a, 210 and 424 function in concert to
directly repress expression of Polycomb group (PcG) proteins CBX7, embryonic
ectoderm development (EED), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and suppressor
of zeste 12 homologue (Suz12), thereby activating p16. We demonstrate the
existence of a tight positive feedback loop in which SA-miRNAs activate and
re-enforce the expression of other SA-miRNA members. In contrast, PcG members
restrain senescence by epigenetically repressing the expression of these
SA-miRNAs. Importantly, loss of p16 leads to repression of SA-miRNA expression,
intimately coupling this effector of senescence to the SA-miRNA/PcG
self-regulatory loop. Taken together, our findings illuminate an important
regulatory axis that underpins the transition from proliferation to cellular
senescence.

PMCID: PMC3919591
PMID: 24217920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Clin Invest. 2013 Nov;123(11):4849-58.

Combined modulation of polycomb and trithorax genes rejuvenates ß cell
replication.

Zhou JX, Dhawan S, Fu H, Snyder E, Bottino R, Kundu S, Kim SK, Bhushan A.

Inadequate functional ß cell mass underlies both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. ß
Cell growth and regeneration also decrease with age through mechanisms that are
not fully understood. Age-dependent loss of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
prevents adult ß cell replication through derepression of the gene encoding
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2a (INK4a). We investigated whether
replenishing EZH2 could reverse the age-dependent increase of Ink4a
transcription. We generated an inducible pancreatic ß cell-specific Ezh2
transgenic mouse model and showed that transgene expression of Ezh2 was
sufficient to increase ß cell replication and regeneration in young adult mice.
In mice older than 8 months, induction of Ezh2 was unable to repress Ink4a. Older
mice had an enrichment of a trithorax group (TrxG) protein complex at the Ink4a
locus. Knockdown of TrxG complex components, in conjunction with expression of
Ezh2, resulted in Ink4a repression and increased replication of ß cells in aged
mice. These results indicate that combined modulation of polycomb group proteins,
such as EZH2, along with TrxG proteins to repress Ink4a can rejuvenate the
replication capacity of aged ß cells. This study provides potential therapeutic
targets for expansion of adult ß cell mass.

PMCID: PMC3809789
PMID: 24216481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Dec;161A(12):2972-80. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36229. Epub 2013
Nov 8.

Weaver syndrome and EZH2 mutations: Clarifying the clinical phenotype.

Tatton-Brown K(1), Murray A, Hanks S, Douglas J, Armstrong R, Banka S, Bird LM,
Clericuzio CL, Cormier-Daire V, Cushing T, Flinter F, Jacquemont ML, Joss S,
Kinning E, Lynch SA, Magee A, McConnell V, Medeira A, Ozono K, Patton M, Rankin
J, Shears D, Simon M, Splitt M, Strenger V, Stuurman K, Taylor C, Titheradge H,
Van Maldergem L, Temple IK, Cole T, Seal S; Childhood Overgrowth Consortium,
Rahman N.

Collaborators: Addor MC, Akgul M, Amor D, Anderson K, Anderson R, Andries S,
Archer H, Armstrong R, Ashton-Prolla P, Bahceci M, Baralle D, Barnicoat A, Barrow
M, Baujat G, Baynam G, Beales P, Becker K, Beckh-Arnold E, Ben-Yehuda A, Berg J, 
Bernhard B, Bhal S, Bhat M, Birch J, Bird L, Bitner M, Blair E, Bliek J, Blyth M,
Bottani A, Bradley L, Brady A, Breatnach F, Brueton L, Buehler B, Burke A, Burn
J, Campbell J, Canham N, Castle B, Chandler K, Chandrasena R, Chang E, Chu C,
Christenden C, Cilliers D, Clarke A, Clayton-Smith J, Clericuzio C, Clowes V,
Cole T, Colley A, Collins A, Connell F, Cook J, Cordeiro H, Crocker C, Crow Y,
Culic V, Cushing T, Dabir T, Dalton A, Danda S, Davidson R, Davies S, Day R, De
Roy M, de Soberanis V, Dearnaley D, Dennis N, Deshpande C, Desouza B, Devlin L,
Differ AM, Dinwiddie R, Dixit A, Dobbie A, Dominguez J, Donaldson A, Donnai D,
Doz M, Dupont J, Eastwood D, Edwards M, Ellis I, Elmslie F, Evans R, Faravelli F,
Firth H, Fisher R, Fiskerstrand T, Fitzpatrick D, Flanagan A, Flinter F, Foley P,
Foulds N, Foulkes W, Franklin J, Fryer A, Gallagher A, Garcia S, Gardiner C,
Gardner M, Garrett C, Gener B, Gerrard M, Gibbons R, Gillerot Y, Goel H, Goudie
D, Gowrishankar K, Graham C, Green A, Gregersen N, Hale J, Harper J, Harrison R, 
Hughes H, Henderson A, Henman P, Hennekam R, Hobson E, Holder M, Holder S,
Homfray T, Horovitz D, Huma Z, Hurst J, Hwu WL, Irvine A, Irving M, Izatt L,
Jacquemont ML, Jagadeesh S, Jenkins L, Jessen C, Johnson D, Jones E, Jones L,
Josifova D, Joss S, Kanabar, Kannu P, Keppler-Noreuil K, Kerr B, Kingston H,
Kingston J, Kini U, Kinning E, Krause A, Kumar A, Kumar D, Lachlan K, Lam W,
Lapunzina P, Lees M, Leonard N, Lewis I, Liebelt J, Livesey A, Longman C,
Lopponen T, Lozano, Lucassen A, Lunt P, Lynch SA, Lyonnet S, MacDonnell J, Magee 
A, Maher E, Maitz S, Male A, Mansour S, McConnell V, McDevitt T, McEntagart M,
McGillivray G, McGowan R, McKee S, McKeown C, Meany C, Medeira A, Mehta S, Meiner
V, Metcalfe K, Milstein K, Mohammed S, Monaghan G, Montgomery T, Morgan A,
Morland B, Morrison P, Morton J, Mudgal R, Munaza A, Murday V, Nampoothiri S,
Nathanson K, Neas K, Nemeth A, Neri G, Newbury-Ecob R, Ockeloen C, Oley C, Owen
C, Ozono K, Panarello C, Park SM, Parker M, Patel C, Patton M, Payne S, Pilz D,
Pinkney M, Plecko B, Pocha M, Pottinger C, Prescott K, Price S, Pritchard-Jones
K, Proctor A, Quarrell O, Raith W, Rankin J, Raymond L, Rea G, Reardon W, Reid E,
Rees H, Rittinger O, Robards M, Roposch A, Rosser E, Rothschild A, Rourke D,
Ruddy D, Saggar A, Saleh N, Saletti V, Sampson J, Sandford R, Santos H, Sarkar A,
Scott R, Scurr I, Selicorni A, Semple R, Sharif S, Shaw A, Shaw-Smith C, Shears
D, Shelagh J, Simon M, Smith G, Smithson S, Splitt M, Stevens M, Stewart A,
Stopps K, Stuurman K, Suri M, Swain A, Tanateles G, Taylor A, Taylor C, Teixeira 
M, Temple K, Thomas E, Thompson E, Thonney F, Tischowitz M, Tolmie J, Tomkins S, 
Turkmen S, Turner A, Turnpenny P, Van-Haelst M, Van Maldergem L, Vasudevan P,
Verellen C, Verma IC, Vigneron J, Wakeling E, Wainwright L, Walker L, Wheeler P, 
White K, Williams D, Wilson L, Winter R, Woods G, Wright M, Yachelevich N, Yeung 
A, Zankl A, Stewart F, Stewart H, Sweeney E.

Weaver syndrome, first described in 1974, is characterized by tall stature, a
typical facial appearance, and variable intellectual disability. In 2011,
mutations in the histone methyltransferase, EZH2, were shown to cause Weaver
syndrome. To date, we have identified 48 individuals with EZH2 mutations. The
mutations were primarily missense mutations occurring throughout the gene, with
some clustering in the SET domain (12/48). Truncating mutations were uncommon
(4/48) and only identified in the final exon, after the SET domain. Through
analyses of clinical data and facial photographs of EZH2 mutation-positive
individuals, we have shown that the facial features can be subtle and the
clinical diagnosis of Weaver syndrome is thus challenging, especially in older
individuals. However, tall stature is very common, reported in >90% of affected
individuals. Intellectual disability is also common, present in ~80%, but is
highly variable and frequently mild. Additional clinical features which may help 
in stratifying individuals to EZH2 mutation testing include camptodactyly, soft, 
doughy skin, umbilical hernia, and a low, hoarse cry. Considerable phenotypic
overlap between Sotos and Weaver syndromes is also evident. The identification of
an EZH2 mutation can therefore provide an objective means of confirming a subtle 
presentation of Weaver syndrome and/or distinguishing Weaver and Sotos syndromes.
As mutation testing becomes increasingly accessible and larger numbers of EZH2
mutation-positive individuals are identified, knowledge of the clinical spectrum 
and prognostic implications of EZH2 mutations should improve.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24214728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Oncogene. 2014 Aug 7;33(32):4173-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.471. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

The Polycomb group (PcG) protein EZH2 supports the survival of PAX3-FOXO1
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma by repressing FBXO32 (Atrogin1/MAFbx).

Ciarapica R(1), De Salvo M(1), Carcarino E(2), Bracaglia G(1), Adesso L(1),
Leoncini PP(1), Dall'Agnese A(2), Walters ZS(3), Verginelli F(1), De Sio L(1),
Boldrini R(4), Inserra A(5), Bisogno G(6), Rosolen A(6), Alaggio R(7), Ferrari
A(8), Collini P(9), Locatelli M(10), Stifani S(11), Screpanti I(12), Rutella
S(1), Yu Q(13), Marquez VE(14), Shipley J(3), Valente S(15), Mai A(15), Miele
L(16), Puri PL(17), Locatelli F(18), Palacios D(2), Rota R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncohematology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma,
Italy. (2)IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy. (3)Sarcoma Molecular
Pathology, Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK. (4)Department of Pathology, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy. (5)Department of Surgery, Ospedale
Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy. (6)Department of Pediatrics,
Oncohematology Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (7)Medicine DIMED,
Pathology Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (8)Pediatric Oncology Unit, 
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy. (9)Anatomic
Pathology Unit 2, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milano, Italy. 
(10)Scientific Directorate, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma, Italy.
(11)Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (12)Department of Molecular Medicine,
Sapienza University, Roma, Italy. (13)Cancer Therapeutics and Stratified
Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore. (14)Chemical Biology Laboratory, Frederick National
Laboratory for Cancer Research, CCR, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Frederick,
MD, USA. (15)Istituto Pasteur, Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di
Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy. (16)Cancer
Institute, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA. (17)1]
IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy [2] Muscle Development and Regeneration
Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA. (18)1]
Department of Oncohematology, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Roma,
Italy [2] Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

The Polycomb group (PcG) proteins regulate stem cell differentiation via the
repression of gene transcription, and their deregulation has been widely
implicated in cancer development. The PcG protein Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2
(EZH2) works as a catalytic subunit of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2)
by methylating lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3), a hallmark of PRC2-mediated
gene repression. In skeletal muscle progenitors, EZH2 prevents an unscheduled
differentiation by repressing muscle-specific gene expression and is
downregulated during the course of differentiation. In rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a 
pediatric soft-tissue sarcoma thought to arise from myogenic precursors, EZH2 is 
abnormally expressed and its downregulation in vitro leads to muscle-like
differentiation of RMS cells of the embryonal variant. However, the role of EZH2 
in the clinically aggressive subgroup of alveolar RMS, characterized by the
expression of PAX3-FOXO1 oncoprotein, remains unknown. We show here that EZH2
depletion in these cells leads to programmed cell death. Transcriptional
derepression of F-box protein 32 (FBXO32) (Atrogin1/MAFbx), a gene associated
with muscle homeostasis, was evidenced in PAX3-FOXO1 RMS cells silenced for EZH2.
This phenomenon was associated with reduced EZH2 occupancy and H3K27me3 levels at
the FBXO32 promoter. Simultaneous knockdown of FBXO32 and EZH2 in PAX3-FOXO1 RMS 
cells impaired the pro-apoptotic response, whereas the overexpression of FBXO32
facilitated programmed cell death in EZH2-depleted cells. Pharmacological
inhibition of EZH2 by either 3-Deazaneplanocin A or a catalytic EZH2 inhibitor
mirrored the phenotypic and molecular effects of EZH2 knockdown in vitro and
prevented tumor growth in vivo. Collectively, these results indicate that EZH2 is
a key factor in the proliferation and survival of PAX3-FOXO1 alveolar RMS cells
working, at least in part, by repressing FBXO32. They also suggest that the
reducing activity of EZH2 could represent a novel adjuvant strategy to eradicate 
high-risk PAX3-FOXO1 alveolar RMS.

PMID: 24213577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jan;33(1):91-6. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1549. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Cancer-associated fibroblasts enhance the migration ability of ovarian cancer
cells by increasing EZH2 expression.

Xu L(1), Deng Q, Pan Y, Peng M, Wang X, Song L, Xiao M, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R.
China.

The tumor microenvironment is thought to affect malignant transformation and
tumor progression. The histone methyltransferase, enhancer of zeste homologue 2
(EZH2), has recently been suggested to play a critical role in the tumorigenesis 
of several types of human cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate the
effects of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) on the expression of EZH2 and the
migration ability of ovarian cancer cells, in order to explore the link between
the tumor microenvironment and epigenetic regulation. The ovarian cancer cell
lines, A2780, SKOV3 and ES2, were indirectly co-cultured with primary ovarian
CAFs or normal fibroblasts (NFs). The migration ability of the ovarian cancer
cells was determined by Transwell migration assay. The expression levels of EZH2 
were assessed by quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) and western
blot analysis. The A2780-shEZH2 cells (A2780 cells transfected with shRNA
targeting EZH2) were indirectly co-cultured with CAFs or NFs, and the changes in 
the expression levels of EZH2 and the migration ability of the cells were
detected. The migration ability of the A2780, SKOV3 and ES2 cells co-cultured
with CAFs was significantly enhanced (P<0.05) compared with the NF group and the 
cells cultured alone. The expression of EZH2 in the A2780, SKOV3 and ES2 cells
was significantly increased following co-culture with CAFs (P<0.001) compared
with the cells cultured alone but not those cultured with NFs. The migration
ability of the A2780-shEZH2 cells was not significantly increased following
co-culture with CAFs (P>0.05). Our data indicate that CAFs enhance the migration 
ability of ovarian cancer cells partly by increasing EZH2 expression.

PMID: 24212330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Hepatol. 2014 Mar;60(3):590-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.10.028. Epub 2013 Nov
6.

MicroRNA-101 inhibits human hepatocellular carcinoma progression through EZH2
downregulation and increased cytostatic drug sensitivity.

Xu L(1), Beckebaum S(2), Iacob S(3), Wu G(4), Kaiser GM(5), Radtke A(6), Liu
C(7), Kabar I(8), Schmidt HH(8), Zhang X(9), Lu M(10), Cicinnati VR(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Transplant Medicine, University Hospital Münster, Münster,
Germany; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany; HPB Surgical Department, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Transplant Medicine, University Hospital
Münster, Münster, Germany; Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation
Surgery, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Department of Transplant
Medicine, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany; Fundeni Clinical
Institute, Gastroenterology and Hepatology Center, Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Transplant Medicine, University Hospital Münster, Münster,
Germany; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital
Essen, Essen, Germany. (5)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation
Surgery, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. (6)Department of General,
Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany; 
Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Hospital Münster, Münster,
Germany. (7)HPB Surgical Department, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou,
China. (8)Department of Transplant Medicine, University Hospital Münster,
Münster, Germany. (9)Institute of Virology, University Hospital Essen, Essen,
Germany; Hepatology Unit and Department of Infectious Diseases, Nanfang Hospital,
Guangzhou, China. (10)Institute of Virology, University Hospital Essen, Essen,
Germany. (11)Department of Transplant Medicine, University Hospital Münster,
Münster, Germany; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. Electronic address: vito.cicinnati@ukmuenster.de.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Oncogene polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) has been proposed to be a target gene of putative tumor suppressor
microRNA-101 (miR-101). The aim of our study was to investigate the functional
role of both miR-101 and EZH2 in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: MiR-101 and EZH2 expressions were evaluated in tumor tissues of 99 HCC
patients and 7 liver cancer cell lines by real-time PCR. Luciferase reporter
assay was employed to validate whether EZH2 represents a target gene of miR-101. 
The effect of miR-101 on HCC growth as well as programmed cell death was studied 
in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: MiR-101 expression was significantly downregulated in most of HCC
tissues and all cell lines, whereas EZH2 was significantly overexpressed in most 
of HCC tissues and all cell lines. There was a negative correlation between
expression levels of miR-101 and EZH2. Luciferase assay results confirmed EZH2 as
a direct target gene of miR-101, which negatively regulates EZH2 expression in
HCC. Ectopic overexpression of miR-101 dramatically repressed proliferation,
invasion, colony formation as well as cell cycle progression in vitro and
suppressed tumorigenicity in vivo. Furthermore, miR-101 inhibited autophagy and
synergized with either doxorubicin or fluorouracil to induce apoptosis in tumor
cells.
CONCLUSION: Tumor suppressor miR-101 represses HCC progression through directly
targeting EZH2 oncogene and sensitizes liver cancer cells to chemotherapeutic
treatment. Our findings provide significant insights into molecular mechanisms of
hepatocarcinogenesis and may have clinical relevance for the development of novel
targeted therapies for HCC.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24211739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell. 2013 Oct 24;52(2):157-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.10.008.

PAF makes it EZ(H2) for ß-catenin transactivation.

Zhang X(1), He X.

Author information: 
(1)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2013 Oct 24;52(2):193-205.

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Park and colleagues (Jung et al., 2013) show
that PAF (PCNA-associated factor) binds to and hyperactivates transcriptional
function of ß-catenin in colon cancer cells by recruiting EZH2 to the coactivator
complex. PAF-ß-catenin and PAF-PCNA interactions are competitive, raising the
question of whether ß-catenin might regulate PCNA-dependent DNA replication and
repair.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3848709
PMID: 24210173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Urol. 2013 Dec;190(6):2306. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2013.08.057. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Re: Long non-coding RNA H19 increases bladder cancer metastasis by associating
with EZH2 and inhibiting E-cadherin expression.

Atala A.

Comment on
    Cancer Lett. 2013 Jun 10;333(2):213-21.

PMID: 24209571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cancers (Basel). 2013 Jul 4;5(3):857-74. doi: 10.3390/cancers5030857.

Induction of Chromosomal Instability via Telomere Dysfunction and Epigenetic
Alterations in Myeloid Neoplasia.

Vajen B(1), Thomay K, Schlegelberger B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
schlegelberger.brigitte@mh-hannover.de.

Chromosomal instability (CIN) is a characteristic feature of cancer. In this
review, we concentrate on mechanisms leading to CIN in myeloid neoplasia, i.e.,
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The pathogenesis 
of myeloid neoplasia is complex and involves genetic and epigenetic alterations. 
Chromosome aberrations define specific subgroups and guide clinical decisions.
Genomic instability may play an essential role in leukemogenesis by promoting the
accumulation of genetic lesions responsible for clonal evolution. Indeed, disease
progression is often driven by clonal evolution into complex karyotypes. Earlier 
studies have shown an association between telomere shortening and advanced MDS
and underlined the important role of dysfunctional telomeres in the development
of genetic instability and cancer. Several studies link chromosome rearrangements
and aberrant DNA and histone methylation. Genes implicated in epigenetic control,
like DNMT3A, ASXL1, EZH2 and TET2, have been discovered to be mutated in MDS.
Moreover, gene-specific hypermethylation correlates highly significantly with the
risk score according to the International Prognostic Scoring System. In AML,
methylation profiling also revealed clustering dependent on the genetic status.
Clearly, genetic instability and clonal evolution are driving forces for leukemic
transformation. Understanding the mechanisms inducing CIN will be important for
prevention and for novel approaches towards therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3795368
PMID: 24202323  [PubMed]


359. J Clin Invest. 2013 Dec;123(12):5009-22. doi: 10.1172/JCI70626. Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Germinal center dysregulation by histone methyltransferase EZH2 promotes
lymphomagenesis.

Caganova M, Carrisi C, Varano G, Mainoldi F, Zanardi F, Germain PL, George L,
Alberghini F, Ferrarini L, Talukder AK, Ponzoni M, Testa G, Nojima T, Doglioni C,
Kitamura D, Toellner KM, Su IH, Casola S.

Erratum in
    J Clin Invest. 2014 Apr 1;124(4):1869.

Protection against deadly pathogens requires the production of high-affinity
antibodies by B cells, which are generated in germinal centers (GCs). Alteration 
of the GC developmental program is common in many B cell malignancies.
Identification of regulators of the GC response is crucial to develop targeted
therapies for GC B cell dysfunctions, including lymphomas. The histone H3 lysine 
27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is highly expressed in GC
B cells and is often constitutively activated in GC-derived non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(NHLs). The function of EZH2 in GC B cells remains largely unknown. Herein, we
show that Ezh2 inactivation in mouse GC B cells caused profound impairment of GC 
responses, memory B cell formation, and humoral immunity. EZH2 protected GC B
cells against activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) mutagenesis,
facilitated cell cycle progression, and silenced plasma cell determinant and
tumor suppressor B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (BLIMP1). EZH2
inhibition in NHL cells induced BLIMP1, which impaired tumor growth. In
conclusion, EZH2 sustains AID function and prevents terminal differentiation of
GC B cells, which allows antibody diversification and affinity maturation.
Dysregulation of the GC reaction by constitutively active EZH2 facilitates
lymphomagenesis and identifies EZH2 as a possible therapeutic target in NHL and
other GC-derived B cell diseases.

PMCID: PMC3859423
PMID: 24200695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Dec 16;21(1):51-61. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0375. Print
2014 Feb.

Deregulated expression of selected histone methylases and demethylases in
prostate carcinoma.

Vieira FQ(1), Costa-Pinheiro P, Ramalho-Carvalho J, Pereira A, Menezes FD,
Antunes L, Carneiro I, Oliveira J, Henrique R, Jerónimo C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Group, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Research Center, Rua 
Dr António Bernardino Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal School of Allied Health
Sciences (ESTSP), Polytechnic of Porto, Portugal Department of Pathology
Department of Epidemiology Department of Urology, Portuguese Oncology Institute, 
Porto, Portugal Department of Pathology and Molecular Immunology, Institute of
Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Prostate cancer (PCa), a leading cause of cancer-related morbidity and mortality,
arises through the acquisition of genetic and epigenetic alterations.
Deregulation of histone methyltransferases (HMTs) or demethylases (HDMs) has been
associated with PCa development and progression. However, the precise influence
of altered HMTs or HDMs expression and respective histone marks in PCa onset and 
progression remains largely unknown. To clarify the role of HMTs and HDMs in
prostate carcinogenesis, expression levels of 37 HMTs and 20 HDMs were assessed
in normal prostate and PCa tissue samples by RT-qPCR. SMYD3, SUV39H2, PRMT6,
KDM5A, and KDM6A were upregulated, whereas KMT2A-E (MLL1-5) and KDM4B were
downregulated in PCa, compared with normal prostate tissues. Remarkably, PRMT6
was the histone modifier that best discriminated normal from tumorous tissue
samples. Interestingly, EZH2 and SMYD3 expression levels significantly correlated
with less differentiated and more aggressive tumors. Remarkably, SMYD3 expression
levels were of independent prognostic value for the prediction of
disease-specific survival of PCa patients with clinically localized disease
submitted to radical prostatectomy. We concluded that expression profiling of
HMTs and HDMs, especially SMYD3, might be of clinical usefulness for the
assessment of PCa patients and assist in pre-therapeutic decision-making.

PMID: 24200674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Chem Biol. 2013 Nov 21;20(11):1329-39. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2013.09.013. Epub 
2013 Oct 31.

Identification of EZH2 and EZH1 small molecule inhibitors with selective impact
on diffuse large B cell lymphoma cell growth.

Garapaty-Rao S(1), Nasveschuk C, Gagnon A, Chan EY, Sandy P, Busby J,
Balasubramanian S, Campbell R, Zhao F, Bergeron L, Audia JE, Albrecht BK,
Harmange JC, Cummings R, Trojer P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Constellation Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

The histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a candidate
oncogene due to its prevalent overexpression in malignant diseases, including
late stage prostate and breast cancers. The dependency of cancer cells on EZH2
activity is also predicated by recurrent missense mutations residing in the
catalytic domain of EZH2 that have been identified in subtypes of diffuse large B
cell lymphoma, follicular lymphoma and melanoma. Herein, we report the
identification of a highly selective small molecule inhibitor series of EZH2 and 
EZH1. These compounds inhibit wild-type and mutant versions of EZH2 with
nanomolar potency, suppress global histone H3-lysine 27 methylation, affect gene 
expression, and cause selective proliferation defects. These compounds represent 
a structurally distinct EZH2 inhibitor chemotype for the exploration of the role 
of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2-mediated H3K27 methylation in various biological
contexts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24183969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Lett. 2014 Mar 1;344(1):20-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.10.021. Epub 2013
Oct 30.

Long noncoding RNAs: Novel insights into hepatocelluar carcinoma.

He Y(1), Meng XM(1), Huang C(1), Wu BM(1), Zhang L(1), Lv XW(1), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; The Key Laboratory of
Anti-Inflammatory and Immune Medicine (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of
Education, China; Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University
(ILD-AMU), Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China. (2)School of Pharmacy, 
Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230032, China; The Key Laboratory of Anti-Inflammatory and
Immune Medicine (Anhui Medical University), Ministry of Education, China;
Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University (ILD-AMU), Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230032, China. Electronic address: heyongR99@163.com.

Recent advances in non-protein coding part of human genome analysis have
discovered extensive transcription of large RNA transcripts that lack of coding
protein function, termed long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs). It is becoming evident
that lncRNAs may be an important class of pervasive genes involved in
carcinogenesis and metastasis. However, the biological and molecular mechanisms
of lncRNAs in diverse diseases are not yet fully understood. Thus, it is
anticipated that more efforts should be made to clarify the lncRNAs world.
Moreover, accumulating studies have demonstrated that a class of lncRNAs are
dysregulated in hepatocellular carcinoma(HCC) and closely related with
tumorigenesis, metastasis, prognosis or diagnosis. In this review, we will
briefly discuss the regulation and functional role of lncRNAs in HCC, therefore
evaluating the potential of lncRNAs as prospective novel therapeutic targets in
HCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24183851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cancer Cell. 2013 Nov 11;24(5):660-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.10.006. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

Reduced H3K27me3 and DNA hypomethylation are major drivers of gene expression in 
K27M mutant pediatric high-grade gliomas.

Bender S(1), Tang Y, Lindroth AM, Hovestadt V, Jones DT, Kool M, Zapatka M,
Northcott PA, Sturm D, Wang W, Radlwimmer B, Højfeldt JW, Truffaux N, Castel D,
Schubert S, Ryzhova M, Seker-Cin H, Gronych J, Johann PD, Stark S, Meyer J, Milde
T, Schuhmann M, Ebinger M, Monoranu CM, Ponnuswami A, Chen S, Jones C, Witt O,
Collins VP, von Deimling A, Jabado N, Puget S, Grill J, Helin K, Korshunov A,
Lichter P, Monje M, Plass C, Cho YJ, Pfister SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology, and
Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Two recurrent mutations, K27M and G34R/V, within histone variant H3.3 were
recently identified in ~50% of pHGGs. Both mutations define clinically and
biologically distinct subgroups of pHGGs. Here, we provide further insight about 
the dominant-negative effect of K27M mutant H3.3, leading to a global reduction
of the repressive histone mark H3K27me3. We demonstrate that this is caused by
aberrant recruitment of the PRC2 complex to K27M mutant H3.3 and enzymatic
inhibition of the H3K27me3-establishing methyltransferase EZH2. By performing
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation sequencing and
whole-genome bisulfite sequencing in primary pHGGs, we show that reduced H3K27me3
levels and DNA hypomethylation act in concert to activate gene expression in K27M
mutant pHGGs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24183680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Oncol Lett. 2013 Nov;6(5):1487-1491. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

A single nucleotide polymorphism in EZH2 predicts overall survival rate in
patients with cholangiocarcinoma.

Paolicchi E(1), Pacetti P, Giovannetti E, Mambrini A, Orlandi M, Crea F, Romani
AA, Tartarini R, Danesi R, Peters GJ, Cantore M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pharmacology, University of Pisa,
Pisa I-56126, Italy.

Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a deadly disease arising from the malignant
transformation of cholangiocytes. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is
overexpressed in poorly differentiated CCA. Functional single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in this gene may affect the role of EZH2 in
cholangiocarcinogenesis and chemoresistance. The aim of the current study was to 
evaluate the correlation between EZH2 SNPs and clinical outcome. Using PROMO3.0, 
GeneCard and MicroSNiper, 4 EZH2 SNPs with functional relevance in CCA were
selected in silico. These SNPs were studied in genomic DNA extracted from the
blood samples of 75 patients with advanced CCA, who were treated with
epirubicin-cisplatin-xeloda (ECX regimen). SNP genotyping was performed with
specific PCR assays. The rs887569 TT genotype was correlated with a significantly
longer overall survival (OS; TT vs. CT-CC, P=0.026). Moreover, the TT genotype
revealed a trend toward a significant association with a reduced risk of
mortality (HR, 0.59; 95% CI, 0.33-1.05; P=0.075), by multivariate analysis. These
results support future studies on the role of rs887569 EZH2 SNP as a possible
predictive marker of OS in advanced CCA patients.

PMCID: PMC3813671
PMID: 24179546  [PubMed]


365. Br J Cancer. 2014 Jan 7;110(1):172-82. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.681. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

Synergistic interaction of novel lactate dehydrogenase inhibitors with
gemcitabine against pancreatic cancer cells in hypoxia.

Maftouh M(1), Avan A(1), Sciarrillo R(1), Granchi C(2), Leon LG(3), Rani R(2),
Funel N(4), Smid K(1), Honeywell R(1), Boggi U(4), Minutolo F(2), Peters GJ(1),
Giovannetti E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, De Boelelaan
1117, 1081HV, Amsterdam, Netherlands. (2)Department of Pharmacy, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Center for Biomedical Research of the Canary Islands,
Instituto de Tecnologias Biomedicas, University of La Laguna, La Laguna, Spain.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Hypoxia is a driving force in pancreatic-ductal-adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
growth, metastasis and chemoresistance. The muscle-isoform of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH-A) constitutes a major checkpoint for the switch to anaerobic 
glycolysis, ensuring supply of energy and anabolites in hypoxic-environments.
Therefore, we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the
pharmacological interaction of novel LDH-A inhibitors in combination with
gemcitabine in PDAC cells.
METHODS: Lactate dehydrogenase A levels were studied by quantitative RT-PCR,
western blot, immunofluorescence and activity assays in 14 PDAC cells, including 
primary-cell-cultures and spheroids, in normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Cell
proliferation, migration and key determinants of drug activity were evaluated by 
sulforhodamine-B-assay, wound-healing assay, PCR and LC-MS/MS.
RESULTS: Lactate dehydrogenase A was significantly increased under hypoxic
conditions (1% O2), where the novel LDH-A inhibitors proved to be particularly
effective (e.g., with IC50 values of 0.9 vs 16.3 µM for NHI-1 in LPC006 in
hypoxia vs normoxia, respectively). These compounds induced apoptosis, affected
invasiveness and spheroid-growth, reducing expression of metalloproteinases and
cancer-stem-like-cells markers (CD133+). Their synergistic interaction with
gemcitabine, with combination index values <0.4 in hypoxia, might also be
attributed to modulation of gemcitabine metabolism, overcoming the reduced
synthesis of phosphorylated metabolites.
CONCLUSION: Lactate dehydrogenase A is a viable target in PDAC, and novel LDH-A
inhibitors display synergistic cytotoxic activity with gemcitabine, offering an
innovative tool in hypoxic tumours.

PMCID: PMC3887288
PMID: 24178759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Epigenetics. 2014 Feb;9(2):222-35. doi: 10.4161/epi.26793. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

In situ histone landscape of nephrogenesis.

McLaughlin N(1), Wang F(1), Saifudeen Z(2), El-Dahr SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics; Tulane University School of Medicine; New Orleans,
LA USA; Biomedical Sciences Program; Tulane University School of Medicine; New
Orleans, LA USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics; Tulane University School of
Medicine; New Orleans, LA USA; The Renal and Hypertension Center of Excellence;
Tulane University School of Medicine; New Orleans, LA USA.

In the developing kidney, self-renewing progenitors respond to inductive
signaling from the adjacent branching ureteric bud by undergoing
mesenchyme-to-epithelium transition. Nascent nephrons subsequently undergo
elongation, segmentation, and differentiation into a mature renal epithelium with
diverse functions. Epigenetic mechanisms have been implicated in impacting cell
fate decisions during nephrogenesis; however, the chromatin landscape of nephron 
progenitors and daughter differentiating cells are largely unknown. Here, we
examined the spatiotemporal expression patterns of histone H3 methylation and
histone methyltransferases in E15.5 mouse kidneys. Kidney sections were probed
with antibodies against histone modifications, enzymes, and markers of
progenitors and differentiation. The results revealed that: (1) nephron
progenitor cells exhibit a broad histone methylation signature that comprises
both "active" and "repressive" marks (H3K4me3/K9me3/K27me3/R2me2/R17me2); (2)
nascent nephrons retain high H3K4me3 but show downregulation of H3K9/K27me3 and; 
(3) maturing epithelial tubules acquire high levels of H3K79me2/3. Consistent
with respective histone marks, the H3K4 methyltransferase, Ash2l, is expressed in
progenitors and nascent nephrons, whereas the H3K9/K27 methyltransferases,
G9a/Ezh2, are more enriched in progenitors than nascent nephrons. We conclude
that combinatorial histone signatures correlate with cell fate decisions during
nephrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3962532
PMID: 24169366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Jan;46(1):1-5. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt117. Epub 2013 Oct 27.

Long non-coding RNA HOTAIR in carcinogenesis and metastasis.

Zhang J(1), Zhang P, Wang L, Piao HL, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have gained massive attention in recent years as a
potentially new and crucial layer of gene regulation. LncRNAs are prevalently
transcribed in the genome, but their roles in gene regulation and disease
development are largely unknown. HOX antisense intergenic RNA (HOTAIR), a lncRNA 
located in the HOXC locus, has been shown to repress HOXD gene expression and
promote breast cancer metastasis. Mechanistically, HOTAIR interacts with and
recruits polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and regulates chromosome occupancy 
by EZH2 (a subunit of PRC2), which leads to histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
of the HOXD locus. Moreover, HOTAIR is pervasively overexpressed in most human
cancers compared with noncancerous adjacent tissues. This review summarizes the
studies on the HOTAIR lncRNA over the past 6 years.

PMCID: PMC3869294
PMID: 24165275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Haematologica. 2014 Mar;99(3):481-8. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.094474. Epub 2013
Oct 25.

Early lesions of follicular lymphoma: a genetic perspective.

Mamessier E(1), Song JY, Eberle FC, Pack S, Drevet C, Chetaille B, Abdullaev Z,
Adelaïde J, Birnbaum D, Chaffanet M, Pittaluga S, Roulland S, Chott A, Jaffe ES, 
Nadel B.

Author information: 
(1)elainejaffe@nih.gov or nadel@ciml.univ-mrs.fr.

The pathogenesis of follicular lymphoma is a multi-hit process progressing over
many years through the accumulation of numerous genetic alterations. Besides the 
hallmark t(14;18), it is still unclear which other oncogenic hits contribute to
the early steps of transformation and in which precursor stages these occur. To
address this issue, we performed high-resolution comparative genomic
hybridization microarrays on laser-capture micro-dissected cases of follicular
lymphoma in situ (n=4), partial involvement by follicular lymphoma (n=4), and
duodenal follicular lymphoma (n=4), assumed to represent, potentially, the
earliest stages in the evolution of follicular lymphoma. Cases of reactive
follicular hyperplasia (n=2), uninvolved areas from follicular lymphoma in situ
lymph nodes, follicular lymphoma grade 1-2 (n=5) and follicular lymphoma grade 3A
(n=5) were used as controls. Surprisingly, alterations involving several relevant
(onco)genes were found in all entities, but at significantly lower proportions
than in overt follicular lymphoma. While the number of alterations clearly
assigns all these entities as precursors, the pattern of partial involvement by
follicular lymphoma alterations was quantitatively and qualitatively closer to
that of follicular lymphoma, indicating significant selective pressure in line
with its faster rate of progression. Among the most notable alterations, we
observed and validated deletions of 1p36 and gains of the 7p and 12q chromosomes 
and related oncogenes, which include some of the most recurrent oncogenic
alterations in overt follicular lymphoma (TNFRSF14, EZH2, MLL2). By further
delineating distinctive and hierarchical molecular and genetic features of early 
follicular lymphoma entities, our analysis underlines the importance of applying 
appropriate criteria for the differential diagnosis. It also provides a first set
of candidates likely to be involved in the cascade of hits that pave the path of 
the various progression phases to follicular lymphoma development.

PMCID: PMC3943311
PMID: 24162788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Nat Neurosci. 2013 Dec;16(12):1745-53. doi: 10.1038/nn.3564. Epub 2013 Oct 27.

EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation mediates neurodegeneration in
ataxia-telangiectasia.

Li J(1), Hart RP, Mallimo EM, Swerdel MR, Kusnecov AW, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway,
New Jersey, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Sep;17(9):1286.

The symptoms of ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) include a progressive
neurodegeneration caused by ATM protein deficiency. We previously found that
nuclear accumulation of histone deacetylase-4, HDAC4, contributes to this
degeneration; we now report that increased trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys27 
(H3K27me3) mediated by polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is also important in 
the A-T phenotype. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a core catalytic component
of PRC2, is a new ATM kinase target, and ATM-mediated phosphorylation of EZH2 on 
Ser734 reduces protein stability. Thus, PRC2 formation is elevated along with
H3K27me3 in ATM deficiency. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing showed
an increase in H3K27me3 'marks' and a dramatic shift in their location. The
change of H3K27me3 chromatin-binding pattern is directly related to cell cycle
reentry and cell death of ATM-deficient neurons. Lentiviral knockdown of EZH2
rescued Purkinje cell degeneration and behavioral abnormalities in Atm(-/-) mice,
demonstrating that EZH2 hyperactivity is another key factor in A-T
neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3965909
PMID: 24162653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 1;23(5):1211-23. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt513. Epub 2013 Oct
24.

Spread of X-chromosome inactivation into autosomal sequences: role for DNA
elements, chromatin features and chromosomal domains.

Cotton AM(1), Chen CY, Lam LL, Wasserman WW, Kobor MS, Brown CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics.

X-chromosome inactivation results in dosage equivalence between the X chromosome 
in males and females; however, over 15% of human X-linked genes escape silencing 
and these genes are enriched on the evolutionarily younger short arm of the X
chromosome. The spread of inactivation onto translocated autosomal material
allows the study of inactivation without the confounding evolutionary history of 
the X chromosome. The heterogeneity and reduced extent of silencing on autosomes 
are evidence for the importance of DNA elements underlying the spread of
silencing. We have assessed DNA methylation in six unbalanced X-autosome
translocations using the Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 array. Two to 42% 
of translocated autosomal genes showed this mark of silencing, with the highest
degree of inactivation observed for trisomic autosomal regions. Generally, the
extent of silencing was greatest close to the translocation breakpoint; however, 
silencing was detected well over 100 kb into the autosomal DNA. Alu elements were
found to be enriched at autosomal genes that escaped from inactivation while L1s 
were enriched at subject genes. In cells without the translocation, there was
enrichment of heterochromatic features such as EZH2 and H3K27me3 for those genes 
that become silenced when translocated, suggesting that underlying chromatin
structure predisposes genes towards silencing. Additionally, the analysis of
topological domains indicated physical clustering of autosomal genes of common
inactivation status. Overall, our analysis indicated a complex interaction
between DNA sequence, chromatin features and the three-dimensional structure of
the chromosome.

PMCID: PMC4051349
PMID: 24158853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Oct;26(8):1166-75. doi: 10.1071/RD13169.

EZH2 is essential for development of mouse preimplantation embryos.

Huang XJ(1), Wang X(1), Ma X(1), Sun SC(1), Zhou X(1), Zhu C(1), Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Weigang No.1, Nanjing 210095, China. (2)Corresponding author. Email:

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) is essential for the development of the
early mouse preimplantation embryo. Loss of Ezh2 results in embryonic lethality
in mice. Ezh2-deficient embryos display impaired outgrowth potential, defective
establishment of Ezh2-null embryonic stem (ES) cells and adherence and
differentiation of the trophoblast layer into giant cells. We investigated if
Ezh2 controls the fate of embryos at an earlier stage by treating with
cycloheximide (CHX) or microinjecting short interfering RNA (siRNA) to restrict
embryonic Ezh2 expression during preimplantation. CHX inhibited de novo EZH2
protein synthesis in zygotes, suggesting that EZH2 requires de novo synthesis
during post-fertilisation stages. We found that loss of Ezh2 at the pronuclear
stage caused severe growth retardation and reduced blastocyst formation.
Expression of the pluripotency-associated markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were
significantly decreased in embryos that had been injected with Ezh2 siRNA. In
addition, Ezh2 loss induced upregulated expression of genes related to the
differentiation of germ layers, including Gata6, Hoxb1 and Hand1. Finally,
apoptosis was increased in the blastocyst embryos with Ezh2 knockdown.
Modification of histone H3-Lysine 27 de-methylation and tri-methylation
(H3K27me2/3) was strongly reduced in Ezh2 siRNA embryos. We conclude that Ezh2 is
essential for early preimplantation embryo development through the regulation of 
epigenetic modification and apoptosis.

PMID: 24153105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Leukemia. 2014 May;28(5):1103-12. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.307. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

Increasing genomic and epigenomic complexity in the clonal evolution from in situ
to manifest t(14;18)-positive follicular lymphoma.

Schmidt J(1), Salaverria I(2), Haake A(2), Bonzheim I(1), Adam P(1),
Montes-Moreno S(3), Piris MA(3), Fend F(1), Siebert R(2), Quintanilla-Martinez
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Eberhard-Karls-University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (2)Institute of Human
Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel/Christian-Albrechts 
University, Kiel, Germany. (3)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario
Marqués de Valdecilla, Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de
Valdecilla, Santander, Spain.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is characterized besides the t(14;18)(q32;q21), by
recurrent chromosomal alterations and somatic mutations. In this study, we
analyzed cases of FL in situ (FLIS) without manifest FL (mFL), partial
involvement by FL (PFL) and paired cases of FLIS and mFL to detect possible early
chromosomal imbalances, mutations, as well as DNA-methylation patterns of genomic
regions of selected genes. We demonstrate that all paired FLIS and mFL cases were
clonally related, based on IGH rearrangement patterns and BCL2 breakpoint
sequences. FLIS and PFL had no or few secondary chromosomal imbalances detectable
by array comparative genomic hybridization (FLIS 0.8 copy number alterations
(CNA)/case; PFL 2.0 CNA/case; mFL 6.3 CNA/case) and a lower level of DNA
methylation of genes recurrently de novo methylated in lymphomas, as compared
with mFL. EZH2 Tyr641 mutations were detected in a subset of both FLIS (2/9) and 
PFL (1/3) cases. In conclusion, these findings provide evidence that FLIS
represents a FL precursor lesion of long-lived clonal B cells carrying the
t(14;18) with no or few secondary genetic changes. Our data suggest that there
may be more than one distinct lesion driving the progression from FLIS to
manifest lymphoma.

PMID: 24153014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jun;229(6):762-71. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24496.

GKN2 contributes to the homeostasis of gastric mucosa by inhibiting GKN1
activity.

Kim O(1), Yoon JH, Choi WS, Ashktorab H, Smoot DT, Nam SW, Lee JY, Park WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seocho-gu, Seoul, South Korea.

Gastrokine 1 (GKN1) plays an important role in maintaining gastric mucosa
integrity. Here, we investigated whether gastrokine 2 (GKN2) contributes to the
homeostasis of gastric epithelial cells by regulating GKN1 activity. We analyzed 
cell viability, proliferation, and death in AGS cells transfected with GKN1,
GKN2, GKN1 plus GKN2 using MTT, BrdU incorporation, and apoptosis assays,
respectively. In addition, the expression levels of the cell cycle- and
apoptosis-related proteins, miR-185, DNMT1, and EZH2 were determined. We also
compared the expression of GKN1, GKN2, and CagA in 50 non-neoplastic gastric
mucosae and measured GKN2 expression in 169 gastric cancers by
immunohistochemistry. GKN2 inhibited anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic
activities, miR-185 induction, and anti-epigenetic modifications of GKN1. There
was a positive correlation between GKN1 and GKN2 expression (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0074), and the
expression of GKN1, but not GKN2, was significantly lower in Helicobacter pylori 
CagA-positive gastric mucosa (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0013). Interestingly, ectopic GKN1 expression
in AGS cells increased GKN2 mRNA and protein expression in a time-dependent
manner (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). Loss of GKN2 expression was detected in 126 (74.6%) of 169
gastric cancers by immunohistochemical staining and was closely associated with
GKN1 expression and differentiation of gastric cancer cells (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0002 and
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0114, respectively). Overall, our data demonstrate that in the presence of 
GKN2, GKN1 loses its ability to decrease cell proliferation, induce apoptosis,
and inhibit epigenetic alterations in gastric cancer cells. Thus, we conclude
that GKN2 may contribute to the homeostasis of gastric epithelial cells by
inhibiting GKN1 activity.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24151046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Haematologica. 2014 Mar;99(3):465-73. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.093765. Epub
2013 Oct 18.

Next-generation sequencing-based multigene mutational screening for acute myeloid
leukemia using MiSeq: applicability for diagnostics and disease monitoring.

Luthra R(1), Patel KP, Reddy NG, Haghshenas V, Routbort MJ, Harmon MA, Barkoh BA,
Kanagal-Shamanna R, Ravandi F, Cortes JE, Kantarjian HM, Medeiros LJ, Singh RR.

Author information: 
(1)rluthra@mdanderson.org or rsingh@mdanderson.org.

Routine molecular testing in acute myeloid leukemia involves screening several
genes of therapeutic and prognostic significance for mutations. A comprehensive
analysis using single-gene assays requires large amounts of DNA, is cumbersome
and timely consolidation of results for clinical reporting is challenging. High
throughput, next-generation sequencing platforms widely used in research have not
been tested vigorously for clinical application. Here we describe the clinical
application of MiSeq, a next-generation sequencing platform to screen mutational 
hotspots in 54 cancer-related genes including genes relevant in acute myeloid
leukemia (NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH1/2, JAK2, KIT and EZH2). We
sequenced 63 samples from patients with acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic
syndrome using MiSeq and compared the results with those obtained using another
next-generation sequencing platform, Ion-Torrent Personal Genome Machine and
other conventional testing platforms. MiSeq detected a total of 100 single
nucleotide variants and 23 NPM1 insertions that were confirmed by Ion Torrent or 
conventional platforms, indicating complete concordance. FLT3-internal tandem
duplications (n=10) were not detected; however, re-analysis of the MiSeq output
by Pindel, an indel detection algorithm, did detect them. Dilution studies of
cancer cell-line DNA showed that the quantitative accuracy of mutation detection 
was up to an allelic frequency of 1.5% with a high level of inter- and intra-run 
assay reproducibility, suggesting potential utility for monitoring response to
therapy, clonal heterogeneity and evolution. Examples demonstrating the
advantages of MiSeq over conventional platforms for disease monitoring are
provided. Easy work-flow, high throughput multiplexing capability, 4-day
turnaround time and simultaneous assessment of routinely tested and emerging
markers make MiSeq highly applicable for clinical molecular testing in acute
myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3943309
PMID: 24142997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;20(11):1258-64. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2700. Epub 2013
Oct 20.

PRC2 binds active promoters and contacts nascent RNAs in embryonic stem cells.

Kaneko S(1), Son J, Shen SS, Reinberg D, Bonasio R.

Author information: 
(1)1] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, New York, USA. [2] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013 Dec;20(12):1344-6.

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of PRC2, a central epigenetic repressor essential
for development processes in vivo and for the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) in vitro. The biochemical function of PRC2 in depositing repressive 
H3K27me3 marks is well understood, but how it is regulated and directed to
specific genes before and during differentiation remains unknown. Here, we report
that PRC2 binds at low levels to a majority of promoters in mouse ESCs, including
many that are active and devoid of H3K27me3. Using in vivo RNA-protein
cross-linking, we show that EZH2 directly binds the 5' region of nascent RNAs
transcribed from a subset of these promoters and that these binding events
correlate with decreased H3K27me3. Our findings suggest a molecular mechanism by 
which PRC2 senses the transcriptional state of the cell and translates it into
epigenetic information.

PMCID: PMC3839660
PMID: 24141703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4119-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-05-505180. Epub 2013 
Oct 18.

The histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is a crucial epigenetic regulator of
allogeneic T-cell responses mediating graft-versus-host disease.

He S(1), Xie F, Liu Y, Tong Q, Mochizuki K, Lapinski PE, Mani RS, Reddy P,
Mochizuki I, Chinnaiyan AM, Mineishi S, King PD, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine.

Posttranscriptional modification of histones by methylation plays an important
role in regulating Ag-driven T-cell responses. We have recently drawn
correlations between allogeneic T-cell responses and the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2, which catalyzes histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. The 
functional relevance of Ezh2 in T-cell alloimmunity remains unclear. Here, we
identify a central role of Ezh2 in regulating allogeneic T-cell proliferation,
differentiation, and function. Conditional loss of Ezh2 in donor T cells
inhibited graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in mice after allogeneic bone marrow
(BM) transplantation. Although Ezh2-deficient T cells were initially activated to
proliferate upon alloantigenic priming, their ability to undergo continual
proliferation and expansion was defective during late stages of GVHD induction.
This effect of Ezh2 ablation was largely independent of the proapoptotic molecule
Bim. Unexpectedly, as a gene silencer, Ezh2 was required to promote the
expression of transcription factors Tbx21 and Stat4. Loss of Ezh2 in T cells
specifically impaired their differentiation into interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-producing
effector cells. However, Ezh2 ablation retained antileukemia activity in
alloreactive T cells, leading to improved overall survival of the recipients. Our
findings justify investigation of modulating Ezh2 as a therapeutic strategy for
the treatment of GVHD and other T cell-mediated inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC3862282
PMID: 24141370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Neurol Sci. 2013 Dec 15;335(1-2):191-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.09.030. Epub
2013 Sep 29.

Combined aberrant expression of Bmi1 and EZH2 is predictive of poor prognosis in 
glioma patients.

Wu Z(1), Wang Q, Wang L, Li G, Liu H, Fan F, Li Z, Li Y, Tu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology and K.K. Leung Brain Research 
Centre, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an City 710032, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Bmi1 and EZH2 are involved in tumorigenesis of
gliomas. However, clinicopathologic significance of their expression in gliomas
is unknown; especially, the prognostic value of combined expression of Bmi1 and
EZH2 has not been explored.
METHODS: Bmi1 and EZH2 expression in human gliomas and nonneoplastic brain
tissues was measured by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Both Bmi1 and EZH2 expressions in glioma tissues were significantly
higher than those in corresponding nonneoplastic brain tissues (both P<0.001).
Additionally, the upregulations of Bmi1 and EZH2 proteins were both significantly
associated with advanced WHO grades (both P<0.001) and low KPS (P=0.008 and 0.01,
respectively). Moreover, the overall survival of patients with high Bmi1 protein 
expression (P=0.006) or high EZH2 protein expression (P=0.01) was obviously lower
than those with low expressions. More interestingly, glioma patients with
combined overexpression of Bmi1 and EZH2 proteins had the shortest overall
survival (P<0.001). Furthermore, multivariate analysis showed that Bmi1n
expression (P=0.02), EZH2 expression (P=0.03), and combined expression of Bmi1
and EZH2 (P=0.008), were all independent prognostic factors for overall survival 
in glioma patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest for the first time that the combination of Bmi1 and
EZH2 overexpression may be a highly sensitive marker for the prognosis in glioma 
patients.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24139839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(2):790-803. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt896. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

The primary microRNA-208b interacts with Polycomb-group protein, Ezh2, to
regulate gene expression in the heart.

Mathiyalagan P(1), Okabe J, Chang L, Su Y, Du XJ, El-Osta A.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease Laboratory, The Alfred Medical
Research and Education Precinct, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia,
Experimental Cardiology, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, The Alfred
Medical Research and Education Precinct, Melbourne, Victoria 3004, Australia,
Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia and Central Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, Monash University,
Victoria, Australia.

The Polycomb-group protein, Ezh2, is required for epigenetic gene silencing in
the adult heart by unknown mechanism. We investigated the role of Ezh2 and
non-coding RNAs in a mouse model of pressure overload using transverse aortic
constriction (TAC) attenuated by the prototypical histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
trichostatin A (TSA). Chromatin immunoprecipitation of TAC and TAC+TSA hearts
suggests interaction of Ezh2 and primary microRNA-208b (pri-miR-208b) in the
regulation of hypertrophic gene expression. RNAi silencing of pri-miR-208b and
Ezh2 validate pri-miR-208b-mediated transcriptional silencing of genes implicated
in cardiac hypertrophy including the suppression of the bi-directional promoter
(bdP) of the cardiac myosin heavy chain genes. In TAC mouse heart, TSA attenuated
Ezh2 binding to bdP and restored antisense ß-MHC and a-MHC gene expression.
RNA-chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments in TAC hearts also show increased
pri-miR-208b dependent-chromatin binding. These results are the first description
by which primary miR interactions serve to integrate chromatin modifications and 
the transcriptional response to distinct signaling cues in the heart. These
studies provide a framework for MHC expression and regulation of genes implicated
in pathological remodeling of ventricular hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC3902903
PMID: 24137001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4021-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-381665. Epub 2013 
Oct 17.

The genetic basis of myelodysplasia and its clinical relevance.

Cazzola M(1), Della Porta MG, Malcovati L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology Oncology, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy; and.

Myelodysplasia is a diagnostic feature of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) but is
also found in other myeloid neoplasms. Its molecular basis has been recently
elucidated by means of massive parallel sequencing studies. About 90% of MDS
patients carry =1 oncogenic mutations, and two thirds of them are found in
individuals with a normal karyotype. Driver mutant genes include those of RNA
splicing (SF3B1, SRSF2, U2AF1, and ZRSR2), DNA methylation (TET2, DNMT3A, and
IDH1/2), chromatin modification (ASXL1 and EZH2), transcription regulation
(RUNX1), DNA repair (TP53), signal transduction (CBL, NRAS, and KRAS), and
cohesin complex (STAG2). Only 4 to 6 genes are consistently mutated in =10% MDS
patients, whereas a long tail of ~50 genes are mutated less frequently. At
presentation, most patients typically have 2 or 3 driver oncogenic mutations and 
hundreds of background mutations. MDS driver genes are also frequently mutated in
other myeloid neoplasms. Reliable genotype/phenotype relationships include the
association of the SF3B1 mutation with refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts, 
TET2/SRSF2 comutation with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and activating CSF3R 
mutation with chronic neutrophilic leukemia. Although both founding and subclonal
driver mutations have been shown to have prognostic significance, prospective
clinical trials that include the molecular characterization of the patient's
genome are now needed.

PMCID: PMC3862275
PMID: 24136165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 1;23(5):1175-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt511. Epub 2013 Oct
16.

A methylome-wide study of aging using massively parallel sequencing of the
methyl-CpG-enriched genomic fraction from blood in over 700 subjects.

McClay JL(1), Aberg KA, Clark SL, Nerella S, Kumar G, Xie LY, Hudson AD, Harada
A, Hultman CM, Magnusson PK, Sullivan PF, Van Den Oord EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

The central importance of epigenetics to the aging process is increasingly being 
recognized. Here we perform a methylome-wide association study (MWAS) of aging in
whole blood DNA from 718 individuals, aged 25-92 years (mean = 55). We sequenced 
the methyl-CpG-enriched genomic DNA fraction, averaging 67.3 million reads per
subject, to obtain methylation measurements for the ~27 million autosomal CpGs in
the human genome. Following extensive quality control, we adaptively combined
methylation measures for neighboring, highly-correlated CpGs into 4 344 016 CpG
blocks with which we performed association testing. Eleven age-associated
differentially methylated regions (DMRs) passed Bonferroni correction (P-value < 
1.15 × 10(-8)). Top findings replicated in an independent sample set of 558
subjects using pyrosequencing of bisulfite-converted DNA (min P-value < 10(-30)).
To examine biological themes, we selected 70 DMRs with false discovery rate of
<0.1. Of these, 42 showed hypomethylation and 28 showed hypermethylation with
age. Hypermethylated DMRs were more likely to overlap with CpG islands and
shores. Hypomethylated DMRs were more likely to be in regions associated with
polycomb/regulatory proteins (e.g. EZH2) or histone modifications H3K27ac,
H3K4m1, H3K4m2, H3K4m3 and H3K9ac. Among genes implicated by the top DMRs were
protocadherins, homeobox genes, MAPKs and ryanodine receptors. Several of our
DMRs are at genes with potential relevance for age-related disease. This study
successfully demonstrates the application of next-generation sequencing to MWAS, 
by interrogating a large proportion of the methylome and returning potentially
novel age DMRs, in addition to replicating several loci implicated in previous
studies using microarrays.

PMCID: PMC3919012
PMID: 24135035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Pathol. 2014 Feb;232(3):308-18. doi: 10.1002/path.4294.

EZH2-miR-30d-KPNB1 pathway regulates malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour
cell survival and tumourigenesis.

Zhang P(1), Garnett J, Creighton CJ, Al Sannaa GA, Igram DR, Lazar A, Liu X, Liu 
C, Pollock RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA; Sarcoma Research Center, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    J Pathol. 2014 Jul;233(3):320. Igram, Davis R [corrected to Ingram, Davis R].

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumours (MPNSTs), which develop sporadically or
from neurofibromatosis, recur frequently with high metastatic potential and poor 
outcome. The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is an
important regulator for various human malignancies. However, the function of EZH2
in MPNSTs is unknown. Here we report that the EZH2-miR-30d-KPNB1 signalling
pathway is critical for MPNST tumour cell survival in vitro and tumourigenicity
in vivo. Up-regulated EZH2 in MPNST inhibits miR-30d transcription via promoter
binding activity, leading to enhanced expression of the nuclear transport
receptor KPNB1 that is inhibited by miR-30d targeting of KPNB1 3' UTR region.
Furthermore, inhibition of EZH2 or KPNB1, or miR-30d over-expression, induces
MPNST cell apoptosis in vitro and suppresses tumourigenesis in vivo. More
importantly, forced over-expression of KPNB1 rescues MPNST cell apoptosis induced
by EZH2 knockdown. Immunohistochemical analyses show that EZH2 and KPNB1
over-expression is observed in human MPNST specimens and is negatively associated
with miR-30d expression. Our findings identify a novel signalling pathway
involved in MPNST tumourigenesis, and also suggest that EZH2-miR-30d-KPNB1
signalling represents multiple potential therapeutic targetable nodes for MPNST.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4166508
PMID: 24132643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Med Oncol. 2013 Dec;30(4):713. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0713-6. Epub 2013 Oct 17.

EZH2 regulates cancer cell migration through repressing TIMP-3 in non-small cell 
lung cancer.

Xu C(1), Hou Z, Zhan P, Zhao W, Chang C, Zou J, Hu H, Zhang Y, Yao X, Yu L, Yan
J.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Chest Hospital, Nanjing,
210029, Jiangsu, China.

Histone methylations play important roles in human cancer metastasis. Enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a key component of the polycomb repressor complex 2,
which is responsible for histone H3K27 methylation. EZH2 is overexpressed in lung
cancer and epigenetically silences tumor suppressor genes. Here, we showed that
EZH2 was up-regulated in lung cancer and had a positive correlation with
pathologic stage, nodal involvement in lung cancer patients. Moreover,
overexpression of EZH2 was correlated with reduced tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) expression, which was shown to be negatively
associated with tumor metastasis. Of note, overall survival time of patients with
high EZH2/low TIMP-3 expression was significantly shorter than that of patients
with low EZH2/high TIMP-3 (P = 0.031). RNA interfering and pharmacologic
inhibition of EZH2 reduced histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation level and
increased TIMP-3 expression level. Knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA significantly
reduced A549 cancer cell migration. In contrast, reduction of TIMP-3 in A549
cells partially rescued EZH2 deficiency-induced loss of cell migration capacity. 
Taken together, our findings indicate that EZH2 accelerates cancer cell
migration, in part, via the repression of TIMP-3 expression, suggesting a
potential mechanism by which EZH2 promotes lung cancer progression and
metastasis.

PMID: 24132606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Am J Hematol. 2014 Feb;89(2):181-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23611. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Clinical implications of the SETBP1 mutation in patients with primary
myelodysplastic syndrome and its stability during disease progression.

Hou HA(1), Kuo YY, Tang JL, Chou WC, Yao M, Lai YJ, Lin CC, Chen CY, Liu CY,
Tseng MH, Huang CF, Chiang YC, Lee FY, Liu MC, Liu CW, Huang SY, Ko BS, Wu SJ,
Tsay W, Chen YC, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Mutations of the SET binding protein 1 (SETBP1) gene have been identified in
patients with myeloid neoplasms, but the clinical relevance of this mutation and 
its association with other gene mutations in myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and
the stability during disease progression remains unclear. Mutations in SETBP1
gene at exon 4 were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing
in 430 MDS patients. The results were correlated with clinical features,
cytogenetics, gene mutations and treatment outcomes. SETBP1 mutations were
identified in 14 (3.3%) of the 430 patients with primary MDS based on the FAB
classification and 8 (2.4%) of the 333 patients based on the WHO classification. 
The SETBP1 mutation was closely associated with higher white blood cell counts,
isochromosome of 17q, monosomy 7, and mutations of ASXL1, EZH2 and SRSF2. With a 
median follow-up of 43.9 months, MDS patients, based on either the FAB or WHO
classification, had a significantly poorer overall survival (OS) if they harbored
SETBP1 mutation. Further, SETBP1 mutation was an independent poor prognostic
factor for OS (HR = 1.842, CI 95%, 1.1018-3.332, P = 0.043) irrespective of age, 
sex, and the International Prognostic Scoring System. Sequential analysis showed 
that the original SETBP1 mutations in the eight SETBP1-mutated patients studied
were retained while two of the 101 SETBP1-wild patients acquired novel SETBP1
mutations during follow-ups. The SETBP1 mutation is associated with poor
prognosis in MDS. The mutation can be acquired during the clinical course
suggesting it may play a role in disease progression.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24127063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Stem Cells. 2014 Mar;32(3):802-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.1573.

EZH2 and KDM6A act as an epigenetic switch to regulate mesenchymal stem cell
lineage specification.

Hemming S(1), Cakouros D, Isenmann S, Cooper L, Menicanin D, Zannettino A,
Gronthos S.

Author information: 
(1)Mesenchymal Stem Cell Laboratory, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Health Sciences, South Australia, Australia.

Comment in
    Stem Cells. 2014 Jul;32(7):1993-4.
    Stem Cells. 2014 Jul;32(7):1991-2.

The methyltransferase, Enhancer of Zeste homology 2 (EZH2), trimethylates histone
3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) on chromatin and this repressive mark is removed by lysine
demethylase 6A (KDM6A). Loss of these epigenetic modifiers results in
developmental defects. We demonstrate that Ezh2 and Kdm6a transcript levels
change during differentiation of multipotential human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Enforced expression of Ezh2 in MSC promoted
adipogenic in vitro and inhibited osteogenic differentiation potential in vitro
and in vivo, whereas Kdm6a inhibited adipogenesis in vitro and promoted
osteogenic differentiation in vitro and in vivo. Inhibition of EZH2 activity and 
knockdown of Ezh2 gene expression in human MSC resulted in decreased adipogenesis
and increased osteogenesis. Conversely, knockdown of Kdm6a gene expression in MSC
leads to increased adipogenesis and decreased osteogenesis. Both Ezh2 and Kdm6a
were shown to affect expression of master regulatory genes involved in
adipogenesis and osteogenesis and H3K27me3 on the promoters of master regulatory 
genes. These findings demonstrate an important epigenetic switch centered on
H3K27me3 which dictates MSC lineage determination.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24123378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Anticancer Res. 2013 Oct;33(10):4309-17.

Aberrant expression of EZH2 is associated with pathological findings and P53
alteration.

Shiogama S(1), Yoshiba S, Soga D, Motohashi H, Shintani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Dentistry, Showa
University, 2-1-1 Kitasenzoku, Ota-ku, Tokyo 145-8515, Japan.
shintani@dent.showa-u.ac.jp.

AIM: Enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2) and B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region-1 
homolog (BMI1) are members of the polycomb group of proteins, which function as
transcriptional repressors through chromatin modification. EZH2 forms part of the
polycomb repressive complex (PRC)-2, while BMI1 is a component of PRC1. Previous 
studies have shown that EZH2 is highly expressed in various type of cancers.
Expression of EZH2 is reported to be regulated by the P53-E2F/retinoblastoma
(RB)-related pathway, and a correlation between P53 mutation and EZH2 expression 
was recently found in breast cancer. Here, we examined the relationship between
P53 and EZH2 in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry, we investigated the expression
of EZH2 and BMI1 in 99 surgically-resected OSCC and 34 epithelial dysplasia
samples. We analyzed associations between aberrant expression of EZH2 and BMI1,
and clinicopathological findings and patient outcome. P53 expression was also
examined and analyzed in relation to EZH2 and BMI1 expression.
RESULTS: EZH2 and BMI1 protein were up-regulated in OSCC tissues compared with
epithelial dysplasia and normal epithelium. Aberrant EZH2 and BMI1 protein
expression was observed in 32 and 59 of the 99 OSCC samples, respectively.
Aberrant EZH2 and BMI1 expression was significantly associated with mode of
invasion, but not with lymph node metastasis or survival rate. Aberrant EZH2
expression was associated with P53 alteration in OSCC tissue. Expression of EZH2 
mRNA in SAS/neo cells, which have wild-type P53, was significantly lower than in 
SAS/mp53 cells that have a mutant P53 gene.
CONCLUSION: P53 alteration may be involved in dysregulated EZH2 expression, and
aberrant expression of EZH2 may play a role in carcinogenesis of OSCC.

PMID: 24122997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Cell Cycle. 2013 Dec 1;12(23):3575-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.26785. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

EZH2 takes the stage when BRCA1 loses.

Wang L(1), Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine; Rochester, MN USA.

PMCID: PMC3903702
PMID: 24121664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 7;8(10):e76822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076822. eCollection
2013.

Membrane-to-nucleus signaling links insulin-like growth factor-1- and stem cell
factor-activated pathways.

Hayashi Y(1), Asuzu DT, Gibbons SJ, Aarsvold KH, Bardsley MR, Lomberk GA,
Mathison AJ, Kendrick ML, Shen KR, Taguchi T, Gupta A, Rubin BP, Fletcher JA,
Farrugia G, Urrutia RA, Ordog T.

Author information: 
(1)Enteric Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Biomedical
Engineering, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America ;
Gastroenterology Research Unit, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.

Stem cell factor (mouse: Kitl, human: KITLG) and insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF1), acting via KIT and IGF1 receptor (IGF1R), respectively, are critical for 
the development and integrity of several tissues. Autocrine/paracrine KITLG-KIT
and IGF1-IGF1R signaling are also activated in several cancers including
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST), the most common sarcoma. In murine
gastric muscles, IGF1 promotes Kitl-dependent development of interstitial cells
of Cajal (ICC), the non-neoplastic counterpart of GIST, suggesting cooperation
between these pathways. Here, we report a novel mechanism linking IGF1-IGF1R and 
KITLG-KIT signaling in both normal and neoplastic cells. In murine gastric
muscles, the microenvironment for ICC and GIST, human hepatic stellate cells
(LX-2), a model for cancer niches, and GIST cells, IGF1 stimulated Kitl/KITLG
protein and mRNA expression and promoter activity by activating several signaling
pathways including AKT-mediated glycogen synthase kinase-3ß inhibition (GSK3i).
GSK3i alone also stimulated Kitl/KITLG expression without activating mitogenic
pathways. Both IGF1 and GSK3i induced chromatin-level changes favoring
transcriptional activation at the Kitl promoter including increased histone H3/H4
acetylation and H3 lysine (K) 4 methylation, reduced H3K9 and H3K27 methylation
and reduced occupancy by the H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2. By pharmacological or 
RNA interference-mediated inhibition of chromatin modifiers we demonstrated that 
these changes have the predicted impact on KITLG expression. KITLG knock-down and
immunoneutralization inhibited the proliferation of GIST cells expressing
wild-type KIT, signifying oncogenic autocrine/paracrine KITLG-KIT signaling. We
conclude that membrane-to-nucleus signaling involving GSK3i establishes a
previously unrecognized link between the IGF1-IGF1R and KITLG-KIT pathways, which
is active in both physiologic and oncogenic contexts and can be exploited for
therapeutic purposes.

PMCID: PMC3792098
PMID: 24116170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 8;8(10):e76450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076450. eCollection
2013.

The loss of miR-26a-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of cyclin E2 in
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and decreased patient survival.

Deng J(1), He M, Chen L, Chen C, Zheng J, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: miR-26a plays a critical role in tumorigenesis, either as a tumor
suppressor or as an oncogenic miRNA, depending on different tumor types. However,
the function of miR-26a in pancreatic cancer has not been clearly elucidated. The
present study was designed to determine the roles of miR-26a in pancreatic cancer
and its association with the survival of patients with pancreatic cancer.
METHODS: The expression of miR-26a was examined in 15 pairs of pancreatic duct
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and their adjacent benign pancreatic tissues (ABPT), by
qRT-PCR. The results were confirmed by in situ hybridization using two panels of 
106 PDACs and their ABPT microarray. The association of miR-26a expression with
overall survival was determined. The proliferation and cell cycle distribution of
Capan-2, SW-1990, and Panc-1 cells, transfected with miR-26a mimics or a miR-26a 
inhibitor, were assessed using the Cell Counting Kit-8 assay and flow cytometry, 
respectively. The cell tumorigenicity was evaluated via murine xenograft
experiments. Cyclin D2, E2, EZH2, and PCNA levels were analyzed by Western blot
and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: miR-26a was expressed in the cytoplasm of pancreatic ductal epithelial
cells, whereas its expression was significantly downregulated in PDAC tissues
compared with that of ABPT. Patients with low miR-26a expression had a
significantly shorter survival than those with high miR-26a expression. The in
vitro and in vivo assays showed that overexpression of miR-26a resulted in cell
cycle arrest, inhibited cell proliferation, and decreased tumor growth, which was
associated with cyclin E2 downregulation.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-26a is an important suppressor of pancreatic ductal carcinoma,
and can prove to be a novel prognostic factor and therapeutic target for
pancreatic cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3792981
PMID: 24116110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Immunol. 2013 Nov 15;191(10):4908-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300433. Epub 2013 
Oct 9.

Cutting edge: Smad2 and Smad4 regulate TGF-ß-mediated Il9 gene expression via
EZH2 displacement.

Wang A(1), Pan D, Lee YH, Martinez GJ, Feng XH, Dong C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Inflammation and Cancer, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054;

IL-9 is a proallergic cytokine produced by a newly proposed Th cell subset, Th9. 
Th9 cells can be generated by treatment of naive T cells with TGF-ß and IL-4 in
vitro. However, it is still not clear how TGF-ß signaling regulates Th9
differentiation. In this study, we demonstrate that Smad2 and Smad4, two
transcriptional factors activated by TGF-ß signaling, are required for Th9
differentiation in vitro. Deficiency of Smad2 or Smad4 in T cells resulted in
impaired IL-9 expression, which was coincident with enrichment of repressive
chromatin modification histone H3 K27 trimethylation and enhanced EZH2 binding to
the Il9 locus. Pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 partially rescued IL-9 production
in Smad-deficient Th9 cells. Smad proteins may displace EZH2 directly from the
Il9 locus, because Smad2 and Smad4 can bind EZH2. Our data shed light on the
molecular mechanisms underlying Th9 cell differentiation, revealing that the
TGF-ß-Smad2/4-signaling pathway regulates IL-9 production through an epigenetic
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3842015
PMID: 24108699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Epigenetics. 2013 Dec;8(12):1280-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.26546. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

A key role for EZH2 in epigenetic silencing of HOX genes in mantle cell lymphoma.

Kanduri M(1), Sander B(2), Ntoufa S(3), Papakonstantinou N(3), Sutton LA(4),
Stamatopoulos K(3), Kanduri C(5), Rosenquist R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine; Institute of
Biomedicine; Gothenburg University; Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department of
Laboratory Medicine; Division of Pathology; Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska 
University Hospital; Huddinge, Sweden. (3)Hematology Department and HCT Unit G.
Papanicolaou Hospital; Thessaloniki, Greece; Institute of Applied Biosciences;
CERTH; Thessaloniki, Greece. (4)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology;
Uppsala University; Uppsala, Sweden. (5)Department of Medical and Clinical
Genetics; Department of Biomedicine; The Sahlgrenska Academy; Gothenburg
University; Gothenburg, Sweden.

The chromatin modifier EZH2 is overexpressed and associated with inferior outcome
in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). Recently, we demonstrated preferential DNA
methylation of HOX genes in MCL compared with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL),
despite these genes not being expressed in either entity. Since EZH2 has been
shown to regulate HOX gene expression, to gain further insight into its possible 
role in differential silencing of HOX genes in MCL vs. CLL, we performed detailed
epigenetic characterization using representative cell lines and primary samples. 
We observed significant overexpression of EZH2 in MCL vs. CLL. Chromatin immune
precipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that EZH2 catalyzed repressive H3 lysine 27 
trimethylation (H3K27me3), which was sufficient to silence HOX genes in CLL,
whereas in MCL H3K27me3 is accompanied by DNA methylation for a more stable
repression. More importantly, hypermethylation of the HOX genes in MCL resulted
from EZH2 overexpression and subsequent recruitment of the DNA methylation
machinery onto HOX gene promoters. The importance of EZH2 upregulation in this
process was further underscored by siRNA transfection and EZH2 inhibitor
experiments. Altogether, these observations implicate EZH2 in the long-term
silencing of HOX genes in MCL, and allude to its potential as a therapeutic
target with clinical impact.

PMCID: PMC3933489
PMID: 24107828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Biotechniques. 2013 Oct;55(4):204-6. doi: 10.2144/000114089.

A rapid and efficient method to purify proteins at replication forks under native
conditions.

Leung KH(1), Abou El Hassan M, Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Lunenfeld Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.

Tools for studying replication fork dynamics are critical for dissecting the
mechanisms of DNA replication, DNA repair, histone deposition, and epigenetic
memory. Isolation of protein on nascent DNA (iPOND) is an elegant method for
purifying replication fork proteins. Here, we present accelerated native iPOND
(aniPOND), a simplification of the iPOND procedure with improved protein yield.
Cell membrane lysis and nuclei harvesting are combined in one step to reduce
washes and minimize sample loss. A mild nuclei lysis protocol is then used to
better preserve DNA-protein complexes. aniPOND is faster than iPOND, avoids
formaldehyde cross-linking, and improves protein yield 5- and 20-fold for the
CAF1-complex or PCNA respectively. Moreover, using aniPOND, but not iPOND, we
could detect the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components SUZ12, EZH2, and
RBBP4 at replication forks. This faster, higher-yield method will facilitate MS
analysis of replication fork complexes.

PMID: 24107252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Oncogenesis. 2013 Oct 7;2:e75. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.39.

Deregulation of let-7e in epithelial ovarian cancer promotes the development of
resistance to cisplatin.

Cai J(1), Yang C, Yang Q, Ding H, Jia J, Guo J, Wang J, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Drug resistance remains a major clinical obstacle to successful treatment in
ovarian cancer patients, and the evidence of microRNAs involvement in drug
resistance has been emerging recently. In this report, we investigated the role
of let-7e in the development of cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer. On the
cellular level, let-7e expression was significantly reduced in
cisplatin-resistant human epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cell line A2780/CP
compared with parental A2780 cell and decreased in a concentration-dependent
manner in A2780, SKOV3 and ES2 cells treated with cisplatin. Overexpression of
let-7e by transfection of agomir could resensitize A2780/CP and reduce the
expression of cisplatin-resistant-related proteins enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) and
cyclin D1 (CCND1), whereas let-7e inhibitors increased resistance to cisplatin in
parental A2780 cells. Quantitative methylation-specific PCR analysis showed
hypermethylation of the CpG island adjacent to let-7e in A2780/CP cells, and
demethylation treatment with 5-aza-CdR or transfection of pYr-let-7e-shRNA
plasmid containing unmethylated let-7e DNA sequence could restore let-7e
expression and partly reduce the chemoresistance. In addition, cisplatin combined
with let-7e agomirs inhibited the growth of A2780/CP xenograft more effectively
than cisplatin alone. Diminished expression of EZH2 and CCND1 and higher
cisplatin concentrations in tumor tissue of mice subjected to administration of
let-7e agomirs in addition to cisplatin were revealed by immunohistochemistry and
atomic absorption spectroscopy, respectively. Taken together, our findings
suggest that let-7e may act as a promising therapeutic target for improvement of 
the sensibility to cisplatin in EOC.

PMCID: PMC3816216
PMID: 24100610  [PubMed]


393. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 1;440(4):689-95. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.123. Epub 2013 Oct 5.

Functional analysis of the NH2-terminal hydrophobic region and BRICHOS domain of 
GKN1.

Yoon JH(1), Choi YJ, Choi WS, Nam SW, Lee JY, Park WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, 505 Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, South Korea.

Gastrokine 1 (GKN1) protects the gastric antral mucosa and promotes healing by
facilitating restitution and proliferation after injury. GKN1 is down-regulated
in Helicobacter pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells and loss of GKN1
expression is tightly associated with gastric carcinogenesis. However, the
underlying mechanisms as a tumor suppressor are largely unknown. Presently, the
hydrophobic region and BRICHOS domain of GKN1, pGKN1(D13N), pGKN1(<U+0394>68-199), and
pGKN1(<U+0394>1-67,165-199) were shown to suppress gastric cancer cell growth and
recapitulate GKN1 functions. As well, the hydrophobic region and BRICHOS domain
of GKN1 had a synergistic anti-cancer effect with 5-FU on tumor cell growth,
implying that the NH2-terminal hydrophobic region and BRICHOS domain of GKN1 are 
sufficient for tumor suppression, thereby suggesting a therapeutic intervention
for gastric cancer. Also, its domain inducing endogenous miR-185 directly
targeted the epigenetic effectors DNMT1 and EZH2 in gastric cancer cells. Our
results suggest that the NH2-terminal hydrophobic region and BRICHOS domain of
GKN1 are sufficient for its tumor suppressor activities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24099765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 1;19(23):6556-65. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3946.
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

EZH2 protein expression associates with the early pathogenesis, tumor
progression, and prognosis of non-small cell lung carcinoma.

Behrens C(1), Solis LM, Lin H, Yuan P, Tang X, Kadara H, Riquelme E, Galindo H,
Moran CA, Kalhor N, Swisher SG, Simon GR, Stewart DJ, Lee JJ, Wistuba II.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology,
Pathology, Biostatistics, Thoracic Surgery, and Translational Molecular
Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; and
The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

PURPOSE: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes carcinogenesis by
epigenetically silencing tumor suppressor genes. We studied EZH2 expression by
immunohistochemistry in a large series of non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) 
in association with tumor characteristics and patient outcomes.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EZH2 immunohistochemistry expression was analyzed in 265
normal and premalignant bronchial epithelia, 541 primary NSCLCs [221 squamous
cell carcinomas (SCC) and 320 adenocarcinomas] and 36 NSCLCs with paired brain
metastases. An independent set of 91 adenocarcinomas was also examined. EZH2
expression was statistically correlated with clinico-pathological information,
and EGFR/KRAS mutation status.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression was significantly (P < 0.0001) higher in SCCs compared
with adenocarcinomas and in brain metastasis relative to matched primary tumors
(P = 0.0013). EZH2 expression was significantly (P < 0.0001) elevated in
bronchial preneoplastic lesions with increasing severity. In adenocarcinomas,
higher EZH2 expression significantly correlated with younger age, cigarette
smoking, and higher TNM stage (P = 0.02 to P < 0.0001). Higher EZH2 expression in
adenocarcinoma was associated with worse recurrence-free survival (RFS; P =
0.025; HR = 1.54) and overall survival (OS; P = 0.0002; HR = 1.96). Furthermore, 
lung adenocarcinomas with low EZH2 levels and high expression of the
lineage-specific transcription factor, TTF-1, exhibited significantly improved
RFS (P = 0.009; HR = 0.51) and OS (P = 0.0011; HR = 0.45), which was confirmed in
the independent set of 91 adenocarcinomas.
CONCLUSION: In lung, EZH2 expression is involved in early pathogenesis of SCC and
correlates with a more aggressive tumor behavior of adenocarcinoma. When EZH2 and
TTF-1 expressions are considered together, they serve as a prognostic marker in
patients with surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3890101
PMID: 24097870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Leukemia. 2014 Jan;28(1):44-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.288. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

EZH2 in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

Lund K(1), Adams PD(2), Copland M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epigenetics of Cancer and Aging, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Cancer Research UK Beatson Labs, Glasgow, Scotland, UK.
(2)Department of Epigenetics of Cancer and Aging, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
University of Glasgow, Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Glasgow, Scotland, 
UK. (3)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Sciences,
College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow,
Gartnavel General Hospital, 1053 Great Western Road, Glasgow, Scotland.

The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2), a component
of the polycomb group complex, is vital for stem cell development, including
hematopoiesis. Its primary function, to deposit the histone mark H3K27me3,
promotes transcriptional repression. The activity of EZH2 influences cell fate
regulation, namely the balance between self-renewal and differentiation. The
contribution of aberrant EZH2 expression to tumorigenesis by directing cells
toward a cancer stem cell (CSC) state is increasingly recognized. However, its
role in hematological malignancies is complex. Point mutations, resulting in
gain-of-function, and inactivating mutations, reported in lymphoma and leukemia, 
respectively, suggest that EZH2 may serve a dual purpose as an oncogene and
tumor-suppressor gene. The reduction of CSC self-renewal via EZH2 inhibition
offers a potentially attractive therapeutic approach to counter the aberrant
activation found in lymphoma and leukemia. The discovery of small molecules that 
specifically inhibit EZH2 raises the exciting possibility of exploiting the
oncogenic addiction of tumor cells toward this protein. However, interference
with the tumor-suppressor role of wild-type EZH2 must be avoided. This review
examines the role of EZH2 in normal and malignant hematopoiesis and recent
developments in harnessing the therapeutic potential of EZH2 inhibition.

PMID: 24097338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2013 Sep 18;7:289-306. doi: 10.4137/BBI.S12494.
eCollection 2013.

Molecular Insights on Post-chemotherapy Retinoblastoma by Microarray Gene
Expression Analysis.

Nalini V(1), Segu R, Deepa PR, Khetan V, Vasudevan M, Krishnakumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Larsen and Toubro Department of Ocular Pathology, Vision Research Foundation, 
Sankara Nethralaya, Chennai, India. ; Birla Institute of Technology and Science
(BITS), Pilani, India.

PURPOSE: Management of Retinoblastoma (RB), a pediatric ocular cancer is limited 
by drug-resistance and drug-dosage related side effects during chemotherapy.
Molecular de-regulation in post-chemotherapy RB tumors was investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: cDNA microarray analysis of two post-chemotherapy and one 
pre-chemotherapy RB tumor tissues was performed, followed by Principle Component 
Analysis, Gene ontology, Pathway Enrichment analysis and Biological Analysis
Network (BAN) modeling. The drug modulation role of two significantly
up-regulated genes (p=0.05) - Ect2 (Epithelial-cell-transforming-sequence-2), and
PRAME (preferentially-expressed-Antigen-in-Melanoma) was assessed by qRT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry and cell viability assays.
RESULTS: Differential up-regulation of 1672 genes and down-regulation of 2538
genes was observed in RB tissues (relative to normal adult retina), while 1419
genes were commonly de-regulated between pre-chemotherapy and post- chemotherapy 
RB. Twenty one key gene ontology categories, pathways, biomarkers and phenotype
groups harboring 250 differentially expressed genes were dys-regulated (EZH2,
NCoR1, MYBL2, RB1, STAMN1, SYK, JAK1/2, STAT1/2, PLK2/4, BIRC5, LAMN1, Ect2,
PRAME and ABCC4). Differential molecular expressions of PRAME and Ect2 in RB
tumors with and without chemotherapy were analyzed. There was neither up-
regulation of MRP1, nor any significant shift in chemotherapeutic IC50, in PRAME 
over-expressed versus non-transfected RB cells.
CONCLUSION: Cell cycle regulatory genes were dys-regulated post-chemotherapy.
Ect2 gene was expressed in response to chemotherapy-induced stress. PRAME does
not contribute to drug resistance in RB, yet its nuclear localization and BAN
information, points to its possible regulatory role in RB.

PMCID: PMC3785389
PMID: 24092970  [PubMed]


397. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013 Dec;22(12):2333-44. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-13-0333-T. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Loss of PTEN is associated with aggressive behavior in ERG-positive prostate
cancer.

Leinonen KA(1), Saramäki OR, Furusato B, Kimura T, Takahashi H, Egawa S, Suzuki
H, Keiger K, Ho Hahm S, Isaacs WB, Tolonen TT, Stenman UH, Tammela TL, Nykter M, 
Bova GS, Visakorpi T.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Institute of Biomedical Technology and Institute of
Signal Processing, Prostate Cancer Research Center, BioMediTech, Department of
Urology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere University
Hospital, Tampere, Finland; Departments of Pathology and Urology, Jikei
University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo; Department of Urology, Toho
University Sakura Medical Center, Sakura, Chiba, Japan; Departments of Pathology 
and Urology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland; and Department of
Clinical Chemistry, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The associations of ERG overexpression with clinical behavior and
molecular pathways of prostate cancer are incompletely known. We assessed the
association of ERG expression with AR, PTEN, SPINK1, Ki-67, and EZH2 expression
levels, deletion, and mutations of chromosomal region 3p14 and TP53, and
clinicopathologic variables.
METHODS: The material consisted of 326 prostatectomies, 166 needle biopsies from 
men treated primarily with endocrine therapy, 177 transurethral resections of
castration-resistant prostate cancers (CRPC), and 114 CRPC metastases obtained
from 32 men. Immunohistochemistry, FISH, and sequencing was used for the
measurements.
RESULTS: ERG expression was found in about 45% of all patient cohorts. In a
multivariate analysis, ERG expression showed independent value of favorable
prognosis (P = 0.019). ERG positivity was significantly associated with loss of
PTEN expression in prostatectomy (P = 0.0348), and locally recurrent CRPCs (P =
0.0042). Loss of PTEN expression was associated (P = 0.0085) with shorter
progression-free survival in ERG-positive, but not in negative cases. When
metastases in each subject were compared, consistent ERG, PTEN, and AR expression
as well as TP53 mutations were found in a majority of subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: A similar frequency of ERG positivity from early to late stage of
the disease suggests lack of selection of ERG expression during disease
progression. The prognostic significance of PTEN loss solely in ERG-positive
cases indicates interaction of these pathways. The finding of consistent genetic 
alterations in different metastases suggests that the major genetic alterations
take place in the primary tumor.
IMPACT: Interaction of PTEN and ERG pathways warrants further studies.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4086660
PMID: 24083995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2013 Oct;137(10):1326-36. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2012-0525-OA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression is associated with metastasis and adverse 
clinical outcome in clear cell renal cell carcinoma: a comparative study and
review of the literature.

Xu B(1), Abourbih S, Sircar K, Kassouf W, Mansure JJ, Aprikian A, Tanguay S,
Brimo F.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathology (Drs Xu and Brimo) and Urology (Drs
Abourbih, Kassouf, Mansure, Aprikian, and Tanguay), McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; and the Department of Pathology (Dr Sircar),
The University of Texas Maryland Anderson Cancer Center, Houston.

CONTEXT: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone methyltransferase
mediating chromatin condensation and epigenetic modulation, is overexpressed in
various human carcinomas and is associated with adverse clinicopathologic
characteristics and biologic behavior. The expression of EZH2 in renal cell
carcinomas (RCCs) has not been fully characterized yet.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prognostic role of EZH2 in RCC by analyzing the
immunohistochemical staining pattern of the marker in relation to pathologic
features and clinical outcome.
DESIGN: We correlated the immunolabeling of EZH2 with multiple clinicopathologic 
features, including Fuhrman nuclear grade, pathologic stage, metastatic status,
and clinical outcome in 223 clear cell RCCs (CRCCs) and 21 papillary RCCs, by
using tissue microarrays of primary and metastatic cases.
RESULTS: Most CRCCs (75%) showed positive EZH2 staining, with most primary tumors
showing focal staining in comparison to nonfocal staining in metastatic cases. In
primary tumors, EZH2 expression was associated with higher nuclear grade and
lower pathologic stage. Metastatic tumors showed a higher number of positive
cases (81% versus 67%) and a more diffuse and more intense pattern of staining
than primary CRCCs. For the 22 locally advanced primary tumors (T3/4) and 43
metastatic RCCs, patients who experienced RCC-related deaths significantly
overexpressed the marker in comparison to patients who did not experience
RCC-related mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: By showing that EZH2 expression is associated with increased
metastatic potential and a worse clinical outcome, this study suggests that EZH2 
can serve as a prognostic biomarker for RCC, thus confirming it as a key molecule
driving oncogenesis and metastasis.

PMID: 24079759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Sep 30;6:35. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-35.

Genomic pathway analysis reveals that EZH2 and HDAC4 represent mutually exclusive
epigenetic pathways across human cancers.

Cohen AL(1), Piccolo SR, Cheng L, Soldi R, Han B, Johnson WE, Bild AH.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
adam.cohen@hci.utah.edu.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in epigenetic marks, including methylation or
acetylation, are common in human cancers. For many epigenetic pathways, however, 
direct measures of activity are unknown, making their role in various cancers
difficult to assess. Gene expression signatures facilitate the examination of
patterns of epigenetic pathway activation across and within human cancer types
allowing better understanding of the relationships between these pathways.
METHODS: We used Bayesian regression to generate gene expression signatures from 
normal epithelial cells before and after epigenetic pathway activation.
Signatures were applied to datasets from TCGA, GEO, CaArray, ArrayExpress, and
the cancer cell line encyclopedia. For TCGA data, signature results were
correlated with copy number variation and DNA methylation changes. GSEA was used 
to identify biologic pathways related to the signatures.
RESULTS: We developed and validated signatures reflecting downstream effects of
enhancer of zeste homolog 2(EZH2), histone deacetylase(HDAC) 1, HDAC4, sirtuin
1(SIRT1), and DNA methyltransferase 2(DNMT2). By applying these signatures to
data from cancer cell lines and tumors in large public repositories, we identify 
those cancers that have the highest and lowest activation of each of these
pathways. Highest EZH2 activation is seen in neuroblastoma, hepatocellular
carcinoma, small cell lung cancer, and melanoma, while highest HDAC activity is
seen in pharyngeal cancer, kidney cancer, and pancreatic cancer. Across all
datasets studied, activation of both EZH2 and HDAC4 is significantly
underrepresented. Using breast cancer and glioblastoma as examples to examine
intrinsic subtypes of particular cancers, EZH2 activation was highest in luminal 
breast cancers and proneural glioblastomas, while HDAC4 activation was highest in
basal breast cancer and mesenchymal glioblastoma. EZH2 and HDAC4 activation are
associated with particular chromosome abnormalities: EZH2 activation with
aberrations in genes from the TGF and phosphatidylinositol pathways and HDAC4
activation with aberrations in inflammatory and chemokine related genes.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression patterns can reveal the activation level of
epigenetic pathways. Epigenetic pathways define biologically relevant subsets of 
human cancers. EZH2 activation and HDAC4 activation correlate with growth factor 
signaling and inflammation, respectively, and represent two distinct states for
cancer cells. This understanding may allow us to identify targetable drivers in
these cancer subsets.

PMCID: PMC3850967
PMID: 24079712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Asian J Androl. 2013 Nov;15(6):703-4. doi: 10.1038/aja.2013.116. Epub 2013 Sep
30.

Scaffold attachment factor B1: an intrinsic inhibitor of androgen receptor
downregulated in prostate cancer.

Huang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA [2] Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College
of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA [3] Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a pleiotrophic transcription factor that regulates 
expression of a large number of genes involved in many diverse cellular
processes. The AR activation pathways have been studied extensively. However, the
molecular mechanism and biological significance of AR inhibitory signals remain
poorly understood. Mukhopadhyay et al. have now identified the nuclear matrix
protein scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) as a novel AR corepressor. The
authors found that SAFB1 physically associates with AR protein and inhibits AR
transcriptional activity and androgen-sensitive gene expression. SAFB1 had no
effect on chromatin occupancy of AR, but silencing of SAFB1 abolished recruitment
MST1, a known AR repressor, at AR target loci. They also showed that SAFB1
interacts with EZH2, SUZ12 and EED, three core components of the Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyzes the gene repression histone
modification H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). The authors further showed
that forced expression of SAFB1 increases H3K27me3 at AR target loci and this
effect requires EZH2. Finally, the authors demonstrated that expression of SAFB1 
is downregulated in human prostate cancer (PCa) specimens and SAFB1 knockdown
results in an aggressive phenotype of PCa. These findings identify SAFB1 as an
important node for integration of multiple inhibitory signals of AR, which
represents a viable pathway for therapeutic intervention of PCa.

PMCID: PMC3854040
PMID: 24077602  [PubMed]


401. Cell. 2013 Sep 26;155(1):121-34. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.08.056.

Dnmt3L antagonizes DNA methylation at bivalent promoters and favors DNA
methylation at gene bodies in ESCs.

Neri F(1), Krepelova A, Incarnato D, Maldotti M, Parlato C, Galvagni F, Matarese 
F, Stunnenberg HG, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), via Nizza 52, 10126 Torino, Italy.

The de novo DNA methyltransferase 3-like (Dnmt3L) is a catalytically inactive DNA
methyltransferase that cooperates with Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b to methylate DNA. Dnmt3L
is highly expressed in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), but its function in
these cells is unknown. Through genome-wide analysis of Dnmt3L knockdown in ESCs,
we found that Dnmt3L is a positive regulator of methylation at the gene bodies of
housekeeping genes and, more surprisingly, is also a negative regulator of
methylation at promoters of bivalent genes. Dnmt3L is required for the
differentiation of ESCs into primordial germ cells (PGCs) through the activation 
of the homeotic gene Rhox5. We demonstrate that Dnmt3L interacts with the
Polycomb PRC2 complex in competition with the DNA methyltransferases Dnmt3a and
Dnmt3b to maintain low methylation levels at the H3K27me3 regions. Thus, in ESCs,
Dnmt3L counteracts the activity of de novo DNA methylases to maintain
hypomethylation at promoters of bivalent developmental genes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24074865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Surgery. 2013 Oct;154(4):739-46; discussion 746-7. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2013.06.041.

EZH2-shRNA-mediated upregulation of p21waf1/cip1 and its transcriptional
enhancers with concomitant downmodulation of mutant p53 in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.

Batchu RB(1), Qazi AM, Gruzdyn OV, Semaan A, Seward SM, Chamala S, Dhulipala VB, 
Bouwman DL, Weaver DW, Gruber SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical Oncology & Developmental Therapeutics, Department of
Surgery, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI; John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI. Electronic address: rbatchu@med.wayne.edu.

PURPOSE: Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a component of the chromatin
modification protein complex, is upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma 
(PDAC), whereas loss of p53 and its downstream target, p21(waf1/cip1), is also
observed frequently. We sought to investigate the role of the p53-p21(waf1/cip1) 
pathway in relation to EZH2-mediated inhibition of PDAC.
METHODS: The PANC-1 cell line was utilized in chromatin immunoprecipitation, gene
profiling, Western blot, cell invasion, cell proliferation, and tumor xenograft
assays.
RESULTS: Western blot analysis with antibodies that recognize both wild-type and 
mutant p53 did not show any alterations in band intensity; however, antibody that
detects only mutant p53 showed a band of significantly lesser intensity with EZH2
knockdown. Western blot analysis further revealed a significant upregulation of
p21(waf1/cip1). Gene expression profile analysis indicated significantly enhanced
transcripts of transcriptional inducers of p21(waf1/cip1), with downregulation of
mutant p53 transcript, corroborating the Western blot analysis. PANC-1 cells
expressing EZH2-short hairpin RNA displayed markedly attenuated growth in SCID
mice.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of mutant p53 with concomitant enhanced expression of 
p21(waf1/cip1) and its transcriptional trans-activators may contribute toward
EZH2-mediated suppression of PDAC.

Copyright © 2013 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24074410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Genes Cancer. 2013 May;4(5-6):235-41. doi: 10.1177/1947601913489020.

Identification of TET1 Partners That Control Its DNA-Demethylating Function.

Cartron PF(1), Nadaradjane A, Lepape F, Lalier L, Gardie B, Vallette FM.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Apoptose et Progression Tumorale, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie
Nantes-Angers, INSERM U892, Nantes, France ; Département de Recherche en
Cancérologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France.

Several recent reports have identified TET1 as the main enzyme modulating DNA
methylation and gene transcription via hydroxylation of 5-methylcytosine.
However, little is known about the protein network that controls TET1 activity.
By using a new proximity ligation in situ assay, we identified MeCP2, HDAC1/6/7, 
EZH2, mSin3A, PCNA, and LSD1 as TET1-interacting proteins. We also discerned that
TET1/PCNA acts as a demethylator of the cyclical methylation/demethylation
process, the perturbation of which promotes the aberrant methylation hallmarks
frequently observed in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3782005
PMID: 24069510  [PubMed]


404. Neurotherapeutics. 2013 Oct;10(4):621-31. doi: 10.1007/s13311-013-0212-7.

Epigenetics and ncRNAs in brain function and disease: mechanisms and prospects
for therapy.

Varela MA(1), Roberts TC, Wood MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, South
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3QX, UK.

The most fundamental roles of non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) and epigenetic mechanisms 
are the guidance of cellular differentiation in development and the regulation of
gene expression in adult tissues. In brain, both ncRNAs and the various
epigenetic gene regulatory mechanisms play a fundamental role in neurogenesis and
normal neuronal function. Thus, epigenetic chromatin remodelling can render
coding sites transcriptionally inactive by DNA methylation, histone modifications
or antisense RNA interactions. On the other hand, microRNAs (miRNAs) are ncRNA
molecules that can regulate the expression of hundreds of genes
post-transcriptionally, typically recognising binding sites in the 3'
untranslated region (UTR) of mRNA transcripts. Furthermore, there are a myriad of
interactions in the interface of miRNAs and epigenetics. For example, epigenetic 
mechanisms can silence miRNA coding sites, and miRNAs can be the effectors of
transcriptional gene silencing, targeting complementary promoters or silencing
the expression of epigenetic modifier genes like MECP2 and EZH2 leading to global
changes in the epigenome. Alterations in this regulatory machinery play a key
role in the pathology of complex disorders including cancer and neurological
diseases. For example, miRNA genes are frequently inactivated by epimutations in 
gliomas. Here we describe the interactions between epigenetic and ncRNA
regulatory systems and discuss therapeutic potential, with an emphasis on tumors,
cognitive disorders and neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC3805859
PMID: 24068583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Jan;35(1):53-61. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt317. Epub 2013 Sep
25.

Telbivudine treatment corrects HBV-induced epigenetic alterations in liver cells 
of patients with chronic hepatitis B.

Tian Y(1), Ni D, Yang W, Zhang Y, Zhao K, Song J, Mao Q, Tian Z, van Velkinburgh 
JC, Yang D, Wu Y, Ni B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, PR China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) alters the expression of host cellular genes to support
its replication and survival and to promote the liver cell injury. However, the
underlying mechanism remained incompletely understood. In this study, we
investigated HBV-induced epigenetic changes in HepG2 cells by profiling the
landscapes of the active histone modification mark H3K4me3 and repressive mark
H3K27me3 using chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing. HBV caused the altered
histone modifications at thousands of genomic loci, which are critically involved
in HBV entry, inflammation, fibrosis and carcinogenesis of host cells.
Interestingly, treatment of the HBV-transformed HepG2 cells with the anti-HBV
drug Telbivudine substantially restored the H3K4me3 level to that of
untransformed HepG2 cells. More importantly, our analysis of liver samples from
control and chronic hepatitis B patients revealed that treatment of the patients 
with Telbivudine not only corrected the target gene expression but also the
epigenetic modification of critical genes. In addition, the expression of the
histone methyltransferases SMYD3 and EZH2 that regulate histone H3-specific
methylation showed no difference in HepG2 cell with or without HBV existence.
Thus, our data suggest that abnormal histone modifications might critically
involved in HBV-mediated liver pathogenesis and Telbivudine therapy might benefit
patients with HBV-related chronic infection, liver cirrhosis and even hepatic
carcinoma.SUMMARY: Telbivudine substantially restores in vitro and in vivo
HBV-caused abnormal expressions and histone H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 modifications at
thousands of genomic loci that are involved in the pathogenesis of liver cells,
revealing a novel mechanism for HBV-mediated liver damage.

PMID: 24067902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 16;8(9):e73625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073625. eCollection
2013.

Unique anti-glioblastoma activities of hypericin are at the crossroad of
biochemical and epigenetic events and culminate in tumor cell differentiation.

Dror N(1), Mandel M, Lavie G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of Medicine, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Failure of conventional therapies to alleviate glioblastoma (GBM) fosters search 
for novel therapeutic strategies. These include epigenetic modulators as histone 
deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi), which relax abnormally compact tumor cell
chromatin organization, enabling cells to overcome blockage in differentiation.
However, in clinical settings, HDACi efficacy is confined to subsets of
hematologic malignancies. We reasoned that molecules targeting multiple
epigenetic mechanisms may exhibit superior anti-cancer activities. We focused on 
the redox perylene-quinone Hypericin (HYP) and showed that HYP targets Hsp90 for 
polyubiquitination, degradation and inactivation. Hsp90 is implicated in
mediating inheritable epigenetic modifications transferable to progeny. We
therefore examined if HYP can induce epigenetic alterations in GBM cells and show
here that HYP indeed, targets multiple mechanisms in human glioblastoma tumor
cell lines via unique manners. These elicit major epigenetic signature changes in
key developmentally regulated genes. HYP induces neuroglial tumor cell
differentiation modulating the cytoarchitecture, neuroglial differentiation
antigen expression and causes exit from cell proliferation cycles. Such
activities characterize HDACi however HYP is not an HDAC inhibitor. Instead, HYP 
effectively down-regulates expression of Class-I HDACs, creating marked
deficiencies in HDACs cellular contents, leading to histones H3 and H4
hyperacetylation. Expression of EZH2, the Polycomb repressor complex-2 catalytic 
subunit, which trimethylates histone H3K27 is also suppressed. The resulting
histone hyperacetylation and diminished H3K27-trimethylation relax chromatin
structure, activating gene transcription including differentiation-promoting
genes. DNMT profiles are also modulated increasing global DNA methylation. HYP
induces unique epigenetic down-regulations of HDACs, EZH2 and DNMTs, remodeling
chromatin structure and culminating in tumor cell differentiation. These
modulations generate clinically significant anti-GBM effects obtained in a
clinical trial performed in patients with recurrent, progressive disease. Despite
this advanced disease stage, patients responded to HYP, displaying stable disease
and partial responses; patients on compassionate therapy survived for up to 34
months. Hypericin may constitute a novel anti-glioblastoma therapeutic paradigm.

PMCID: PMC3774735
PMID: 24066060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Front Oncol. 2013 Sep 9;3:235. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00235.

Pre-clinical studies of epigenetic therapies targeting histone modifiers in lung 
cancer.

Huffman K(1), Martinez ED.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, UT Southwestern Medical Center
, Dallas, TX , USA.

Treatment options for lung cancer patients have been generally limited to
standard therapies or targeted interventions which involve a small number of
known mutations. Although the targeted therapies are initially successful, they
most often result in drug resistance, relapse, and mortality. We now know that
the complexity of lung cancer comes not only from genomic changes, but also from 
aberrant epigenetic regulatory events. Epigenetic therapies have shown promise as
single agents in the treatment of hematological malignancies but have yet to meet
this expectation in solid tumors thus fostering researchers to pursue new
approaches in the development and use of epigenetic interventions. Here, we
review some recent pre-clinical findings involving the use of drugs targeting
histone modifying enzymes both as single agents and as co-therapies against lung 
cancer. A greater understanding of the impact of these epigenetic compounds in
lung cancer signaling is needed and further evaluation in vivo is warranted in
several cases based on the pre-clinical activity of a subset of compounds
discussed in this review, including drugs co-targeting HDACs and EGF receptor,
targeting Brd4 and targeting Jumonji histone demethylases.

PMCID: PMC3766830
PMID: 24058902  [PubMed]


408. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1293-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2759. Epub 2013 Sep 22.

The landscape of somatic mutations in Down syndrome-related myeloid disorders.

Yoshida K(1), Toki T, Okuno Y, Kanezaki R, Shiraishi Y, Sato-Otsubo A, Sanada M, 
Park MJ, Terui K, Suzuki H, Kon A, Nagata Y, Sato Y, Wang R, Shiba N, Chiba K,
Tanaka H, Hama A, Muramatsu H, Hasegawa D, Nakamura K, Kanegane H, Tsukamoto K,
Adachi S, Kawakami K, Kato K, Nishimura R, Izraeli S, Hayashi Y, Miyano S, Kojima
S, Ito E, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Genomics Project, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. [2] Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. [3].

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2013 Dec;45(12):1516.

Transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) is a myeloid proliferation resembling acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), mostly affecting perinatal infants with Down
syndrome. Although self-limiting in a majority of cases, TAM may evolve as
non-self-limiting AMKL after spontaneous remission (DS-AMKL). Pathogenesis of
these Down syndrome-related myeloid disorders is poorly understood, except for
GATA1 mutations found in most cases. Here we report genomic profiling of 41 TAM, 
49 DS-AMKL and 19 non-DS-AMKL samples, including whole-genome and/or whole-exome 
sequencing of 15 TAM and 14 DS-AMKL samples. TAM appears to be caused by a single
GATA1 mutation and constitutive trisomy 21. Subsequent AMKL evolves from a
pre-existing TAM clone through the acquisition of additional mutations, with
major mutational targets including multiple cohesin components (53%), CTCF (20%),
and EZH2, KANSL1 and other epigenetic regulators (45%), as well as common
signaling pathways, such as the JAK family kinases, MPL, SH2B3 (LNK) and multiple
RAS pathway genes (47%).

PMID: 24056718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Cell. 2013 Oct 24;52(2):193-205. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.08.028. Epub 2013
Sep 19.

PAF and EZH2 induce Wnt/ß-catenin signaling hyperactivation.

Jung HY(1), Jun S, Lee M, Kim HC, Wang X, Ji H, McCrea PD, Park JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2013 Oct 24;52(2):157-8.

Fine control of Wnt signaling is essential for various cellular and developmental
decision-making processes. However, deregulation of Wnt signaling leads to
pathological consequences, one of which is cancer. Here, we identify a function
of PAF, a component of translesion DNA synthesis, in modulating Wnt signaling.
PAF is specifically overexpressed in colon cancer cells and intestinal stem cells
and is required for colon cancer cell proliferation. In Xenopus laevis,
ventrovegetal expression of PAF hyperactivates Wnt signaling, developing a
secondary axis with ß-catenin target gene upregulation. Upon Wnt signaling
activation, PAF dissociates from PCNA and binds directly to ß-catenin. Then, PAF 
recruits EZH2 to the ß-catenin transcriptional complex and specifically enhances 
Wnt target gene transactivation, independently of EZH2's methyltransferase
activity. In mice, conditional expression of PAF induces intestinal neoplasia via
Wnt signaling hyperactivation. Our studies reveal an unexpected role of PAF in
regulating Wnt signaling and propose a regulatory mechanism of Wnt signaling
during tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4040269
PMID: 24055345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Blood. 2013 Oct 31;122(18):3165-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496893. Epub 2013
Sep 19.

EZH2 mutations are frequent and represent an early event in follicular lymphoma.

Bödör C(1), Grossmann V, Popov N, Okosun J, O'Riain C, Tan K, Marzec J, Araf S,
Wang J, Lee AM, Clear A, Montoto S, Matthews J, Iqbal S, Rajnai H, Rosenwald A,
Ott G, Campo E, Rimsza LM, Smeland EB, Chan WC, Braziel RM, Staudt LM, Wright G, 
Lister TA, Elemento O, Hills R, Gribben JG, Chelala C, Matolcsy A, Kohlmann A,
Haferlach T, Gascoyne RD, Fitzgibbon J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of 
London, United Kingdom;

Gain of function mutations in the H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2 represent a
promising therapeutic target in germinal center lymphomas. In this study, we
assessed the frequency and distribution of EZH2 mutations in a large cohort of
patients with follicular lymphoma (FL) (n = 366) and performed a longitudinal
analysis of mutation during the disease progression from FL to transformed FL
(tFL) (n = 33). Mutations were detected at 3 recurrent mutation hot spots (Y646, 
A682, and A692) in 27% of FL cases with variant allele frequencies (VAF) ranging 
from 2% to 61%. By comparing VAF of EZH2 with other mutation targets (CREBBP,
MLL2, TNFRSF14, and MEF2B), we were able to distinguish patients harboring clonal
EZH2 mutation from rarer cases with subclonal mutations. Overall, the high
incidence of EZH2 mutations in FL and their stability during disease progression 
makes FL an appropriate disease to evaluate EZH2 targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC3814734
PMID: 24052547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Future Med Chem. 2013 Sep;5(14):1661-70. doi: 10.4155/fmc.13.136.

Recent progress in the discovery of small-molecule inhibitors of the HMT EZH2 for
the treatment of cancer.

Verma SK(1), Knight SD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, GlaxoSmithKline
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 1250 South Collegeville Road, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.

The histone lysine methyltransferase EZH2 is the catalytic component of the
multi-protein PRC2 complex and methylates lysine 27 on histone H3. EZH2
overexpression is implicated in tumorigenesis and correlates with poor prognosis 
in several tumor types. Inhibition of aberrant EZH2 activity might attenuate
tumorigenesis resulting from misregulated gene transcription derived from
aberrant EZH2 activity. In the last year, the first reports of small molecules
demonstrating potent and selective inhibition of EZH2 have been published by
multiple groups. Herein, we review recent progress reported in the discovery of
small molecule inhibitors of EZH2.

PMID: 24047271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2805-11. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.09.006. Epub
2013 Sep 13.

Distinctive microRNA signature associated of neoplasms with the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway.

Sun X(1), He Y, Huang C, Ma TT, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei 230032, China; The Key Laboratory of
Anti-inflammatory and Immune Medicine, Anhui Medical University, Ministry of
Education, China.

As the crucial biological regulators, microRNAs that act by suppressing their
target genes are involved in a variety of pathophysiological processes. It is
generally accepted that microRNAs are often dysregulated in many types of
neoplasm and other human diseases. In neoplasm, microRNAs may function as
oncogenes or tumor suppressors. As constitutive activation of the Wnt signaling
pathway is a common feature of neoplasm and contributes to its development,
progression and metastasis in various cancers, numerous studies have revealed
that microRNA-mediated gene regulation are interconnected with the Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling pathway, forming a Wnt/ß-catenin-microRNA regulatory network, which is 
critical to successful targeting of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway for oncotherapy. In
this review, we aim to accumulate recent advances on microRNAs that work in
tandem with Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in tumorigenesis, with particular focus on
how microRNAs affect Wnt/ß-catenin activity as well as how microRNAs are
regulated through the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

© 2013.

PMID: 24041653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Helicobacter. 2013 Sep;18 Suppl 1:34-8. doi: 10.1111/hel.12082.

Gastric cancer: epidemiologic aspects.

González CA(1), Sala N, Rokkas T.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Nutrition, Environment and Cancer, Catalan Institute of Oncology-
Idibell, Barcelona, Spain.

A multifactorial and multistep model of gastric cancer (GC) is currently
accepted, according to which different environmental and genetic factors are
involved at different stages in the cancer process. The aim of this article is to
review the most relevant information published on the relative contribution of
genetic and environmental factors. Large meta-analyses confirmed the association 
between IL8, IL10, TNF-b, TP53 and PSCA, while genetic variation at different
genes such as XPG, PLCE1, HFE, ERCC5, EZH2, DOC2, CYP19A1, ALDH2, and CDH1 have
been reported to be associated with GC risk. Several microRNAs have also been
associated with GC and their prognosis. Cohort studies have shown the association
between GC and fruit, flavonoid, total antioxidant capacity, and green tea
intake. Obesity was associated with cardia GC, heme iron intake from meat with GC
risk. Several large meta-analyses have confirmed the positive association of GC
with salt intake and pickled foods and the negative association with aspirin use.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24011243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e74870. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074870. eCollection
2013.

Effects of EZH2 polymorphisms on susceptibility to and pathological development
of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yu YL(1), Su KJ, Hsieh YH, Lee HL, Chen TY, Hsiao PC, Yang SF.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Center for Molecular Medicine, China 
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan ; The Ph.D. Program for Cancer Biology and
Drug Discovery, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan ; Department of
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) gene encodes the histone
methyltransferase that is the catalytic component of the polycomb repressive
complex-2, which initiates epigenetic silencing of genes. The expression level of
EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is highly correlated with tumor
progression; however, it has not been determined if specific EZH2 genetic
variants are associated with the risk of HCC. This study investigated the
potential associations of EZH2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms with HCC
susceptibility and its clinicopathologic characteristics.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A total of 220 HCC patients and 552 cancer-free
controls were analyzed for four EZH2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs6950683, 
rs2302427, rs3757441, and rs41277434) using real-time PCR genotyping. After
adjusting for other co-variants, the individuals carrying at least one C allele
at EZH2 rs6950683 and rs3757441 had a 0.611-fold and a 0.660-fold lower risk of
developing HCC than did wild-type (TT) carriers, respectively. The CCCA or CCTA
haplotype among the four EZH2 sites (rs6950683, rs2302427, rs3757441, and
rs41277434), respectively, was also associated with a reduced risk of HCC.
Furthermore, HCC patients who carried at least one C allele at rs6950683 or
rs3757441 had a higher lymph-node-metastasis risk but a lower liver-cirrhosis
risk than did patients carrying the wild-type allele.
CONCLUSIONS: The rs6950683 and rs3757441 polymorphic genotypes of EZH2 might
contribute to the prediction of susceptibility to and pathological development of
HCC. This is the first study to provide insight into risk factors associated with
EZH2 variants in carcinogenesis of HCC in Taiwan.

PMCID: PMC3769270
PMID: 24040354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074556. eCollection 
2013.

Chromatin changes in dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells in response to
retinoic acid induced differentiation.

Tennakoon JB(1), Wang H, Coarfa C, Cooney AJ, Gunaratne PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

Loss of Dicer, an enzyme critical for microRNA biogenesis, results in lethality
due to a block in mouse embryonic stem cell (mES) differentiation. Using ChIP-Seq
we found increased H3K9me2 at over 900 CpG islands in the Dicer(-/-)ES epigenome.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that promoters of chromatin regulators to be
among the most impacted by increased CpG island H3K9me2 in ES (Dicer(-/-)). We
therefore, extended the study to include H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks for selected 
genes. We found that the ES (Dicer(-/-)) mutant epigenome was characterized by a 
shift in the overall balance between transcriptionally favorable (H3K4me3) and
unfavorable (H3K27me3) marks at key genes regulating ES cell differentiation.
Pluripotency genes Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were not impacted in relation to patterns
of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 and showed no changes in the rates of transcript
down-regulation in response to RA. The most striking changes were observed in
regards to genes regulating differentiation and the transition from self-renewal 
to differentiation. An increase in H3K4me3 at the promoter of Lin28b was
associated with the down-regulation of this gene at a lower rate in Dicer(-/-)ES 
as compared to wild type ES. An increase in H3K27me3 in the promoters of
differentiation genes Hoxa1 and Cdx2 in Dicer(-/-)ES cells was coincident with an
inability to up-regulate these genes at the same rate as ES upon retinoic acid
(RA)-induced differentiation. We found that siRNAs Ezh2 and post-transcriptional 
silencing of Ezh2 by let-7 g rescued this effect suggesting that Ezh2
up-regulation is in part responsible for increased H3K27me3 and decreased rates
of up-regulation of differentiation genes in Dicer(-/-)ES.

PMCID: PMC3767645
PMID: 24040281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Apr 5;386(1-2):46-54. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.005.
Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Genetic and epigenetic changes in sporadic endocrine tumors: parathyroid tumors.

Costa-Guda J(1), Arnold A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism,
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT 06030-3101, USA.
(2)Center for Molecular Medicine and Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism,
University of Connecticut School of Medicine, Farmington, CT 06030-3101, USA.
Electronic address: molecularmedicine@uchc.edu.

Parathyroid neoplasia is most commonly due to benign parathyroid adenoma but
rarely can be caused by malignant parathyroid carcinoma. Evidence suggests that
parathyroid carcinomas rarely, if ever, evolve through an identifiable benign
intermediate, with the notable exception of carcinomas associated with the
familial hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumor syndrome. Several genes have been directly
implicated in the pathogenesis of typical sporadic parathyroid adenoma; somatic
mutations in the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene are the most frequent finding, and
alterations in the cyclin D1/PRAD1 oncogene are also firmly established molecular
drivers of sporadic adenomas. In addition, good evidence supports mutation in the
CDKN1B/p27 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI) gene, and in other CDKI genes
as contributing to disease pathogenesis in this context. Somatic defects in
additional genes, including ß-catenin, POT1 and EZH2 may contribute to
parathyroid adenoma formation but, for most, their ability to drive parathyroid
tumorigenesis remains to be demonstrated experimentally. Further, genetic
predisposition to sporadic presentations of parathyroid adenoma appears be
conferred by rare, and probably low-penetrance, germline variants in CDKI genes
and, perhaps, in other genes such as CASR and AIP. The HRPT2 tumor suppressor
gene is commonly mutated in parathyroid carcinoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3943641
PMID: 24035866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Chin J Physiol. 2013 Oct 31;56(5):282-90. doi: 10.4077/CJP.2013.BAB139. Epub 2013
Aug 31.

Histone trimethylation of the p53 gene by expression of a constitutively active
prolactin receptor in prostate cancer cells.

Tan D(1), Tan S, Zhang J, Tang P, Huang J, Zhou W, Wu S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences/College of Medicine, Jishou University, Jishou
416000, Hunan People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    Chin J Physiol. 2013 Dec 31;56(6):362.

Prolactin (PRL) is a pituitary polypeptide hormone characterized by multiple
biological actions including stimulation of growth in the prostate, breast and
ovarian epithelial cells. A sizable body of reports has presented evidences to
indicate the involvement of PRL in the pathogenic process of cancers of the
reproductive system, such as prostate and breast cancers. PRL exerts its effects 
by dimerizing its receptor (PRLR) on the plasma membrane, and initiating cellular
Jak-Stat signal pathway. We have previously cloned from prostate cancer cells a
natural variant of PRLR in which the S2 subdomain of the extracellular domain is 
missing (<U+0394>S2). Our preliminary data showed that <U+0394>S2 PRLR was able to dimerize and
to constitutively activate the ß-casein promoter (in the absence of its ligand,
PRL) in breast and prostate epithelial cells. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2
(EZH2), an important histone-modifying enzyme, is able to trimethylate histone 3 
on lysine 27 (H3K27Me3), consequently leading to gene silencing, especially
silencing of tumor suppressor genes such as p53. We hypothesized that <U+0394>S2 PRLR
played an important pathogenic role in prostate cancer through, at least partly, 
alterations in the expression of EZH2 and the trimethylation of histone 3 on
lysine 27. In the present study, overexpression of <U+0394>S2 PRLR in prostate
epithelial cells was achieved by infection with an adenoviral vector carrying the
cDNA. The viable cell number overexpressing <U+0394>S2 PRLR was assessed using MTS
reagent. Western blot, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay and acid
histone extraction were applied to detect expression of EZH2 as well as
trimethylation of histone 3, respectively. In prostate epithelial cells,
overexpression of <U+0394>S2 PRLR increased the levels of EZH2 methyltransferase mRNA
and protein, induced EZH2 methyltransferase recruitment to chromatin, increased
the trimethylation of histone 3 on lysine 27, and decreased expression of the p53
gene. We concluded that <U+0394>S2 PRLR plays an important pathogenic role in prostate
cancer through epigenetic covalent modification leading to chromatin remodeling. 
Hypertrimethylation on H3K27 of the p53 gene promoter region due to elevated
expression of <U+0394>S2 PRLR by alternative splicing of the pre-mRNA in its full-length
form might serve as a new mechanism underlying human prostate cancer.

PMID: 24032713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Pathol. 2013 Dec;231(4):402-12. doi: 10.1002/path.4263.

Through the glass darkly: intraepithelial neoplasia, top-down differentiation,
and the road to ovarian cancer.

Crum CP(1), Herfs M, Ning G, Bijron JG, Howitt BE, Jimenez CA, Hanamornroongruang
S, McKeon FD, Xian W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Women's and Perinatal Pathology, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.

It is currently hoped that deaths from extra-uterine high-grade serous cancer
(HGSC) will be reduced via opportunistic salpingectomy in healthy women.
Accumulated data implicate the fimbria as a site of origin and descriptive
molecular pathology and experimental evidence strongly support a serous
carcinogenic sequence in the Fallopian tube. Both direct and indirect
('surrogate') precursors suggest that the benign tube undergoes important
biological changes after menopause, acquiring abnormalities in gene expression
that are often shared with malignancy, including PAX2, ALDH1, LEF1, RCN1, RUNX2, 
beta-catenin, EZH2, and others. However, the tube can be linked to only some
HGSCs, recharging arguments that nearby peritoneum/ovarian surface epithelium
(POSE) also hosts progenitors to this malignancy. A major sticking point is the
difference in immunophenotype between POSE and Müllerian epithelium, essentially 
requiring mesothelial to Müllerian differentiation prior to or during malignant
transformation to HGSC. However, emerging evidence implicates an embryonic or
progenitor phenotype in the adult female genital tract with the capacity to
differentiate, normally or during neoplastic transformation. Recently, a putative
cell of origin for cervical cancer has been identified in the squamo-columnar
(SC) junction, projecting a model whereby Krt7+ embryonic progenitors give rise
to immunophenotypically distinct progeny under stromal influences via 'top down' 
differentiation. Similar differentiation can be seen in the endometrium with a
parallel in juxtaposed mesothelial and Müllerian differentiation in the ovary.
Abrupt mesothelial-Müllerian transitions remain to be proven, but would explain
the rapid evolution, short asymptomatic interval, and absence of a defined
epithelial starting point in many HGSCs. Resolving this question will require
accurately distinguishing progenitor from progeny tumour cells in HGSC and
pinpointing where initial transformation and trans-differentiation occur, whether
in the tube or POSE. Both will be critical to expectations from prophylactic
salpingectomy and future approaches to pelvic serous cancer prevention.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3947463
PMID: 24030860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Jul;42(4):443-9.

[Expression of EZH2 in breast cancer and its clinicopathological significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Wang H, Deng Y, Cao P, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University Medical College, Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of EZH2 in breast cancer and its
clinicopathological significance.
METHODS: Eighty cases of invasive breast cancer with complete clinlcpathological 
data and follow-up information were enrolled in the study. The expressions of ER,
PR, HER-2, CK5/6, CK14, EGFR and EZH2 proteins were detected by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). The relationship of EZH2 expression with molecular
subtypes and prognosis of breast cancer was analyzed.
RESULTS: In 80 cases of breast cancer, there were 49 cases of Luminal subtype, 8 
cases of HER-2(+) subtype, 20 cases of Basal-like subtype and 3 cases of Normal
breast-like subtype. The molecular subtypes of breast cancer were associated with
menopausal status of patients. Luminal subtype had the highest overall survival
rate, while the Basal-like carcinomas were associated with the lowest survival
(P< 0.05). The overall EZH2-positive expression rate was 45.00% and the
expression was correlated with axillary lymph node metastasis, histological
grading and clinical staging of breast cancer (P < 0.05). The EZH2-positive
expression rates in Luminal subtype, HER-2(+) subtype and Basal-like subtype of
breast cancers were 34.6%,50.0% and 70.0%, respectively (P <0.05).
CONCLUSION: Positive expression of EZH2 may indicate a poor prognosis of breast
cancer patients and it might be used as a novel therapeutic target for breast
cancer of Basal-like subtype.

PMID: 24022934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3206-17. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.08.020. Epub 2013 Sep 7.

The role of Sp1 and EZH2 in the regulation of LMX1A in cervical cancer cells.

Lin WC(1), Yan MD, Yu PN, Li HJ, Kuo CC, Hsu CL, Lin YW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

We have reported previously that LIM homeobox transcription factor 1a (LMX1A) is 
hypermethylated and functions as a metastasis suppressor in cervical cancer
cells. However, the regulation of LMX1A in carcinogenesis has not been reported. 
We aim to clarify whether specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) are involved in the regulation of LMX1A in cervical cancer.
First we characterized the LMX1A promoter and used overexpression, knockdown, and
reporter assays to show that Sp1 increased LMX1A promoter activity. Next, we used
site-directed mutagenesis and electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSAs) to
demonstrate that Sp1-binding sites were important for Sp1-mediated activation of 
the LMX1A promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation data demonstrated that Sp1
could bind directly to the LMX1A promoter and activate endogenous LMX1A
expression in cells pretreated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC). Knockdown 
of EZH2 decreased H3K27me3 histone modification but was insufficient to restore
LMX1A expression. To explore the effect of EZH2 on the endogenous LMX1A promoter,
we treated EZH2-knockdown cells with 5-aza-dC and trichostatin A (TSA) and then
depleted the cells of drugs for 3days. H3K14ac was enriched at the LMX1A promoter
in EZH2-knockdown cells and LMX1A mRNA was still expressed. Taken together, these
data imply that Sp1 may activate LMX1A expression upon oncogenic stress during
cervical cancer development. Moreover, suppression of EZH2 may delay resilencing 
of LMX1A after the removal of 5-aza-dC and TSA.

© 2013.

PMID: 24018208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. PLoS Genet. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003712. Epub 2013 
Aug 29.

A critical function of Mad2l2 in primordial germ cell development of mice.

Pirouz M(1), Pilarski S, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany. mehdi.pirouz@mpibpc.mpg.de

The development of primordial germ cells (PGCs) involves several waves of
epigenetic reprogramming. A major step is following specification and involves
the transition from the stably suppressive histone modification H3K9me2 to the
more flexible, still repressive H3K27me3, while PGCs are arrested in G2 phase of 
their cycle. The significance and underlying molecular mechanism of this
transition were so far unknown. Here, we generated mutant mice for the Mad2l2
(Mad2B, Rev7) gene product, and found that they are infertile in both males and
females. We demonstrated that Mad2l2 is essential for PGC, but not somatic
development. PGCs were specified normally in Mad2l2(-/-) embryos, but became
eliminated by apoptosis during the subsequent phase of epigenetic reprogramming. 
A majority of knockout PGCs failed to arrest in the G2 phase, and did not switch 
from a H3K9me2 to a H3K27me3 configuration. By the analysis of transfected
fibroblasts we found that the interaction of Mad2l2 with the histone
methyltransferases G9a and GLP lead to a downregulation of H3K9me2. The
inhibitory binding of Mad2l2 to Cyclin dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1) could arrest the
cell cycle in the G2 phase, and also allowed another histone methyltransferase,
Ezh2, to upregulate H3K27me3. Together, these results demonstrate the potential
of Mad2l2 in the regulation of both cell cycle and the epigenetic status. The
function of Mad2l2 is essential in PGCs, and thus of high relevance for
fertility.

PMCID: PMC3757036
PMID: 24009519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(22):12139-50. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01047-13. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Oncoprotein E7 from beta human papillomavirus 38 induces formation of an
inhibitory complex for a subset of p53-regulated promoters.

Saidj D(1), Cros MP, Hernandez-Vargas H, Guarino F, Sylla BS, Tommasino M,
Accardi R.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.

Our previous studies on cutaneous beta human papillomavirus 38 (HPV38) E6 and E7 
oncoproteins highlighted a novel activity of I<U+03BA>B kinase beta (IKKß) in the
nucleus of human keratinocytes, where it phosphorylates and stabilizes <U+0394>Np73a, an
antagonist of p53/p73 functions. Here, we further characterize the role of the
IKKß nuclear form. We show that IKKß nuclear translocation and <U+0394>Np73a
accumulation are mediated mainly by HPV38 E7 oncoprotein. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP)/Re-ChIP experiments showed that <U+0394>Np73a and IKKß are
part, together with two epigenetic enzymes DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and
the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), of a transcriptional regulatory complex
that inhibits the expression of some p53-regulated genes, such as PIG3.
Recruitment to the PIG3 promoter of EZH2 and DNMT1 resulted in trimethylation of 
histone 3 on lysine 27 and in DNA methylation, respectively, both events
associated with gene expression silencing. Decreases in the intracellular levels 
of HPV38 E7 or <U+0394>Np73a strongly affected the recruitment of the inhibitory
transcriptional complex to the PIG3 promoter, with consequent restoration of
p53-regulated gene expression. Finally, the <U+0394>Np73a/IKKß/DNMT1/EZH2 complex
appears to bind a subset of p53-regulated promoters. In fact, the complex is
efficiently recruited to several promoters of genes encoding proteins involved in
DNA repair and apoptosis, whereas it does not influence the expression of the
prosurvival factor Survivin. In summary, our data show that HPV38 via E7 protein 
promotes the formation of a multiprotein complex that negatively regulates the
expression of several p53-regulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3807916
PMID: 24006445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 15;73(18):5695-708. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4196. Epub
2013 Sep 4.

Oncogenic herpesvirus HHV-8 promotes androgen-independent prostate cancer growth.

Mygatt JG(1), Singhal A, Sukumar G, Dalgard CL, Kaleeba JA.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliation: Emerging Infectious Diseases Program, Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.

Mechanisms underlying progression to androgen-independent prostate cancer
following radical ablation therapy remain poorly defined. Although intraprostatic
infections have been highlighted as potential cofactors, pathogen influences on
pathways that support tumor regrowth are not known. To explore this provocative
concept, we derived androgen-sensitive and -insensitive prostate epithelial cells
persistently infected with human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8), an oncogenic herpesvirus 
that has been detected in normal prostate epithelium, prostate adenocarcinoma,
and biologic fluids of patients with prostate cancer, to explore its effects on
transition to hormone-refractory disease. Strikingly, we found that HHV-8
infection of androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells conferred the capacity for 
androgen-independent growth. This effect was associated with altered expression
and transcriptional activity of the androgen receptor (AR). However, HHV-8
infection bypassed AR signaling by promoting enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2)-mediated epigenetic silencing of tumor-suppressor genes, including MSMB
and DAB2IP that are often inactivated in advanced disease. Furthermore, we found 
that HHV-8 triggered epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Although HHV-8 has not
been linked etiologically to prostate cancer, virologic outcomes revealed by our 
study provide mechanistic insight into how intraprostatic infections could
constitute risk for progression to androgen-independent metastatic disease where 
EZH2 has been implicated. Taken together, our findings prompt further evaluations
of the relationship between HHV-8 infections and risk of advanced prostate
cancer.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 24005834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Hepatology. 2014 May;59(5):1850-63. doi: 10.1002/hep.26720. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

c-Myc-mediated epigenetic silencing of MicroRNA-101 contributes to dysregulation 
of multiple pathways in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang L(1), Zhang X, Jia LT, Hu SJ, Zhao J, Yang JD, Wen WH, Wang Z, Wang T, Zhao 
J, Wang RA, Meng YL, Nie YZ, Dou KF, Chen SY, Yao LB, Fan DM, Zhang R, Yang AG.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Department of Immunology, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, China; Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 May;59(5):1676-7.

The MYC oncogene is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and has been 
associated with widespread microRNA (miRNA) repression; however, the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. Here, we report that the c-Myc oncogenic
transcription factor physically interacts with enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2), a core enzymatic unit of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).
Furthermore, miR-101, an important tumor-suppressive miRNA in human
hepatocarcinomas, is epigenetically repressed by PRC2 complex in a c-Myc-mediated
manner. miR-101, in turn, inhibits the expression of two subunits of PRC2 (EZH2
and EED), thus creating a double-negative feedback loop that regulates the
process of hepatocarcinogenesis. Restoration of miR-101 expression suppresses
multiple malignant phenotypes of HCC cells by coordinate repression of a cohort
of oncogenes, including STMN1, JUNB, and CXCR7, and further increases expression 
of endogenous miR-101 by inhibition of PRC2 activation. In addition,
co-overexpression of c-Myc and EZH2 in HCC samples was closely associated with
lower expression of miR-101 (P < 0.0001) and poorer prognosis of HCC patients (P 
< 0.01).CONCLUSIONS: c-Myc collaborates with EZH2-containing PRC2 complex in
silencing tumor-suppressive miRNAs during hepatocarcinogenesis and provides
promising therapeutic candidates for human HCC.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24002871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Oct;27(10):1666-77. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1211. Epub 2013 Sep
3.

Persistently altered epigenetic marks in the mouse uterus after neonatal estrogen
exposure.

Jefferson WN(1), Chevalier DM, Phelps JY, Cantor AM, Padilla-Banks E, Newbold RR,
Archer TK, Kinyamu HK, Williams CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, US Department of Health and Human Services, PO Box 12233, MD E4-05,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709. williamsc5@niehs.nih.gov.

Neonatal exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) causes permanent alterations in
female reproductive tract gene expression, infertility, and uterine cancer in
mice. To determine whether epigenetic mechanisms could explain these phenotypes, 
we first tested whether DES altered uterine expression of chromatin-modifying
proteins. DES treatment significantly reduced expression of methylcytosine
dioxygenase TET oncogene family, member 1 (TET1) on postnatal day 5; this
decrease was correlated with a subtle decrease in DNA 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in 
adults. There were also significant reductions in histone methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), histone lysine acetyltransferase 2A (KAT2A), 
and histone deacetylases HDAC1, HDAC2, and HDAC3. Uterine chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to analyze the locus-specific association of
modified histones with 2 genes, lactoferrin (Ltf) and sine oculis homeobox 1
(Six1), which are permanently upregulated in adults after neonatal DES treatment.
Three histone modifications associated with active transcription, histone H3
lysine 9 acetylation (H3K9ac), H3 lysine 4 trimethylation (H3K4me3), and H4
lysine 5 acetylation (H4K5ac) were enriched at specific Ltf promoter regions
after DES treatment, but this enrichment was not maintained in adults. H3K9ac,
H4K5ac, and H3K4me3 were enriched at Six1 exon 1 immediately after neonatal DES
treatment. As adults, DES-treated mice had greater differences in H4K5ac and
H3K4me3 occupancy at Six1 exon 1 and new differences in these histone marks at an
upstream region. These findings indicate that neonatal DES exposure temporarily
alters expression of multiple chromatin-modifying proteins and persistently
alters epigenetic marks in the adult uterus at the Six1 locus, suggesting a
mechanism for developmental exposures leading to altered reproductive function
and increased cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3787132
PMID: 24002655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochemistry. 2013 Oct 1;52(39):6866-78. doi: 10.1021/bi400805w. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Enzyme-dependent lysine deprotonation in EZH2 catalysis.

Kipp DR(1), Quinn CM, Fortin PD.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research , 250 Massachusetts Avenue,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

Protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) are key players in epigenetic
regulation and have been associated with a variety of diseases, including
cancers. The catalytic subunit of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2, EZH2 (EC
2.1.1.43), is a PKMT and a member of a family of SET domain lysine
methyltransferases that catalyze the transfer of a methyl group from
S-adenosyl-l-methionine to lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27). Wild-type (WT) EZH2
primarily catalyzes the mono- and dimethylation of H3K27; however, a clinically
relevant active site mutation (Y641F) has been shown to alter the reaction
specificity, dominantly catalyzing trimethylation of H3K27, and has been linked
to tumor genesis and maintenance. Herein, we explore the chemical mechanism of
methyl transfer by EZH2 and its Y641F mutant with pH-rate profiles and solvent
kinetic isotope effects (sKIEs) using a short peptide derived from histone H3
[H3(21-44)]. A key component of the chemical reaction is the essential
deprotonation of the e-NH3(+) group of lysine to accommodate subsequent
methylation. This deprotonation has been suggested by independent studies (1) to 
occur prior to binding to the enzyme (by bulk solvent) or (2) to be facilitated
within the active site following binding, either (a) by the enzyme itself or (b) 
by a water molecule with access to the binding pocket. Our pH-rate and sKIE data 
best support a model in which lysine deprotonation is enzyme-dependent and at
least partially rate-limiting. Furthermore, our experimental data are in
agreement with prior computational models involving enzyme-dependent solvent
deprotonation through a channel providing bulk solvent access to the active site.
The mechanism of deprotonation and the rate-limiting catalytic steps appear to be
unchanged between the WT and Y641F mutant enzymes, despite their activities being
highly dependent on different substrate methylation states, suggesting
determinants of substrate and product specificity in EZH2 are independent of
catalytic events limiting the steady-state rate.

PMID: 24000826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Haematologica. 2014 Jan;99(1):37-45. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.091454. Epub 2013
Aug 30.

Array comparative genomic hybridization and sequencing of 23 genes in 80 patients
with myelofibrosis at chronic or acute phase.

Brecqueville M(1), Rey J, Devillier R, Guille A, Gillet R, Adélaide J,
Gelsi-Boyer V, Arnoulet C, Chaffanet M, Mozziconacci MJ, Vey N, Birnbaum D,
Murati A.

Author information: 
(1)muratia@ipc.unicancer.fr.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2014 Jan;99(1):2-3.

Myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative neoplasm that occurs de novo (primary
myelofibrosis) or results from the progression of polycythemia vera or essential 
thrombocytemia (hereafter designated as secondary myelofibrosis or
post-polycythemia vera/ essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis). To progress in 
the understanding of myelofibrosis and to find molecular prognostic markers we
studied 104 samples of primary and secondary myelofibrosis at chronic (n=68) and 
acute phases (n=12) from 80 patients, by using array-comparative genomic
hybridization and sequencing of 23 genes (ASXL1, BMI1, CBL, DNMT3A, EZH2, IDH1/2,
JAK2, K/NRAS, LNK, MPL, NF1, PPP1R16B, PTPN11, RCOR1, SF3B1, SOCS2, SRSF2, SUZ12,
TET2, TP53, TRPS1). We found copy number aberrations in 54% of samples, often
involving genes with a known or potential role in leukemogenesis. We show that
cases carrying a del(20q), del(17) or del(12p) evolve in acute myeloid leukemia
(P=0.03). We found that 88% of the cases were mutated, mainly in signaling
pathway (JAK2 69%, NF1 6%) and epigenetic genes (ASXL1 26%, TET2 14%, EZH2 8%).
Overall survival was poor in patients with more than one mutation (P=0.001) and
in patients with JAK2/ASXL1 mutations (P=0.02). Our study highlights the
heterogeneity of myelofibrosis, and points to several interesting copy number
aberrations and genes with diagnostic and prognostic impact.

PMCID: PMC4007931
PMID: 23996481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2654-63. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-484055. Epub 2013 
Aug 27.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) suppresses Eµ-myc lymphoma.

Lee SC(1), Phipson B, Hyland CD, Leong HS, Allan RS, Lun A, Hilton DJ, Nutt SL,
Blewitt ME, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Majewski IJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC,
Australia; and.

Deregulation of polycomb group complexes polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and
2 (PRC2) is associated with human cancers. Although inactivating mutations in
PRC2-encoding genes EZH2, EED, and SUZ12 are present in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and in myeloid malignancies, gain-of-function mutations in
EZH2 are frequently observed in B-cell lymphoma, implying disease-dependent
effects of individual mutations. We show that, in contrast to PRC1, PRC2 is a
tumor suppressor in Eµ-myc lymphomagenesis, because disease onset was accelerated
by heterozygosity for Suz12 or by short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of Suz12
or Ezh2. Accelerated lymphomagenesis was associated with increased accumulation
of B-lymphoid cells in the absence of effects on apoptosis or cell cycling.
However, Suz12-deficient B-lymphoid progenitors exhibit enhanced serial
clonogenicity. Thus, PRC2 normally restricts the self-renewal of B-lymphoid
progenitors, the disruption of which contributes to lymphomagenesis. This finding
provides new insight regarding the functional contribution of mutations in PRC2
in a range of leukemias.

PMID: 23982173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Breast Cancer Res. 2013;15(4):R72.

Sox4, EMT programs, and the metastatic progression of breast cancers: mastering
the masters of EMT.

Parvani JG, Schiemann WP.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):768-83.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) programs require the expression of a
variety of so-called master regulators of EMT, including members of the Snail,
Zeb, and Twist transcription factor families. Teleologically, the requirement for
such a diverse group of 'master regulators' seems evolutionarily cumbersome, and 
emerging evidence indicates that these transcription factors do in fact mediate
unique and specialized functions, suggesting the existence of higher-order
'masters' that truly direct and coordinate EMT programs. Accordingly, Tiwari and 
colleagues recently delineated an elegant pathway wherein transforming growth
factor-beta stimulates Sox4 expression, which induces that of the histone
methyltransferase, Ezh2, thereby reprogramming the epigenome to elicit EMT
programs and metastasis of breast cancers. This viewpoint highlights Sox4 as a
'new' master of EMT programs and metastatic breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3979076
PMID: 23981787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Bioinformatics. 2013 Nov 15;29(22):2928-30. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt495.
Epub 2013 Aug 23.

catRAPID omics: a web server for large-scale prediction of protein-RNA
interactions.

Agostini F(1), Zanzoni A, Klus P, Marchese D, Cirillo D, Tartaglia GG.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Function and Evolution, Bioinformatics and Genomics, Centre for Genomic
Regulation (CRG) and Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

SUMMARY: Here we introduce catRAPID omics, a server for large-scale calculations 
of protein-RNA interactions. Our web server allows (i) predictions at proteomic
and transcriptomic level; (ii) use of protein and RNA sequences without size
restriction; (iii) analysis of nucleic acid binding regions in proteins; and (iv)
detection of RNA motifs involved in protein recognition.
RESULTS: We developed a web server to allow fast calculation of ribonucleoprotein
associations in Caenorhabditis elegans, Danio rerio, Drosophila melanogaster,
Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and
Xenopus tropicalis (custom libraries can be also generated). The catRAPID omics
was benchmarked on the recently published RNA interactomes of
Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 1 (SRSF1), Histone-lysine
N-methyltransferase EZH2 (EZH2), TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP43) and
RNA-binding protein FUS (FUS) as well as on the protein interactomes of U1/U2
small nucleolar RNAs, X inactive specific transcript (Xist) repeat A region
(RepA) and Crumbs homolog 3 (CRB3) 3'-untranslated region RNAs. Our predictions
are highly significant (P < 0.05) and will help the experimentalist to identify
candidates for further validation.
AVAILABILITY: catRAPID omics can be freely accessed on the Web at
http://s.tartaglialab.com/catrapid/omics. Documentation, tutorial and FAQs are
available at http://s.tartaglialab.com/page/catrapid_group.

PMCID: PMC3810848
PMID: 23975767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Niger J Clin Pract. 2013 Oct-Dec;16(4):407-17. doi: 10.4103/1119-3077.116871.

The end of the road for prostate specific antigen testing?

Nna E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Safety Molecular Pathology Laboratory, Faculty of Health Sciences and
Technology, University of Nigeria, Enugu Campus, Enugu State, Nigeria.

Many candidate biomarkers for diagnosis of prostate cancer have been
investigated, but prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing remains the frontline
test for both mass screening and individual clinical testing. Although the PSA
test is cost-effective, analytically reliable, and flexibly high throughput, it
has a very weak correlation with prostate malignancy. This has resulted in
over-diagnosis and over-treatment of patients leading to costly economic, social,
and psychological impacts. PSA testing lacks the ability to molecularly
characterize prostate diseases and define aggressiveness and lethality, which are
necessary to influence choice of treatment. Therefore, newer molecular tests are 
beginning to replace the PSA tests. The prostate cancer antigen 3 test has shown 
superiority and is now widely used. The recently reported sarcosine urine test,
the already delineated TMPRSS2: ETS fusion genes, the glutathione-S-transferase
P1 serum marker, and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 biomarker may also help improve 
diagnosis and prognostication of prostate cancer. The analytical trend is toward 
a multiplex testing format using molecular and/or proteomic techniques that are
reliable, accurate, reproducible, and ensure rapid quantitation. Therefore,
validation of these newer biomarkers and their assays are necessary for both
large-scale clinical trials and clinical utility.

PMID: 23974730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Chem Biol. 2013 Oct;9(10):643-50. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1331. Epub 2013 Aug
25.

Targeted disruption of the EZH2-EED complex inhibits EZH2-dependent cancer.

Kim W(1), Bird GH, Neff T, Guo G, Kerenyi MA, Walensky LD, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. [3] Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the histone lysine N-methyltransferase
component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which, in conjunction with
embryonic ectoderm development (EED) and suppressor of zeste 12 homolog,
regulates cell lineage determination and homeostasis. Enzymatic hyperactivity has
been linked to aberrant repression of tumor suppressor genes in diverse cancers. 
Here, we report the development of stabilized a-helix of EZH2 (SAH-EZH2) peptides
that selectively inhibit H3 Lys27 trimethylation by dose-responsively disrupting 
the EZH2-EED complex and reducing EZH2 protein levels, a mechanism distinct from 
that reported for small-molecule EZH2 inhibitors targeting the enzyme catalytic
domain. MLL-AF9 leukemia cells, which are dependent on PRC2, undergo growth
arrest and monocyte-macrophage differentiation upon treatment with SAH-EZH2,
consistent with observed changes in expression of PRC2-regulated,
lineage-specific marker genes. Thus, by dissociating the EZH2-EED complex, we
pharmacologically modulate an epigenetic 'writer' and suppress PRC2-dependent
cancer cell growth.

PMCID: PMC3778130
PMID: 23974116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Oncol. 2013 Nov;43(5):1467-80. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2062. Epub 2013 Aug
20.

High expression of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 27 predicts better
prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Chen X(1), Song N, Matsumoto K, Nanashima A, Nagayasu T, Hayashi T, Ying M, Endo 
D, Wu Z, Koji T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Cell Biology, Nagasaki University Graduate School 
of Biomedical Science, Nagasaki, Japan.

Epigenetic parameters such as DNA methylation and histone modifications play
pivotal roles in carcinogenesis. Global histone modification patterns have been
implicated as possible predictors of cancer recurrence and prognoses in a great
variety of tumor entities. Our study was designed to evaluate the association
among trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3), clinicopathological
variables and outcome in early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). The
expression of H3K27me3 and its methyl-transferase, enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) together with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) were evaluated by 
immunohistochemistry in normal lung tissue (n=5) and resected NSCLC patients
(n=42). In addition, the specificity of antibody for H3K27me3 was tested by
western blot analysis. The optimal cut-off point of H3K27me3 expression for
prognosis was determined by the X-tile program. The prognostic significance was
determined by means of Kaplan-Meier survival estimates and log-rank tests. As a
result, enhanced trimethylation of H3K27me3 was correlated with longer overall
survival (OS) and better prognosis (P<0.05). Moreover, both univariate and
multivariate analyses indicated that H3K27me3 level was a significant and
independent predictor of better survival (hazard ratio, 0.187; 95% confidence
interval, 0.066-0.531, P=0.002). Furthermore, H3K27me3 expression was positively 
correlated with DNA methylation level at CCGG sites while reversely related to
EZH2 expression (P<0.05). In conclusion, H3K27me3 level defines unrecognized
subgroups of NSCLC patients with distinct epigenetic phenotype and clinical
outcome, and can probably be used as a novel predictor for better prognosis in
NSCLC patients.

PMID: 23969945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 15;8(8):e71670. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071670. eCollection
2013.

Genomic deregulation of the E2F/Rb pathway leads to activation of the oncogene
EZH2 in small cell lung cancer.

Coe BP(1), Thu KL, Aviel-Ronen S, Vucic EA, Gazdar AF, Lam S, Tsao MS, Lam WL.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Oncology Department, BC Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, Canada.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a highly aggressive lung neoplasm with extremely
poor clinical outcomes and no approved targeted treatments. To elucidate the
mechanisms responsible for driving the SCLC phenotype in hopes of revealing novel
therapeutic targets, we studied copy number and methylation profiles of SCLC. We 
found disruption of the E2F/Rb pathway was a prominent feature deregulated in 96%
of the SCLC samples investigated and was strongly associated with increased
expression of EZH2, an oncogene and core member of the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2). Through its catalytic role in the PRC2 complex, EZH2 normally
functions to epigenetically silence genes during development, however, it
aberrantly silences genes in human cancers. We provide evidence to support that
EZH2 is functionally active in SCLC tumours, exerts pro-tumourigenic functions in
vitro, and is associated with aberrant methylation profiles of PRC2 target genes 
indicative of a "stem-cell like" hypermethylator profile in SCLC tumours.
Furthermore, lentiviral-mediated knockdown of EZH2 demonstrated a significant
reduction in the growth of SCLC cell lines, suggesting EZH2 has a key role in
driving SCLC biology. In conclusion, our data confirm the role of EZH2 as a
critical oncogene in SCLC, and lend support to the prioritization of EZH2 as a
potential therapeutic target in clinical disease.

PMCID: PMC3744458
PMID: 23967231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 1;12(17):2705-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.25871. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Revealing targeted therapeutic opportunities in triple-negative breast cancers: a
new strategy.

Poage GM(1), Hartman ZC, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention; The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center; Houston, TX USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3470-80.

PMCID: PMC3899176
PMID: 23966168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Cancer Lett. 2013 Dec 1;341(2):240-7. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.08.021. Epub
2013 Aug 17.

MiR-101 inhibits melanoma cell invasion and proliferation by targeting MITF and
EZH2.

Luo C(1), Merz PR, Chen Y, Dickes E, Pscherer A, Schadendorf D, Eichmüller SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Immunology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: c.luo@dkfz.de.

The microRNA miR-101 has been reported to be a tumor suppressor. Here we show
that low expression of miR-101 is associated with poor survival in stage IV
melanoma patients. We identified microphthalmia-associated transcription factor
(MITF) as a direct target of miR-101. In melanoma cells, overexpression of
miR-101 downregulated protein levels of MITF and a previously reported target
protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). Functional assays showed that
miR-101 suppressed invasion and proliferation - an outcome that could be
phenocopied by siRNA knockdown of MITF and EZH2. Our data suggest that miR-101
might have a beneficial role in melanoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23962556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Blood. 2013 Oct 3;122(14):2460-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496448. Epub 2013
Aug 19.

Comprehensive mutational profiling in advanced systemic mastocytosis.

Schwaab J(1), Schnittger S, Sotlar K, Walz C, Fabarius A, Pfirrmann M, Kohlmann
A, Grossmann V, Meggendorfer M, Horny HP, Valent P, Jawhar M, Teichmann M,
Metzgeroth G, Erben P, Ernst T, Hochhaus A, Haferlach T, Hofmann WK, Cross NC,
Reiter A.

Author information: 
(1)III. Medizinische Klinik, Hämatologie und Onkologie, Universitätsmedizin
Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany;

To explore mechanisms contributing to the clinical heterogeneity of systemic
mastocytosis (SM) and to suboptimal responses to diverse therapies, we analyzed
39 KIT D816V mutated patients with indolent SM (n = 10), smoldering SM (n = 2),
SM with associated clonal hematologic nonmast cell lineage disorder (SM-AHNMD, n 
= 5), and aggressive SM (n = 15) or mast cell leukemia (n = 7) with (n = 18) or
without (n = 4) AHNMD for additional molecular aberrations. We applied
next-generation sequencing to investigate ASXL1, CBL, IDH1/2, JAK2, KRAS,
MLL-PTD, NPM1, NRAS, TP53, SRSF2, SF3B1, SETBP1, U2AF1 at mutational hotspot
regions, and analyzed complete coding regions of EZH2, ETV6, RUNX1, and TET2. We 
identified additional molecular aberrations in 24/27 (89%) patients with advanced
SM (SM-AHNMD, 5/5; aggressive SM/mast cell leukemia, 19/22) whereas only 3/12
(25%) indolent SM/smoldering SM patients carried one additional mutation each
(U2AF1, SETBP1, CBL) (P < .001). Most frequently affected genes were TET2, SRSF2,
ASXL1, CBL, and RUNX1. In advanced SM, 21/27 patients (78%) carried =3 mutations,
and 11/27 patients (41%) exhibited =5 mutations. Overall survival was
significantly shorter in patients with additional aberrations as compared to
those with KIT D816V only (P = .019). We conclude that biology and prognosis in
SM are related to the pattern of mutated genes that are acquired during disease
evolution.

PMID: 23958953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Dec 1;19(23):6344-50. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0223.
Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Molecular pathways: protein methyltransferases in cancer.

Copeland RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Author's Affiliation: Epizyme, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts.

The protein methyltransferases (PMT) constitute a large and important class of
enzymes that catalyze site-specific methylation of lysine or arginine residues on
histones and other proteins. Site-specific histone methylation is a critical
component of chromatin regulation of gene transcription-a pathway that is often
genetically altered in human cancers. Oncogenic alterations (e.g., mutations,
chromosomal translocations, and others) of PMTs, or of associated proteins, have 
been found to confer unique dependencies of cancer cells on the activity of
specific PMTs. Examples of potent, selective small-molecule inhibitors of
specific PMTs are reviewed that have been shown to kill cancers cells bearing
such oncogenic alterations, while having minimal effect on proliferation of
nonaltered cells. Selective inhibitors of the PMTs, DOT1L and EZH2, have entered 
phase I clinical studies and additional examples of selective PMT inhibitors are 
likely to enter the clinic soon. The current state of efforts toward clinical
testing of selective PMT inhibitors as personalized cancer therapeutics is
reviewed here.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23958745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Aug 15;4:e776. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.293.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 activates wnt signaling through downregulating CXXC
finger protein 4.

Lu H(1), Sun J, Wang F, Feng L, Ma Y, Shen Q, Jiang Z, Sun X, Wang X, Jin H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Biomedical Research Center, Sir Runrun Shaw
Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Through silencing tumor suppressor genes, epigenetic changes can activate
signaling pathways important to cancer development. In this report, we found an
epigenetic contribution to the aberrant activation of wnt signaling in human
gastric cancer. CXXC4 (CXXC finger protein 4) was identified as a novel target of
EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2), and EZH2 promotes the activation of wnt
signaling by downregulating CXXC4 expression. CXXC4 inhibits the growth of
gastric cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo through inactivating wnt
signaling. In contrast, depletion of CXXC4 activates wnt signaling and promotes
the anchorage-independent growth of nontumor gastric epithelial cells. CXXC4 is
downregulated in gastric carcinoma tissues and its downregulation is associated
with poor outcome of gastric cancer patients (hazard ratio: 5.053, P < 0.05).
Through its binding to dishevelled (Dvl), CXXC4 stabilizes the destruction
complex of ß-catenin to inhibit wnt signaling. Two critical amino acid residues
in CXXC4, K161 and T162 were found to be important to its binding to Dvl and the 
growth inhibitory effect of CXXC4. In summary, EZH2 promotes the activation of
wnt signaling in gastric carcinogenesis through the downregulation of CXXC4
expression. CXXC4 is a novel potential tumor suppressor directly regulated by
EZH2, and its expression is a significant prognosis factor for patients with
early stages of gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3763454
PMID: 23949225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Virchows Arch. 2013 Nov;463(5):697-711. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1428-y. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

In aggressive variants of non-Hodgkin lymphomas, Ezh2 is strongly expressed and
polycomb repressive complex PRC1.4 dominates over PRC1.2.

Abd Al Kader L(1), Oka T, Takata K, Sun X, Sato H, Murakami I, Toji T, Manabe A, 
Kimura H, Yoshino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikata-chou, Kita-ku,
700-8558, Okayama, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are important for the regulation of hematopoiesis
by regulating chromatin compaction and silencing genes related to differentiation
and cell cycle. Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) and
Bmi-1/PCGF4 has been implicated in solid organ cancers, while Mel-18/PCGF2 has
been reported as a tumor suppressor. Detailed expression profiles of PcG proteins
and their diagnostic significance in malignant lymphomas are still unknown. In
this study, we analyzed the expression levels of Ezh2, Bmi-1, Mel-18, and Ki67 in
197 Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patient samples and in lymphoma cell
lines using immunohistochemistry, fluorescent immunocytochemistry, and Western
blotting. Immunohistochemical staining showed that Ezh2 expression was
significantly increased in aggressive compared to indolent subtypes of B cell
neoplasms (P = 0.000-0.030), while no significant differences in Bmi-1 expression
were found between these subtypes. Compared to the normal counterpart, T cell
lymphomas showed significant overexpression of Bmi-1 (P = 0.011) and Ezh2 (P =
0.000). The Ki67 labeling index showed a positive correlation with Ezh2
expression in B cell lymphomas (correlation coefficient (Co) = 0.983, P = 0.000) 
and T/NK cell lymphomas (Co = 0.629, P = 0.000). Fluorescent immunohistochemical 
staining showed coexpression of Ezh2 and Ki67 in the same tumor cells, indicating
that Ezh2 expression correlates with cell proliferation. Both B and T/NK cell
neoplasms showed low expression of Mel-18 and high expression of both Bmi-1 and
Ezh2. In conclusion, in aggressive lymphoma variants, Ezh2 is strongly expressed 
and polycomb repressive complex PRC1.4 dominates over PRC1.2. Coexpression of
Bmi-1 and Ezh2 is a characteristic of aggressive lymphomas. Ezh2 correlates with 
the proliferation and aggressive nature of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.

PMID: 23948956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. EMBO J. 2013 Oct 2;32(19):2575-88. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.182. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Genome-wide survey by ChIP-seq reveals YY1 regulation of lincRNAs in skeletal
myogenesis.

Lu L(1), Sun K, Chen X, Zhao Y, Wang L, Zhou L, Sun H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences,
Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Skeletal muscle differentiation is orchestrated by a network of transcription
factors, epigenetic regulators, and non-coding RNAs. The transcription factor Yin
Yang 1 (YY1) silences multiple target genes in myoblasts (MBs) by recruiting Ezh2
(Enhancer of Zeste Homologue2). To elucidate genome-wide YY1 binding in MBs, we
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-seq and found 1820 specific
binding sites in MBs with a large portion residing in intergenic regions.
Detailed analysis demonstrated that YY1 acts as an activator for many loci in
addition to its known repressor function. No significant co-occupancy was found
between YY1 and Ezh2, suggesting an additional Ezh2-independent function for YY1 
in MBs. Further analysis of intergenic binding sites showed that YY1 potentially 
regulates dozens of large intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs), whose function
in myogenesis is underexplored. We characterized a novel muscle-associated
lincRNA (Yam-1) that is positively regulated by YY1. Yam-1 is downregulated upon 
differentiation and acts as an inhibitor of myogenesis. We demonstrated that
Yam-1 functions through in cis regulation of miR-715, which in turn targets
Wnt7b. Our findings not only provide the first genome-wide picture of YY1
association in muscle cells, but also uncover the functional role of lincRNA
Yam-1.

PMCID: PMC3791367
PMID: 23942234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 6;8(8):e71196. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071196. Print 2013.

Pharmacological reversal of histone methylation presensitizes pancreatic cancer
cells to nucleoside drugs: in vitro optimization and novel nanoparticle delivery 
studies.

Hung SW(1), Mody H, Marrache S, Bhutia YD, Davis F, Cho JH, Zastre J, Dhar S, Chu
CK, Govindarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, The University of
Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States of America.

We evaluated the potential of an investigational histone methylation reversal
agent, 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), in improving the chemosensitivity of
pancreatic cancer to nucleoside analogs (i.e., gemcitabine). DZNep brought
delayed but selective cytotoxicity to pancreatic cancer cells without affecting
normal human pancreatic ductal epithelial (HPDE) cells. Co-exposure of DZNep and 
gemcitabine induced cytotoxic additivity or synergism in both well- and
poorly-differentiated pancreatic cell lines by increased apoptosis. In contrast, 
DZNep exerted antagonism with gemcitabine against HPDE cells with significant
reduction in cytotoxicity compared with the gemcitabine-alone regimen. DZNep
marginally depended on purine nucleoside transporters for its cytotoxicity, but
the transport dependence was circumvented by acyl derivatization. Drug exposure
studies revealed that a short priming with DZNep followed by gemcitabine
treatment rather than co-treatment of both agents to produce a maximal
chemosensitization response in both gemcitabine-sensitive and
gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells. DZNep rapidly and reversibly
decreased trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 but increased trimethylation of 
lysine 9 in an EZH2- and JMJD1A/2C-dependent manner, respectively. However, DZNep
potentiation of nucleoside analog chemosensitization was found to be temporally
coupled to trimethylation changes in lysine 27 and not lysine 9. Polymeric
nanoparticles engineered to chronologically release DZNep followed by gemcitabine
produced pronounced chemosensitization and dose-lowering effects. Together, our
results identify that an optimized DZNep exposure can presensitize pancreatic
cancer cells to anticancer nucleoside analogs through the reversal of histone
methylation, emphasizing the promising clinical utilities of epigenetic reversal 
agents in future pancreatic cancer combination therapies.

PMCID: PMC3735519
PMID: 23940717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):647-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.128. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

DZNep, inhibitor of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase, down-regulates expression
of SETDB1 H3K9me3 HMTase in human lung cancer cells.

Lee JK(1), Kim KC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Bio-Material Research Center, Department of Biological Sciences,
College of Natural Sciences, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon 200-701,
Republic of Korea.

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an epigenetic anticancer drug, leads to the indirect
suppression of S-adenosyl methionine-dependent cellular methylations by
inhibiting S-adenosyl homocystein (AdoHcy) hydrolase. Although it is well known
that DZNep targets the degradation of EZH2 protein, H3K27me3 HMTase, there are
still uncertainties about the regulation of other types of HMTases during cell
death. In this study, we describe that SETDB1 gene expression was regulated by
DZNep treatment in human lung cancer cells. We confirm that DZNep induced growth 
inhibition and increased the dead cell population of lung cancer cells. DZNep
treatment affected histone methylations, including H3K27me3 and H3K9me3, but not 
H3K4me3. Reduced levels of H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 were related with the decreased
EZH2 and SETDB1 proteins. Real time PCR analysis showed that SETDB1 gene
expression was decreased by DZNep treatment, but no effect was observed for EZH2 
gene expression. We cloned the promoter region of SETDB1 and SUV39H1 genes, and
performed luciferase assays. The promoter activity of SETDB1 gene was down
regulated by DZNep treatment, whereas no effect on SUV39H1 promoter activity was 
observed. In conclusion, we suggest that DZNep regulates not only on H3K27me3
HMTase EZH2, but also H3K9 HMTase SETDB1 gene expression at the transcription
level, implicating that the mechanism of action of DZNep targets multiple HMTases
during the death of lung cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov;57:130-43. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.07.012. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

Ezh1 and Ezh2 differentially regulate PSD-95 gene transcription in developing
hippocampal neurons.

Henriquez B(1), Bustos FJ, Aguilar R, Becerra A, Simon F, Montecino M, van
Zundert B.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica
239, Santiago, Chile; Faculty of Biological Sciences and Faculty of Medicine,
Universidad Andres Bello, Avenida Republica 239, Santiago, Chile.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediates transcriptional silencing by
catalyzing histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), but its role in the
maturation of postmitotic mammalian neurons remains largely unknown. We report
that the PRC2 paralogs Ezh1 and Ezh2 are differentially expressed during
hippocampal development. We show that depletion of Ezh2 leads to increased
expression of PSD-95, a critical plasticity gene, and that reduced PSD-95 gene
transcription is correlated with enrichment of Ezh2 at the PSD-95 gene promoter; 
however, the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark is not present at the PSD-95 gene promoter,
likely due to the antagonizing effects of the H3S28P and H3K27Ac marks and the
activity of the H3K27 demethylases JMJD3 and UTX. In contrast, increased PSD-95
gene transcription is accompanied by the presence of Ezh1 and elongation-engaged 
RNA Polymerase II complexes at the PSD-95 gene promoter, while knock-down of Ezh1
reduces PSD-95 transcription. These results indicate that Ezh1 and Ezh2 have
antagonistic roles in regulating PSD-95 transcription.

© 2013.

PMID: 23932971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2014 Mar;33(3):264-9. doi: 10.1177/0960327113499043. Epub 2013
Aug 7.

Nicotine induces alteration of H3K27 demethylase UTX in kidney cancer cell.

Guo X(1), Li X, Wang Y, Tian Z, Duan X, Cai Z.

Author information: 
(1)1Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Genitourinary Tumor, Shenzhen Second People's
Hospital, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, First Affiliated 
Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Cigarette smoking is one of the most important risk factors for kidney cancer,
but the molecular mechanism is poorly understood. To examine the expression
change of histone H3 on lysine 27 trimethylase (H3K27me3) demethylases
ubiquitously transcribed TPR gene on the X chromosome (UTX) in kidney cancer cell
line 786-O after nicotine treatment, quantitative real-time-polymerase chain
reaction and western blotting analysis were carried out. These results showed
that nicotine can increase UTX messenger RNA and protein levels and also decrease
the content of H3K27me3. The decreased content of H3K27me3 may activate specific 
gene expression and lead to kidney cancer. Future investigation on nicotine
induced UTX expression and its epigenetic effect would deepen our understanding
on nicotine toxicity and carcinogenicity.

PMID: 23925944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Immunol. 2013 Sep 1;191(5):2614-23. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203143. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is a negative regulator of mitochondria-mediated
innate immune responses.

Chen S(1), Sheng C, Liu D, Yao C, Gao S, Song L, Jiang W, Li J, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Sciences Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and
Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

The intracellular RIG-I-like receptors recognize 5'-triphosphate viral genomic
RNA and initiate the production of cytokines through mitochondria adaptor VISA.
The regulation of this signal pathway is largely unknown. In this study, we
report that the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
inhibits RIG-I signal pathway in an methyltransferase-independent manner.
Knockdown EZH2 expression enhances VISA-induced activation of IFN-ß promoter and 
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Cytosolic distributed EZH2 colocalizes with VISA and binds to
its caspase recruitment domain (CARD), thus blocking its association with RIG-I. 
During the infection of influenza A virus (IAV) strain A/WSN/33 (WSN), EZH2
translocates to RIG-I and continuously interferes the interaction between RIG-I
and VISA. Both N and C termini of EZH2 interact with VISA and attenuate its
downstream signaling. WSN virus infection-induced expression of TNF-a, IFN-ß, and
IL-8 is inhibited by EZH2 and its catalytic dead form <U+0394>SET. EZH2 overexpression
facilitates the replications of IAV strains WSN and A/Puerto Rico/8/34 influenza 
virus. Knockdown EZH2 expression activates infection-induced IFN-ß transcription 
and inhibits virus replication. We further provided evidence to show that
pharmacological disruption of EZH2 expression by its inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin 
A activates innate immune responses and attenuates the replication of WSN virus
in HeLa, MDCK, and mouse primary bone marrow-derived macrophages, but not in
IFN-deficient Vero cells. Collectively, these results revealed that EZH2 binds to
VISA and interferes with the interaction between VISA and RIG-I. Targeting EZH2
activates mitochondria-mediated antiviral innate immune responses, and thus
represses the replication of IAV in cells.

PMID: 23918984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;33(19):3951-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00426-13. Epub 2013 Aug 
5.

Expression of polycomb targets predicts breast cancer prognosis.

Jene-Sanz A(1), Váraljai R, Vilkova AV, Khramtsova GF, Khramtsov AI, Olopade OI, 
Lopez-Bigas N, Benevolenskaya EV.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit on Biomedical Informatics, Department of Experimental and Health
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Global changes in the epigenome are increasingly being appreciated as key events 
in cancer progression. The pathogenic role of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) 
has been connected to its histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27) methyltransferase activity 
and gene repression; however, little is known about relationship of changes in
expression of EZH2 target genes to cancer characteristics and patient prognosis. 
Here we show that through expression analysis of genomic regions with H3K27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) and EZH2 binding, breast cancer patients can be
stratified into good and poor prognostic groups independent of known cancer gene 
signatures. The EZH2-bound regions were downregulated in tumors characterized by 
aggressive behavior, high expression of cell cycle genes, and low expression of
developmental and cell adhesion genes. Depletion of EZH2 in breast cancer cells
significantly increased expression of the top altered genes, decreased
proliferation, and improved cell adhesion, indicating a critical role played by
EZH2 in determining the cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3811872
PMID: 23918806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Hear Res. 2013 Oct;304:167-78. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.07.017. Epub 2013 Aug
2.

Epigenetic alterations by NuRD and PRC2 in the neonatal mouse cochlea.

Layman WS(1), Sauceda MA, Zuo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, MS323, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic
address: wanda.layman@stjude.org.

Mammalian cochlear supporting cells remain quiescent at postnatal ages and
age-dependent changes in supporting cell proliferative capacity are evident.
Ectopic Atoh1 expression in neonatal supporting cells converts only a small
percentage of these cells into hair cell-like cells. Despite tremendous potential
for therapeutics, cellular reprogramming in the mammalian inner ear remains a
slow inefficient process that requires weeks, with most cells failing to
reprogram. Cellular reprogramming studies in other tissues have shown that
epigenetic inhibitors can significantly improve reprogramming efficiency. Very
little is known about epigenetic regulation in the mammalian inner ear, and
almost nothing is known about the histone modifications. Histone modifications
are vital for proper transcriptional regulation, and aberrant histone
modifications can cause defects in the regulation of genes required for normal
tissue development and maintenance. Our data indicate that cofactors of
repressive complexes such as NuRD and PRC2 are present in the neonatal organ of
Corti. These NuRD cofactors are present throughout most of the organ of Corti
from E18.5 until P4. By P6, these NuRD cofactors are mostly undetectable by
immunofluorescence and completely lost by P7, but are detectable again at P8 and 
continue to be present through P21. The PRC2 enzymatic subunit, EZH2 is also
highly present from E18.5 to P0 in the organ of Corti, but lost between P2 and
P4. However, EZH2 staining is evident again throughout the organ of Corti by P6
and persists through P21. Our data provide evidence that HDACs, DNA
methyltransferases, histone methyltransferases, and histone demethylases are
expressed postnatally within the organ of Corti, and may be targets for drug
inhibition to increase the capacity, speed, and efficiency of reprogramming a
supporting cell into a hair cell.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3784354
PMID: 23911933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 15;12(16):2675-83. doi: 10.4161/cc.25795. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 contributes to DNA double-strand break repair.

Campbell S(1), Ismail IH, Young LC, Poirier GG, Hendzel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of
Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Polycomb protein histone methyltransferase, enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2),
is frequently overexpressed in human malignancy and is implicated in cancer cell 
proliferation and invasion. However, it is largely unknown whether EZH2 has a
role in modulating the DNA damage response. Here, we show that polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is recruited to sites of DNA damage. This recruitment
is independent of histone 2A variant X (H2AX) and the PI-3-related kinases ATM
and DNA-PKcs. We establish that PARP activity is required for retaining PRC2 at
sites of DNA damage. Furthermore, depletion of EZH2 in cells decreases the
efficiency of DSB repair and increases sensitivity of cells to gamma-irradiation.
These data unravel a crucial role of PRC2 in determining cancer cellular
sensitivity following DNA damage and suggest that therapeutic targeting of EZH2
activity might serve as a strategy for improving conventional chemotherapy in a
given malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3865057
PMID: 23907130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 15;12(16):2546-52. doi: 10.4161/cc.25625. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

A lesson learned from the H3.3K27M mutation found in pediatric glioma: a new
approach to the study of the function of histone modifications in vivo?

Chan KM(1), Han J, Fang D, Gan H, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Epigenomic Developmental
Program, Center of Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive primary brain tumor in human. Recent
studies on high-grade pediatric GBM have identified two recurrent mutations (K27M
and G34R/V) in genes encoding histone H3 (H3F3A for H3.3 and HIST1H3B for H3.1). 
The two histone H3 mutations are mutually exclusive and give rise to tumors in
different brain compartments. Recently, we and others have shown that the histone
H3 K27M mutation specifically altered the di- and tri-methylation of endogenous
histone H3 at Lys27. Genome-wide studies using ChIP-seq on H3.3K27M patient
samples indicate a global reduction of H3K27me3 on chromatin. Remarkably, we also
found a dramatic enrichment of H3K27me3 and EZH2 (the catalytic subunit H3K27
methyltransferase) at hundreds of gene loci in H3.3K27M patient cells. Here, we
discuss potential mechanisms whereby H3K27me3 is enriched at chromatin loci in
cells expressing the H3.3K27M mutation and report effects of Lys-to-Met mutations
of other well-studied lysine residues of histone H3.1/H3.3 and H4 on the
corresponding endogenous lysine methylation. We suggest that mutation(s) on
histones may be found in a variety of human diseases, and the expression of
mutant histones may help to address the function of histone lysine methylation
and possibly other modifications in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3865043
PMID: 23907119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Tumour Biol. 2014 Jan;35(1):205-12. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1025-3. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

A potential antitumor ellagitannin, davidiin, inhibited hepatocellular tumor
growth by targeting EZH2.

Wang Y(1), Ma J, Chow SC, Li CH, Xiao Z, Feng R, Fu J, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Functions of Natural
Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing, 100050, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide and is
the third most common cause of cancer-related deaths. Currently available
treatment options for HCC patients are scarce resulting in an urgent need to
develop a novel effective cure. Polygonum capitatum is a medicinal herb which has
been used to treat inflammatory diseases in Miao nationality of China. We
recently isolated a pure compound davidiin from P. capitatum extract. Four HCC
cell lines were treated with davidiin. Cell viability was recorded by MTT assay. 
siRNAs targeting enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) were applied to modulate the 
expression of EZH2. Established xenograft mice models of HCC were applied to
evaluate the in vivo anticancer activity of davidiin. We investigated the
anticancer activity and the underlying mechanism of davidiin. The compound
inhibited HCC cell growth and also suppressed tumor growth in xenografted HCC
mouse. Such inhibition was facilitated by specifically downregulation on EZH2.
The compound possesses anticancer activity both in vitro and in vivo which
warrants further clinical investigation as a potential anti-HCC agent.

PMID: 23897557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Jan;71(2):257-69. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1426-x. Epub
2013 Jul 30.

Polycomb group proteins and MYC: the cancer connection.

Benetatos L(1), Vartholomatos G, Hatzimichael E.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Bank, General Hospital of Preveza, Selefkias 2, 48100, Preveza, Greece, 
benetatosleon@yahoo.com.

Polycomb group proteins (PcGs) are transcriptional repressors involved in
physiological processes whereas PcG deregulation might result in oncogenesis. MYC
oncogene is able to regulate gene transcription, proliferation, apoptosis, and
malignant transformation. MYC deregulation might result in tumorigenesis with
tumor maintenance properties in both solid and blood cancers. Although the
interaction of PcG and MYC in cancer was described years ago, new findings are
reported every day to explain the exact mechanisms and results of such
interactions. In this review, we summarize recent data on the PcG and MYC
interactions in cancer, and the putative involvement of microRNAs in the
equation.

PMID: 23897499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 19;33(25):3235-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.294. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

Scaffold attachment factor B1 regulates the androgen receptor in concert with the
growth inhibitory kinase MST1 and the methyltransferase EZH2.

Mukhopadhyay NK(1), Kim J(2), You S(1), Morello M(1), Hager MH(3), Huang WC(1),
Ramachandran A(3), Yang J(1), Cinar B(1), Rubin MA(4), Adam RM(3), Oesterreich
S(5), Di Vizio D(2), Freeman MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Departments of Surgery, Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)1] Cancer Biology Program, Departments of
Surgery, Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] Department of
Surgery, Urological Diseases Research Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Urological Diseases
Research Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
Centre, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a transcription factor that employs many diverse
interactions with coregulatory proteins in normal physiology and in prostate
cancer (PCa). The AR mediates cellular responses in association with chromatin
complexes and kinase cascades. Here we report that the nuclear matrix protein,
scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1), regulates AR activity and AR levels in a
manner that suggests its involvement in PCa. SAFB1 mRNA expression was lower in
PCa in comparison with normal prostate tissue in a majority of publicly available
RNA expression data sets. SAFB1 protein levels were also reduced with disease
progression in a cohort of human PCa that included metastatic tumors. SAFB1 bound
to AR and was phosphorylated by the MST1 (Hippo homolog) serine-threonine kinase,
previously shown to be an AR repressor, and MST1 localization to AR-dependent
promoters was inhibited by SAFB1 depletion. Knockdown of SAFB1 in
androgen-dependent LNCaP PCa cells increased AR and prostate-specific antigen
(PSA) levels, stimulated growth of cultured cells and subcutaneous xenografts and
promoted a more aggressive phenotype, consistent with a repressive AR regulatory 
function. SAFB1 formed a complex with the histone methyltransferase EZH2 at
AR-interacting chromatin sites in association with other polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) proteins. We conclude that SAFB1 acts as a novel AR co-regulator
at gene loci where signals from the MST1/Hippo and EZH2 pathways converge.

PMCID: PMC3934948
PMID: 23893242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Dec;20 Suppl 3:S667-75. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3135-y. Epub
2013 Jul 26.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) promotes progression of cholangiocarcinoma
cells by regulating cell cycle and apoptosis.

Nakagawa S(1), Okabe H, Sakamoto Y, Hayashi H, Hashimoto D, Yokoyama N, Sakamoto 
K, Kuroki H, Mima K, Nitta H, Imai K, Chikamoto A, Watanabe M, Beppu T, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). When present in PRC2, EZH2 catalyzes
trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3, resulting in epigenetic
silencing of gene expression and cancer progression. We investigated the
expression and function of EZH2 in intrahepatic and extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC and ECC).
METHODS: The influence of EZH2 on cell growth and apoptosis was assessed by
knockdown experiments. Target gene of EZH2 was searched by quantitative RT-PCR.
Clinical significance of EZH2 in 86 cholangiocarcinoma patients (45 ICC and 41
ECC) who underwent curative surgery was examined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: In vitro analysis, knockdown of EZH2 reduced cell growth, induced G1
arrest, and induced apoptosis, as confirmed by Annexin V staining and increased
sub-G1 populations in cholangiocarcinoma cell lines. The expression levels of p16
(INK4a) and p27 (KIP1) were remarkably increased by knockdown of EZH2 in these
cell lines. In immunohistochemical study, EZH2 upregulation correlated with tumor
diameter (p = 0.0103) in ICC, lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0292) in ECC, and Ki67
index in both ICC (p = 0.0364) and ECC (p = 0.0017). In addition, EZH2 expression
was correlated with poor prognosis in both ICC (p = 0.0447) and ECC (p = 0.0227).
CONCLUSIONS: The current study demonstrated relationships between EZH2 expression
and acceleration of the cell cycle and antiapoptosis, and poor prognosis in
cholangiocarcinoma. These results suggest that EZH2 may represent a potential
therapeutic target in patients with cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 23887863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2345. doi: 10.4161/cc.25775. Epub 2013 Jul 16.

Neighborhood matters: response to EZH2 methyltransferase inhibitors.

Gharpure KM(1), Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology; The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center; Houston, TX USA.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):2113-9.

PMCID: PMC3841310
PMID: 23887388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Diabetes. 2013 Nov;62(11):3727-35. doi: 10.2337/db13-0433. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Maternal obesity induces epigenetic modifications to facilitate Zfp423 expression
and enhance adipogenic differentiation in fetal mice.

Yang QY(1), Liang JF, Rogers CJ, Zhao JX, Zhu MJ, Du M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington.

Maternal obesity (MO) predisposes offspring to obesity and type 2 diabetes
despite poorly defined mechanisms. Zfp423 is the key transcription factor
committing cells to the adipogenic lineage, with exceptionally dense CpG sites in
its promoter. We hypothesized that MO enhances adipogenic differentiation during 
fetal development through inducing epigenetic changes in the Zfp423 promoter and 
elevating its expression. Female mice were subjected to a control (Con) or
obesogenic (OB) diet for 2 months, mated, and maintained on their diets during
pregnancy. Fetal tissue was harvested at embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5), when the
early adipogenic commitment is initiated. The Zfp423 expression was 3.6-fold
higher and DNA methylation in the Zfp423 promoter was lower in OB compared with
Con. Correspondingly, repressive histone methylation (H3K27me3) was lower in the 
Zfp423 promoter of OB fetal tissue, accompanied by reduced binding of enhancer of
zeste 2 (EZH2). Gain- and loss-of-function analysis showed that Zfp423 regulates 
early adipogenic differentiation in fetal progenitor cells. In summary, MO
enhanced Zfp423 expression and adipogenic differentiation during fetal
development, at least partially through reducing DNA methylation in the Zfp423
promoter, which is expected to durably elevate adipogenic differentiation of
progenitor cells in adult tissue, programming adiposity and metabolic dysfunction
later in life.

PMCID: PMC3806589
PMID: 23884886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Epigenetics. 2013 Aug;8(8):873-84. doi: 10.4161/epi.25522. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

E2f6-mediated repression of the meiotic Stag3 and Smc1ß genes during early
embryonic development requires Ezh2 and not the de novo methyltransferase Dnmt3b.

Leseva M(1), Santostefano KE, Rosenbluth AL, Hamazaki T, Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; University of Florida College of Medicine;
Gainesville, FL USA.

The E2f6 transcriptional repressor is an E2F-family member essential for the
silencing of a group of meiosis-specific genes in somatic tissues. Although E2f6 
has been shown to associate with both polycomb repressive complexes (PRC) and the
methyltransferase Dnmt3b, the cross-talk between these repressive machineries
during E2f6-mediated gene silencing has not been clearly demonstrated yet. In
particular, it remains largely undetermined when and how E2f6 establishes
repression of meiotic genes during embryonic development. We demonstrate here
that the inactivation of a group of E2f6 targeted genes, including Stag3 and
Smc1ß, first occurs at the transition from mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to
epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs), which represent pre- and post-implantation stages, 
respectively. This process was accompanied by de novo methylation of their
promoters. Of interest, despite a clear difference in DNA methylation status,
E2f6 was similarly bound to the proximal promoter regions both in ESCs and
EpiSCs. Neither E2f6 nor Dnmt3b overexpression in ESCs decreased meiotic gene
expression or increased DNA methylation, indicating that additional factors are
required for E2f6-mediated repression during the transition. When the SET domain 
of Ezh2, a core subunit of the PRC2 complex, was deleted, however, repression of 
Stag3 and Smc1ß during embryoid body differentiation was largely impaired,
indicating that the event required the enzymatic activity of Ezh2. In addition,
repression of Stag3 and Smc1ß occurred in the absence of Dnmt3b. The data
presented here suggest a primary role of PRC2 in E2f6-mediated gene silencing of 
the meiotic genes.

PMCID: PMC3883790
PMID: 23880518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 16;8(7):e68907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068907. Print 2013.

Changes in the transcriptome of the human endometrial Ishikawa cancer cell line
induced by estrogen, progesterone, tamoxifen, and mifepristone (RU486) as
detected by RNA-sequencing.

Tamm-Rosenstein K(1), Simm J, Suhorutshenko M, Salumets A, Metsis M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biology of Integrated Systems, Tallinn University of Technology,
Tallinn, Estonia. karin.tamm@ttu.ee

BACKGROUND: Estrogen (E2) and progesterone (P4) are key players in the maturation
of the human endometrium. The corresponding steroid hormone modulators, tamoxifen
(TAM) and mifepristone (RU486) are widely used in breast cancer therapy and for
contraception purposes, respectively.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene expression profiling of the human
endometrial Ishikawa cancer cell line treated with E2 and P4 for 3 h and 12 h,
and TAM and RU486 for 12 h, was performed using RNA-sequencing. High levels of
mRNA were detected for genes, including PSAP, ATP5G2, ATP5H, and GNB2L1 following
E2 or P4 treatment. A total of 82 biomarkers for endometrial biology were
identified among E2 induced genes, and 93 among P4 responsive genes. Identified
biomarkers included: EZH2, MDK, MUC1, SLIT2, and IL6ST, which are genes
previously associated with endometrial receptivity. Moreover, 98.8% and 98.6% of 
E2 and P4 responsive genes in Ishikawa cells, respectively, were also detected in
two human mid-secretory endometrial biopsy samples. TAM treatment exhibited both 
antagonistic and agonistic effects of E2, and also regulated a subset of genes
independently. The cell cycle regulator cyclin D1 (CCND1) showed significant
up-regulation following treatment with TAM. RU486 did not appear to act as a pure
antagonist of P4 and a functional analysis of RU486 response identified genes
related to adhesion and apoptosis, including down-regulated genes associated with
cell-cell contacts and adhesion as CTNND1, JUP, CDH2, IQGAP1, and COL2A1.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant changes in gene expression by the Ishikawa cell line
were detected after treatments with E2, P4, TAM, and RU486. These transcriptome
data provide valuable insight into potential biomarkers related to endometrial
receptivity, and also facilitate an understanding of the molecular changes that
take place in the endometrium in the early stages of breast cancer treatment and 
contraception usage.

PMCID: PMC3712916
PMID: 23874806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 18;8(7):e68614. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068614. Print 2013.

Inhibition of GSK 3ß activity is associated with excessive EZH2 expression and
enhanced tumour invasion in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Ma R(1), Wei Y, Huang X, Fu R, Luo X, Zhu X, Lei W, Fang J, Li H, Wen W.

Author information: 
(1)Allergy and Cancer Center, Otorhinolarygology Hospital, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been shown to contribute to
tumour development and/or progression. However, the signalling pathway underlying
the regulation of EZH2 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) remains unclear. Since
EZH2 contains the putative Glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß)
phosphorylation motif ADHWDSKNVSCKNC (591) and may act as a possible substrate of
GSK-3ß, it is possible that inactivation of GSK3ß may lead to excessive EZH2
expression in NPC.
METHOD: We first examined the expression of EZH2 and phosphorylated GSK3ß
(p-GSK3ß) by immunohistochemical staining in NPC samples. Then, we evaluated the 
interaction of GSK3ß and EZH2 using immunoprecipitation and immune blot.
Moreover, we determined the effect of inhibition of GSK3ß activity on EZH2
expression and tumor invasiveness in NPC cell lines in vitro. Finally, we
evaluated the invasive properties of NPC cells after knocking down EZH2
expression with EZH2 siRNA.
RESULTS: We found that expression of EZH2 correlated with phosphorylated GSK3ß
(p-GSK3ß) at Ser 9 (an inactivated form of GSK3ß) in human nasopharyngeal
carcinoma (NPC) samples. We also provided evidence that GSK3ß is able to interact
with EZH2 using immunoprecipitation and immune blot. Furthermore, we found that
inhibition of GSK3ß activity can lead to upregulation of EZH2 in NPC cell lines
in vitro, with enhanced local invasiveness. By knocking down EZH2 expression with
EZH2 siRNA, we found that these invasive properties were EZH2 dependent.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that GSK3ß inactivation may account for EZH2
overexpression and subsequent tumour progression, and this mechanism might be a
potential target for NPC therapy.

PMCID: PMC3715493
PMID: 23874688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Epigenetics. 2013 Sep;8(9):970-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.25753. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Histone signature of metanephric mesenchyme cell lines.

McLaughlin N(1), Yao X, Li Y, Saifudeen Z, El-Dahr SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics; The Renal and Hypertension Center of Excellence;
Tulane University School of Medicine; New Orleans, LA USA; Department of
Biomedical Sciences Program; The Renal and Hypertension Center of Excellence;
Tulane University School of Medicine; New Orleans, LA USA.

The metanephric mesenchyme (MM) gives rise to nephrons, the filtering units of
the mature kidney. The MM is composed of uninduced (Six2(high)/Lhx1(low)) and
induced (Wnt-stimulated, Six2(low)/Lhx1(high)) cells. The global epigenetic state
of MM cells is unknown, partly due to technical difficulty in isolating
sufficient numbers of homogenous cell populations. We therefore took advantage of
two mouse clonal cell lines representing the uninduced (mK3) and induced (mK4)
metanephric mesenchyme (based on gene expression profiles and ability to induce
branching of ureteric bud). ChIP-Seq revealed that whereas H3K4me3 active region 
"peaks" are enriched in metabolic genes, H3K27me3 peaks decorate mesenchyme and
epithelial cell fate commitment genes. In uninduced mK3 cells, promoters of
"stemness" genes (e.g., Six2, Osr1) are enriched with H3K4me3 peaks; these are
lost in induced mK4 cells. ChIP-qPCR confirmed this finding and further
demonstrated that G9a/H3K9me2 occupy the promoter region of Six2 in induced
cells, consistent with the inactive state of transcription. Conversely, genes
that mark the induced epithelialized state (e.g., Lhx1, Pax8), transition from a 
non-permissive to an active chromatin signature in mK3 vs. mK4 cells,
respectively. Importantly, stimulation of Wnt signaling in uninduced mK3 cells
provokes an active chromatin state (high H3K4me3, low H3K27me3), recruitment of
ß-catenin, and loss of pre-bound histone methyltransferase Ezh2 in silent induced
genes followed by activation of transcription. We conclude that the chromatin
signature of uninduced and induced cells correlates strongly with their gene
expression states, suggesting a role of chromatin-based mechanisms in MM cell
fate.

PMCID: PMC3883774
PMID: 23867747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. EZH2-Related Overgrowth.

Tatton-Brown K, Rahman N.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2013 Jul 18.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: EZH2-related overgrowth includes EZH2-related Weaver
syndrome at one end of the spectrum and tall stature at the other. Although most 
individuals diagnosed with a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant have been
identified because of a clinical suspicion of Weaver syndrome, a minority have
been identified through molecular genetic testing of family members of probands
or individuals with overgrowth who did not have a clinical diagnosis of Weaver
syndrome. Thus, the extent of the phenotypic spectrum associated with a
heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant is not yet known. Weaver syndrome is
characterized by tall stature, variable intellect (ranging from normal intellect 
to severe intellectual disability), characteristic facial appearance, and a range
of associated clinical features including advanced bone age, poor coordination,
soft doughy skin, camptodactyly of the fingers or toes, umbilical hernia,
abnormal tone, and hoarse low cry in infancy. Neuronal migration disorders have
also been reported in a few individuals with EZH2-related overgrowth.
Neuroblastoma occurs at a slightly increased frequency in individuals with a
heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant but data are insufficient to determine
absolute risk. There is currently no evidence that additional malignancies
(including hematologic malignancies) occur with increased frequency.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of EZH2-related overgrowth is based on detection
of a heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variant on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For individuals with developmental delay
and/or learning disability, referral for learning/behavior/speech assessment and 
support may be indicated. Occasionally, toe camptodactyly may require surgical
intervention. Physiotherapy may be of benefit to those experiencing joint pain
secondary to ligamentous laxity or joint contractures. Treatment of scoliosis is 
routine. The appropriate specialist referral(s) should be made for other clinical
issues. Surveillance: Regular medical follow up of young children with
EZH2-related Weaver syndrome to monitor developmental progress, camptodactyly
(for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia; medical follow up of older
children/teenagers who do not have medical complications may be less frequent. If
scoliosis is present, monitoring as per the orthopedic recommendations. Although 
current data do not support specific tumor surveillance programs, clinicians
should have a low threshold for investigating any findings that may be tumor
(particularly neuroblastoma) related. Pregnancy management: Families and their
health care providers should be aware that an affected baby may be large so that 
appropriate delivery plans can be made.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EZH2-related overgrowth is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner; a de novo germline pathogenic variant may be common. Each child of an
individual with an EZH2 pathogenic variant has a 50% chance of inheriting the
pathogenic variant; the phenotype of an individual inheriting the EZH2 pathogenic
variant cannot be predicted. If the pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is
possible.

PMID: 23865096  [PubMed]


462. J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Aug;8(8):1102-6. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318298762f.

EZH2 promotes E2F-driven SCLC tumorigenesis through modulation of apoptosis and
cell-cycle regulation.

Hubaux R(1), Thu KL, Coe BP, MacAulay C, Lam S, Lam WL.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. rhubaux@bccrc.ca

Comment in
    J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Nov;8(11):e103.
    J Thorac Oncol. 2013 Nov;8(11):e103-4.

INTRODUCTION: Although enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been associated
with both non-small cell and small-cell lung cancers (SCLCs), current
observations suggest different mechanisms of EZH2 activation and overexpression
in these lung cancer types. Globally, SCLC kills 200,000 people yearly. New
clinical approaches for SCLC treatment are required to improve the poor survival 
rate. Given the therapeutic potential of EZH2 as a target, we sought to delineate
the downstream consequences of EZH2 disruption to identify the cellular
mechanisms by which EZH2 promotes tumorigenesis in SCLC.
METHODS: We generated cells with stable expression of short hairpin RNA targeting
EZH2 and corresponding controls (pLKO.1) and determined the consequences of EZH2 
knockdown on the cell cycle and apoptosis by means of propidium iodide staining
and fluorescence-activated cell sorting, Western blot, quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction as well as cell viability assessment
using methylthiazol tetrazolium assays.
RESULTS: We discovered that EZH2 inhibition (1) increased apoptotic activity by
up-regulating the proapoptotic factors Puma and Bad, (2) decreased the fraction
of cells in S or G2/M phases, and (3) elevated p21 protein levels, implicating
EZH2 in cell death and cell-cycle control in SCLC.
CONCLUSION: Our findings present evidence for the role of EZH2 in the regulation 
of cell cycle and apoptosis, providing a biological mechanism to explain the
tumorigenicity of EZH2 in SCLC. Our work points to the great potential of EZH2 as
a therapeutic target in SCLC.

PMCID: PMC3713495
PMID: 23857401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Sep;20(9):1268-78. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.88. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Epigenetic silencing of Bim transcription by Spi-1/PU.1 promotes apoptosis
resistance in leukaemia.

Ridinger-Saison M(1), Evanno E, Gallais I, Rimmelé P, Selimoglu-Buet D,
Sapharikas E, Moreau-Gachelin F, Guillouf C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Deregulation of transcriptional networks contributes to haematopoietic
malignancies. The transcription factor Spi-1/PU.1 is a master regulator of
haematopoiesis and its alteration leads to leukaemia. Spi-1 overexpression
inhibits differentiation and promotes resistance to apoptosis in
erythroleukaemia. Here, we show that Spi-1 inhibits mitochondrial apoptosis in
vitro and in vivo through the transcriptional repression of Bim, a proapoptotic
factor. BIM interacts with MCL-1 that behaves as a major player in the survival
of the preleukaemic cells. The repression of BIM expression reduces the amount of
BIM-MCL-1 complexes, thus increasing the fraction of potentially active
antiapoptotic MCL-1. We then demonstrate that Spi-1 represses Bim transcription
by binding to the Bim promoter and by promoting the trimethylation of histone 3
on lysine 27 (H3K27me3, a repressive histone mark) on the Bim promoter. The PRC2 
repressive complex of Polycomb is directly responsible for the deposit of
H3K27me3 mark at the Bim promoter. SUZ12 and the histone methyltransferase EZH2, 
two PRC2 subunits bind to the Bim promoter at the same location than H3K27me3,
distinct of the Spi-1 DNA binding site. As Spi-1 interacts with SUZ12 and EZH2,
these results indicate that Spi-1 modulates the activity of PRC2 without directly
recruiting the complex to the site of its activity on the chromatin. Our results 
identify a new mechanism whereby Spi-1 represses transcription and provide
mechanistic insights on the antiapoptotic function of a transcription factor
mediated by the epigenetic control of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3741512
PMID: 23852375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cancer Discov. 2013 Jul;3(7):OF21. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2013-112. Epub
2013 May 23.

Methylation by EZH2 activates STAT3 in glioblastoma.

[No authors listed]

Methylation of STAT3 by EZH2 is required for STAT3 activity in glioblastoma stem 
cells (GSC).

PMID: 23847365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;19(17):4599-610. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3675. 
Epub 2013 Jul 11.

GKN1-miR-185-DNMT1 axis suppresses gastric carcinogenesis through regulation of
epigenetic alteration and cell cycle.

Yoon JH(1), Choi YJ, Choi WS, Ashktorab H, Smoot DT, Nam SW, Lee JY, Park WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

PURPOSE: Gastrokine 1 (GKN1) functions to protect the gastric antral mucosa and
promotes healing by facilitating restoration and proliferation after injury. GKN1
is downregulated in Helicobacter pylori-infected gastric epithelial cells and
loss of GKN1 expression is closely associated with gastric carcinogenesis, but
underlying mechanisms of the tumor-suppressing effects of GKN1 remain largely
unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: AGS, MKN1, MKN28 gastric cancer cells and HFE-145
immortalized non-neoplastic gastric mucosal cells were transfected with GKN1 or
shGKN1. We conducted molecular and functional studies of GKN1 and miR-185 and
investigated the mechanisms of alteration. We also analyzed epigenetic
alterations in 80 gastric cancer tissues.
RESULTS: Restoration of GKN1 protein suppressed gastric cancer cell growth by
inducing endogenous miR-185 that directly targets epigenetic effectors DNMT1 and 
EZH2 in gastric cancer cells. In addition, ectopic expression of GKN1 upregulated
Tip60 and downregulated HDAC1 in an miR-185-independent manner, thereby inducing 
cell-cycle arrest by regulating cell-cycle proteins in gastric cancer cells.
Notably, GKN1 expression was inversely correlated with DNMT1 and EZH2 expression 
in a subset of 80 gastric cancer tissues and various gastric cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, it was found that GKN1 exerted a synergistic anti-cancerous effect
with 5-fluorouracil on tumor cell growth, which suggests a possible therapeutic
intervention method for gastric cancer.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that GKN1 has an miR-185-dependent and -independent 
mechanism for chromatic and DNA epigenetic modification, thereby regulating the
cell cycle. Thus, the loss of GKN1 function contributes to malignant
transformation and proliferation of gastric epithelial cells in gastric
carcinogenesis.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23846337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 23;110(30):12331-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222684110. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Loss of corepressor PER2 under hypoxia up-regulates OCT1-mediated EMT gene
expression and enhances tumor malignancy.

Hwang-Verslues WW(1), Chang PH, Jeng YM, Kuo WH, Chiang PH, Chang YC, Hsieh TH,
Su FY, Lin LC, Abbondante S, Yang CY, Hsu HM, Yu JC, Chang KJ, Shew JY, Lee EY,
Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

The circadian clock gene Period2 (PER2) has been suggested to be a tumor
suppressor. However, detailed mechanistic evidence has not been provided to
support this hypothesis. We found that loss of PER2 enhanced invasion and
activated expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) genes including
TWIST1, SLUG, and SNAIL. This finding was corroborated by clinical observation
that PER2 down-regulation was associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer
patients. We further demonstrated that PER2 served as a transcriptional
corepressor, which recruited polycomb proteins EZH2 and SUZ12 as well as HDAC2 to
octamer transcription factor 1 (OCT1) (POU2F1) binding sites of the TWIST1 and
SLUG promoters to repress expression of these EMT genes. Hypoxia, a condition
commonly observed in tumors, caused PER2 degradation and disrupted the PER2
repressor complex, leading to activation of EMT gene expression. This result was 
further supported by clinical data showing a significant negative correlation
between hypoxia and PER2. Thus, our findings clearly demonstrate the tumor
suppression function of PER2 and elucidate a pathway by which hypoxia promotes
EMT via degradation of PER2.

PMCID: PMC3725072
PMID: 23836662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Aging Cell. 2013 Dec;12(6):1000-11. doi: 10.1111/acel.12132. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

PTEN controls ß-cell regeneration in aged mice by regulating cell cycle inhibitor
p16ink4a.

Zeng N(1), Yang KT, Bayan JA, He L, Aggarwal R, Stiles JW, Hou X, Medina V, Abad 
D, Palian BM, Al-Abdullah I, Kandeel F, Johnson DL, Stiles BL.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90089, USA.

Tissue regeneration diminishes with age, concurrent with declining hormone levels
including growth factors such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). We
investigated the molecular basis for such decline in pancreatic ß-cells where
loss of proliferation occurs early in age and is proposed to contribute to the
pathogenesis of diabetes. We studied the regeneration capacity of ß-cells in
mouse model where PI3K/AKT pathway downstream of insulin/IGF-1 signaling is
upregulated by genetic deletion of Pten (phosphatase and tensin homologue deleted
on chromosome 10) specifically in insulin-producing cells. In this model, PTEN
loss prevents the decline in proliferation capacity in aged ß-cells and restores 
the ability of aged ß-cells to respond to injury-induced regeneration. Using
several animal and cell models where we can manipulate PTEN expression, we found 
that PTEN blocks cell cycle re-entry through a novel pathway leading to an
increase in p16(ink4a), a cell cycle inhibitor characterized for its role in
cellular senescence/aging. A downregulation in p16(ink4a) occurs when PTEN is
lost as a result of cyclin D1 induction and the activation of E2F transcription
factors. The activation of E2F transcriptional factors leads to methylation of
p16(ink4a) promoter, an event that is mediated by the upregulation of polycomb
protein, Ezh2. These analyses establish a novel PTEN/cyclin
D1/E2F/Ezh2/p16(ink4a) signaling network responsible for the aging process and
provide specific evidence for a molecular paradigm that explain how decline in
growth factor signals such as IGF-1 (through PTEN/PI3K signaling) may control
regeneration and the lack thereof in aging cells.

© 2013 the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3838454
PMID: 23826727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Jul 5;6(1):20. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-20.

A quantitative atlas of histone modification signatures from human cancer cells.

Leroy G(1), Dimaggio PA, Chan EY, Zee BM, Blanco MA, Bryant B, Flaniken IZ, Liu
S, Kang Y, Trojer P, Garcia BA.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Program, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Smilow Center for Translational Research, 3400 Civic Center Blvd,, Bldg 421,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. bgarci@mail.med.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: An integral component of cancer biology is the understanding of
molecular properties uniquely distinguishing one cancer type from another. One
class of such properties is histone post-translational modifications (PTMs). Many
histone PTMs are linked to the same diverse nuclear functions implicated in
cancer development, including transcriptional activation and epigenetic
regulation, which are often indirectly assayed with standard genomic
technologies. Thus, there is a need for a comprehensive and quantitative
profiling of cancer lines focused on their chromatin modification states.
RESULTS: To complement genomic expression profiles of cancer lines, we report the
proteomic classification of 24 different lines, the majority of which are cancer 
cells, by quantifying the abundances of a large panel of single and combinatorial
histone H3 and H4 PTMs, and histone variants. Concurrent to the proteomic
analysis, we performed transcriptomic analysis on histone modifying enzyme
abundances as a proxy for quantifying their activity levels. While the
transcriptomic and proteomic results were generally consistent in terms of
predicting histone PTM abundance from enzyme abundances, several PTMs were
regulated independently of the modifying enzyme expression. In addition,
combinatorial PTMs containing H3K27 methylation were especially enriched in
breast cell lines. Knockdown of the predominant H3K27 methyltransferase, enhancer
of zeste 2 (EZH2), in a mouse mammary xenograft model significantly reduced tumor
burden in these animals and demonstrated the predictive utility of proteomic
techniques.
CONCLUSIONS: Our proteomic and genomic characterizations of the histone
modification states provide a resource for future investigations of the
epigenetic and non-epigenetic determinants for classifying and analyzing cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC3710262
PMID: 23826629  [PubMed]


469. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e68226. Print 2013.

EZH2-Mediated H3K27me3 Is Involved in Epigenetic Repression of Deleted in Liver
Cancer 1 in Human Cancers.

Au SL(1), Wong CC, Lee JM, Wong CM, Ng IO.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Liver Research and Department of Pathology, Li Ka
Shing Faculty of Medicine, the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People's
Republic of China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), the histone methyltransferase of the Polycomb
Repressive complex 2 catalyzing histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation (H3K27me3), 
is frequently up-regulated in human cancers. In this study, we identified the
tumor suppressor Deleted in liver cancer 1 (DLC1) as a target of repression by
EZH2-mediated H3K27me3. DLC1 is a GTPase-activating protein for Rho family
proteins. Inactivation of DLC1 results in hyper-activated Rho/ROCK signaling and 
is implicated in actin cytoskeleton reorganization to promote cancer metastasis. 
By chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, we demonstrated that H3K27me3 was
significantly enriched at the DLC1 promoter region of a DLC1-nonexpressing HCC
cell line, MHCC97L. Depletion of EZH2 in MHCC97L by shRNA reduced H3K27me3 level 
at DLC1 promoter and induced DLC1 gene re-expression. Conversely, transient
overexpression of GFP-EZH2 in DLC1-expressing Huh7 cells reduced DLC1 mRNA level 
with a concomitant enrichment of EZH2 on DLC1 promoter. An inverse relation
between EZH2 and DLC1 expression was observed in the liver, lung, breast,
prostate, and ovarian cancer tissues. Treating cancer cells with the EZH2 small
molecular inhibitor, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), restored DLC1 expression in
different cancer cell lines, indicating that EZH2-mediated H3K27me3 epigenetic
regulation of DLC1 was a common mechanism in human cancers. Importantly, we found
that DZNep treatment inhibited HCC cell migration through disrupting actin
cytoskeleton network, suggesting the therapeutic potential of DZNep in targeting 
cancer metastasis. Taken together, our study has shed mechanistic insight into
EZH2-H3K27me3 epigenetic repression of DLC1 and advocated the significant
pro-metastatic role of EZH2 via repressing tumor and metastasis suppressors.

PMCID: PMC3694912
PMID: 23826380  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


470. FEBS J. 2013 Sep;280(18):4531-8. doi: 10.1111/febs.12417. Epub 2013 Jul 25.

miR-144 downregulation increases bladder cancer cell proliferation by targeting
EZH2 and regulating Wnt signaling.

Guo Y(1), Ying L, Tian Y, Yang P, Zhu Y, Wang Z, Qiu F, Lin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Beijing Friendship Hospital Affiliated to Capital
Medical University, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed to be key regulators of diverse biological 
processes such as transcriptional regulation, cell growth and tumorigenesis. Wnt 
signaling plays an important role in the regulation of tumorigenesis and cancer
progression. However, little is known about whether miR-144 regulates bladder
cancer cell proliferation by controlling Wnt signaling. In this study, we found
that the miR-144 expression level is significantly decreased in bladder cancer
cell lines as well as in clinical cancer tissues. miR-144 inhibitor blocks the
expression of endogenous miR-144 and promotes cancer cell proliferation, whereas 
miR-144 overexpression is sufficient to inhibit cell proliferation. We further
demonstrated that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a target gene of miR-144.
miR-144 downregulation relieves miR-144-mediated repression of EZH2, which
results in activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and subsequent cell
proliferation. These data suggest miR-144 is an essential mediator of bladder
cancer cell proliferation, thus offering a new target for the development of
therapeutic agents against bladder cancer.

© 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 23815091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Clin Epigenetics. 2013 Jun 28;5(1):9. doi: 10.1186/1868-7083-5-9.

Specific inhibition of one DNMT1-including complex influences tumor initiation
and progression.

Cheray M(1), Pacaud R, Nadaradjane A, Vallette FM, Cartron PF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie Nantes-Angers, INSERM, U892, Equipe
Apoptose et progression tumorale, Equipe labellisée Ligue Nationale Contre le
Cancer, 8 quai moncousu, BP7021, Nantes, 44007, France.
pierre-francois.cartron@univ-nantes.fr.

BACKGROUND: Reactivation of silenced tumor suppressor genes by DNMT inhibitors
has provided an alternative approach to cancer therapy. However, DNMT inhibitors 
have also been shown to induce or enhance tumorigenesis via DNA
hypomethylation-induced oncogene activation and chromosomal instability. To
develop more specific DNMT inhibitors for efficient cancer therapy, we compared
the effects of peptides designed to specifically disrupt the interaction of DNMT1
with different proteins.
FINDINGS: Our data indicated that the use of an unspecific DNMT inhibitor
(5aza-2deoxycytidine), a DNMT1 inhibitor (procainamide) or peptides disrupting
the DNMT1/PCNA, DNMT1/EZH2, DNMT1/HDAC1, DNMT1/DNMT3b and DNMT1/HP1 interactions 
promoted or enhanced in vivo tumorigenesis in a mouse glioma model. In contrast, 
a peptide disrupting the DNMT1/DMAP1 interaction, which per se did not affect
tumor growth, sensitized cancer cells to chemotherapy/irradiation-induced cell
death. Finally, our data indicated that the peptide disrupting the DNMT1/DMAP1
interaction increased the efficiency of temozolomide treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the DNMT1/DMAP1 interaction could be an
effective anti-cancer target and opens a new avenue for the development of new
strategies to design DNMT inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3727981
PMID: 23809695  [PubMed]


472. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2173-4.

3D culture adds an extra dimension to targeted epigenetic therapies.

Ozes AR(1), Nephew KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, IN, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):2113-9.

PMCID: PMC3755066
PMID: 23803725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Jun;33(6):866-9.

[EZH2 gene silenced by siRNA suppresses the growth and invasion of endometrial
carcinoma cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Leng L(1), Huang Q, Dong Y, Yu H, Tian Y, Peng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Shenzhen
Affiliated Southern Medical University, Shenzhen 518000, China.
13500050878@139.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects on cell proliferation and invasion as well as
molecular basis after suppressing EZH2 expression in endometrial carcinoma cells 
by using siRNAs.
METHODS: RT-PCR was used to examine the expression of EZH2 in endometrial
carcinoma and their paracancerous tissues. SiRNAs targeting to EZH2 were
transfected to endometrial carcinoma cells, and MTT, FACS, and boyden assays were
utilized to examine cell proliferation, cell cycle change, and cell invasion.
Finally, the molecular mechanisms of EZH2 on cell function alteration were
investigated.
RESULTS: Compared with paracancerous tissues, increased expression trend of EZH2 
mRNA was showed in endometrial carcinoma tissues. Further, knocking down EZH2
expression inhibited cell growth, cell cycle transition from G1 to S phase, and
cell invasion ability. Molecular basis indicated that suppression of EZH2
downregulated the expression of E2F1 and MMP9 and upregulated tumor suppressor
p21 expression.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 expression is increased in endometrial carcinoma tissues.
Knocking down EZH2 expression suppresses the cell growth, cell cycle transition
and cell invasion by downregulated E2F1 and MMP9, and upregulated tumor
suppressor p21 expression.

PMID: 23803199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(5):3375-6.

Absence of EZH2 gene mutation in chronic myeloid leukemia patients in blast
crisis.

Chen HY, Yao H, Wu LY, Liu CJ, Zhu JQ, Liu CH, Wang W, Dong SS, Ping NN, Chen SN,
Sun M.

PMID: 23803132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2013 Jul;23(6):997-1005. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e318296a265.

Inhibition of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression is associated with
decreased tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion in endometrial cancer
cell lines.

Eskander RN(1), Ji T, Huynh B, Wardeh R, Randall LM, Hoang B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of California-Irvine Medical Center, Irvine, CA, USA. Eskander@uci.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the impact of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
expression on endometrial cancer cell line behavior.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression levels were
compared between the nonmalignant endometrial cell line T-HESC and 3 endometrial 
cancer cell lines, ECC-1, RL95-2, and HEC1-A. Stable EZH2 knockdown cell lines
were created, and the impact on cellular proliferation, migration, and invasion
were determined. Fluorescent activated cell sorting was used to examine effects
of EZH2 silencing on cell cycle progression. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2
expression in endometrial cancer tissue specimens was examined using
immunohistochemistry. Comparison of differences between control and short-hairpin
EZH2 cell lines was performed using the Student t test and the Fischer exact
test.
RESULTS: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 protein expression was increased in all 3
cancer cell lines and human endometrial cancer tissue specimens relative to
control. RNA interference of EZH2 expression in ECC-1, RL95-2, and HEC1-A
significantly decreased cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
Down-regulation of EZH2 expression resulted in a significant increase in the
proportion of cells arrested in the G2/M phase. RNA interference of EZH2
expression was associated with an increase in the expression of Wnt pathway
inhibitors sFRP1 and DKK3 and a concomitant decrease in ß-catenin. Enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 expression in human tissue samples was significantly associated
with increased stage, grade, depth of invasion, and nodal metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression is associated with tumor cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in 3 endometrial cancer cell lines as well
as with increased stage, grade, depth of invasion, and nodal metastasis in human 
cancer tissue specimens. Further investigation into this potential therapeutic
target is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3694282
PMID: 23792601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jun 20;4:e675. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.197.

CPEB1, a histone-modified hypomethylated gene, is regulated by miR-101 and
involved in cell senescence in glioma.

Xiaoping L(1), Zhibin Y, Wenjuan L, Zeyou W, Gang X, Zhaohui L, Ying Z, Minghua
W, Guiyuan L.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Epigenetic mechanisms have important roles in carcinogenesis. We certified that
the mRNA translation-related gene cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding
protein 1 (CPEB1) is hypomethylated and overexpressed in glioma cells and
tissues. The knockdown of CPEB1 reduced cell senescence by regulating the
expression or distribution of p53 in glioma cells. CPEB1 is also regulated
directly by the tumor suppressor miR-101, a potential marker of glioma. It is
known that the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and
embryonic ectoderm development (EED) are direct targets of miR-101. We
demonstrated that miR-101 downregulated the expression of CPEB1 through reversing
the methylation status of the CPEB1 promoter by regulating the presence on the
promoter of the methylation-related histones H3K4me2, H3K27me3, H3K9me3 and
H4K20me3. The epigenetic regulation of H3K27me3 on CPEB1 promoter is mediated by 
EZH2 and EED. EZH2 has a role in the regulation of H3K4me2. Furthermore, the
downregulation of CPEB1 induced senescence in a p53-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3702288
PMID: 23788032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Blood. 2013 Aug 8;122(6):893-901. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-442012. Epub 2013
Jun 19.

Molecular analysis of patients with polycythemia vera or essential
thrombocythemia receiving pegylated interferon a-2a.

Quintás-Cardama A(1), Abdel-Wahab O, Manshouri T, Kilpivaara O, Cortes J, Roupie 
AL, Zhang SJ, Harris D, Estrov Z, Kantarjian H, Levine RL, Verstovsek S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, M D Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Pegylated interferon a-2a (PEG-IFN-a-2a) has previously been shown to induce
hematologic and molecular responses in patients with polycythemia vera (PV) or
essential thrombocythemia (ET). Here we present a follow-up of a phase 2 trial
with PEG-IFN-a-2a treatment in 43 PV and 40 ET patients with detailed molecular
analysis. After a median follow-up of 42 months, complete hematologic response
was achieved in 76% of patients with PV and 77% of those with ET. This was
accompanied by complete molecular response (CMR) (ie, undetectable JAK2V617F) in 
18% and 17%, of PV and ET patients, respectively. Serial sequencing of TET2,
ASXL1, EZH2, DNMT3A, and IDH1/2 revealed that patients failing to achieve CMR had
a higher frequency of mutations outside the Janus kinase-signal transducer and
activator of transcription pathway and were more likely to acquire new mutations 
during therapy. Patients with both JAK2V617F and TET2 mutations at therapy onset 
had a higher JAK2V617F mutant allele burden and a less significant reduction in
JAK2V617F allele burden compared with JAK2 mutant/TET2 wild-type patients. These 
data demonstrate that PEG-IFN-a-2a induces sustained CMR in a subset of PV or ET 
patients, and that genotypic context may influence clinical and molecular
response to PEG-IFN-a-2a.

PMCID: PMC3739035
PMID: 23782935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):768-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.020.

Sox4 is a master regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition by controlling
Ezh2 expression and epigenetic reprogramming.

Tiwari N(1), Tiwari VK, Waldmeier L, Balwierz PJ, Arnold P, Pachkov M,
Meyer-Schaller N, Schübeler D, van Nimwegen E, Christofori G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, 4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2013;15(4):R72.

Gene expression profiling has uncovered the transcription factor Sox4 with
upregulated activity during TGF-ß-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
in normal and cancerous breast epithelial cells. Sox4 is indispensable for EMT
and cell survival in vitro and for primary tumor growth and metastasis in vivo.
Among several EMT-relevant genes, Sox4 directly regulates the expression of Ezh2,
encoding the Polycomb group histone methyltransferase that trimethylates histone 
3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) for gene repression. Ablation of Ezh2 expression prevents 
EMT, whereas forced expression of Ezh2 restores EMT in Sox4-deficient cells.
Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 marks associate with key EMT genes, representing an
epigenetic EMT signature that predicts patient survival. Our results identify
Sox4 as a master regulator of EMT by governing the expression of the epigenetic
modifier Ezh2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23764001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):711-3. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.05.016.

Cancer Stem Cells Activate STAT3 the EZ Way.

Fouse SD(1), Costello JF.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurosurgery, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):839-52.

Activated STAT3 and increased expression of the histone methyltransferase EZH2
are independently associated with the most malignant subset of gliomas. In this
issue of Cancer Cell, Kim and colleagues discover that EZH2 enhances STAT3
activation by trimethylating lysine180 in STAT3 and does so preferentially in
glioma stem-like cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3706087
PMID: 23763996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Sep;32(3):532-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1417. Epub 2013 Jun
12.

Epigenetic aberrations in myeloid malignancies (Review).

Takahashi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Kitasato University School of Allied Health Sciences; 
Division of Molecular Hematology, Kitasato University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0373, Japan.

The development of novel technologies, such as massively parallel DNA sequencing,
has led to the identification of several novel recurrent gene mutations, such as 
DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt)3a, ten-eleven-translocation oncogene family member 2
(TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)1/2, additional sex comb-like 1 (ASXL1),
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide
repeat X chromosome (UTX) mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and other
myeloid malignancies. These findings strongly suggest a link between recurrent
genetic alterations and aberrant epigenetic regulations, resulting from an
abnormal DNA methylation and histone modification status. This review focuses on 
the current findings of aberrant epigenetic signatures by these newly described
genetic alterations. Moreover, epigenetic aberrations resulting from
transcription factor aberrations, such as mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)
rearrangement, ecotropic viral integration site 1 (Evi1) overexpression,
chromosomal translocations and the downregulation of PU.1 are also described.

PMID: 23760684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):2042-50. doi: 10.4161/cc.25065. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

EZH2 and ALDH1 expression in ductal carcinoma in situ: complex association with
recurrence and progression to invasive breast cancer.

Knudsen ES(1), Dervishaj O, Kleer CG, Pajak T, Schwartz GF, Witkiewicz AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

The diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is an increasingly common event 
due to widespread use of screening mammography. However, appropriate clinical
management of DCIS is a major challenge in the absence of prognostic markers.
Tumor-initiating cells may be particularly relevant for disease pathogenesis;
therefore, two markers associated with such cells, EZH2 and ALDH1, were
evaluated. A cohort of 248 DCIS patients was used to determine the association of
EZH2 and ALDH1 with ipsilateral breast event, DCIS recurrence and progression to 
invasive breast cancer (IBC). In this cohort, high EZH2 expression was associated
with the risk of an ipsilateral breast event and DCIS recurrence but not invasive
progression. ALDH1 expression was observed in both the tumor and stromal
compartment; however, in neither compartment were ALDH1 levels independently
associated with evaluated study endpoints. Interestingly, the combination of high
EZH2 with high epithelial ALDH1 was associated with disease progression.
Therefore, ALDH1 within the DCIS lesion can add to the prognostic significance of
EZH2, particularly in the context of risk of development of invasive disease.

PMCID: PMC3737307
PMID: 23759596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 1;12(13):2113-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.25163. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Three-dimensional culture sensitizes epithelial ovarian cancer cells to EZH2
methyltransferase inhibition.

Amatangelo MD(1), Garipov A, Li H, Conejo-Garcia JR, Speicher DW, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program; The Wistar Institute; Philadelphia,
PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 1;12(15):2345.
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2173-4.

Inhibitors of EZH2 methyltransferase activity have been demonstrated to
selectively suppress the growth of diffused large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells
with gain-of-function mutations in EZH2, while exhibiting very limited effects on
the growth of DLBCL cells with wild-type EZH2. Given that EZH2 is often
overexpressed but not mutated in solid tumors, it is important to investigate the
determinants of sensitivity of solid tumor cells to EZH2 inhibitors. In the
current study, we show that three-dimensional (3D) culture of epithelial ovarian 
cancer (EOC) cells that overexpress EZH2 sensitizes these cells to EZH2
methyltransferase inhibition. Treatment of EOC cells with GSK343, a specific
inhibitor of EZH2 methyltransferase, decreases the level of H3K27Me3, the product
of EZH2's enzymatic activity. However, GSK343 exhibited limited effects on the
growth of EOC cells in conventional two-dimensional (2D) culture. In contrast,
GSK343 significantly suppressed the growth of EOC cells cultured in 3D matrigel
extracellular matrix (ECM), which more closely mimics the tumor microenvironment 
in vivo. Notably, GSK343 induces apoptosis of EOC cells in 3D but not 2D culture.
In addition, GSK343 significantly inhibited the invasion of EOC cells. In
summary, we show that the 3D ECM sensitizes EOC cells to EZH2 methyltransferase
inhibition, which suppresses cell growth, induces apoptosis and inhibits
invasion. Our findings imply that in EZH2 wild-type solid tumors, the ECM tumor
microenvironment plays an important role in determining sensitivity to EZH2
inhibition and suggest that targeting the ECM represents a novel strategy for
enhancing EZH2 inhibitor efficacy.

PMCID: PMC3737313
PMID: 23759589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Oncol Rep. 2013 Aug;30(2):870-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2526. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

miR-708 acts as a tumor suppressor in human glioblastoma cells.

Guo P(1), Lan J, Ge J, Nie Q, Mao Q, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Ren Ji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, PR China.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is one of the most lethal forms of human cancer, and new
clinical biomarkers and therapeutic targets are urgently required. microRNAs
(miRNAs) are small, non-coding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression at
the post-transcriptional and/or translational level by binding the 3'
untranslated regions (3' UTRs) of target mRNAs. The dysregulated expression of
several miRNAs has been reported to modulate glioma progression. In the present
study, we defined the expression and function of miR-708, which, based on
real-time PCR analysis, were downregulated in GBM cells. The overexpression of
miR-708 inhibited cell proliferation and invasion and induced apoptosis in the
human GBM cell lines A172 and T98G. Furthermore, the overexpression of miR-708
reduced the expression of Akt1, CCND1, MMP2, EZH2, Parp-1 and Bcl2 in A172 and
T98G cells. Taken together, our study suggests that miR-708 affects GBM cell
proliferation and invasion, and induces apoptosis. It is suggested that miR-708
may play an important role as a tumor suppressor in GBM and it may be an
attractive target for therapeutic intervention in GBM.

PMID: 23754151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e65138. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065138. Print 2013.

MiR-26a inhibits proliferation and migration of breast cancer through repression 
of MCL-1.

Gao J(1), Li L, Wu M, Liu M, Xie X, Guo J, Tang H, Xie X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center,
Guangzhou, PR China.

Breast cancer is the most commonly malignancies in women. MicroRNAs are a family 
of small non-coding RNAs 18-25 nucleotides in length that post-transcriptionally 
modulate gene expression. MiR-26a has been reported as a tumor suppressor
microRNA in breast cancer, which is attributed mainly to targeting of MTDH and
EZH2, however, the expression profile and therapeutic potential of miR-26a is
still unclear. Here we demonstrate that miR-26a is down-regulated in breast
cancer cells and clinical specimens and its modulation in breast cancer cells
regulates cell proliferation, colony formation, migration and apoptosis. MCL-1,
an anti-apoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family, as novel targets of miR-26a was
found to be in reverse correlation with ectopic expression of miR-26a and
knockdown of MCL-1 phenocopied the effect of miR-26a in breast cancer cell lines.
It was further explored that miR-26a increased sensitivity of breast cancer cells
to paclitaxel in which MCL-1 was involved. Thus, miR-26a impacts on cell
proliferation and migration of breast cancer by regulating several
carcinogenesis-related processes, including a novel mechanism involving the
targeting of MCL-1.

PMCID: PMC3672200
PMID: 23750239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2013 Sep;14(3):454-64. doi: 10.1007/s11864-013-0239-3.

Role of epigenetic modulation for the treatment of sarcoma.

Cote GM(1), Choy E.

Author information: 
(1), 32 Fruit Street, Yawkey 7A, Boston, MA, 02114, USA, gcote@partners.org.

OPINION STATEMENT: Sarcoma is a disease that includes many different subtypes
that can present with a wide range of differing clinical findings, prognosis, and
treatment options. For certain subsets (e.g., Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma, gastrointestinal stromal tumor [GIST]), extensive clinical
trials have delineated effective treatment regimens often involving combination
therapy, including surgery, radiation, systemic chemotherapy, and small molecular
inhibitors of tyrosine kinases (as in the case of GIST). For nearly all patients 
with sarcoma who have relapsed or developed metastasis, the therapeutic benefit
of chemotherapy has reached a plateau and as such new treatment approaches are
needed to move this field forward. We recommend that all patients have the
opportunity to participate in clinical trials where available. Recently, in our
clinic we have started to increase our use of molecular testing and DNA
sequencing studies to help identify potential treatment options for patients. One
area of evolving basic and clinical research in sarcomas is the field of
epigenetic therapeutics. The enclosed article reviews the basics of epigenetics
and highlights some completed and ongoing clinical trials of epigenetic
treatments in sarcoma. We anticipate in the future that diagnostic platforms will
be developed to help clinicians determine if an epigenetic therapy could be
effective for an individual patient with sarcoma.

PMID: 23749746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Jun 5;14(6):11981-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms140611981.

Role of EZH2 in the growth of prostate cancer stem cells isolated from LNCaP
cells.

Li K(1), Liu C, Zhou B, Bi L, Huang H, Lin T, Xu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China. xkw2005@163.com.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) plays a crucial role in embryonic and somatic 
stem cells for their proliferation and differentiation. However, the roles and
underlying mechanisms of EZH2 in prostate cancer stem cells (PCSCs) remain
unknown. This study aimed to investigate the effects of EZH2 on PCSCs. PCSCs were
isolated from the human prostate cancer cell line LNcap by fluorescence activated
cell sorting (FACS). EZH2 expression was compared between PCSCs and non-PCSCs.
The association between EZH2 function and PCSC growth was investigated using
siRNA-mediated knock-down of EZH2. Cell growth was investigated by MTT, cell
cycle and apoptosis of PCSCs were explored by flow cytometric analysis. Finally, 
the upstream pathway miRNA level was determined via a luciferase reporter assay, 
and the downstream pathway cycle regulators were examined via reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The results showed that LNcap cell line 
comprised a greater proportion of CD44+/CD133+ cells by comparison to the PC-3
cell line. EZH2 was up-regulated in PCSCs compared with non-PCSCs. Silence of
EZH2 inhibited cell growth and the cell cycle and promoted the progression of
apoptosis. Furthermore, EZH2 was a direct target of miR-101 in PCSCs and EZH2's
mRNA levels were inversely correlated with miR-101 expression and cyclin E2 (a
cell-cycle regulator) was suppressed by siEZH2. In conclusion, EZH2 is essential 
for PCSC growth, partly through a negative regulation by miR-101 and positively
regulating cyclin E2.

PMCID: PMC3709767
PMID: 23739676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2867-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.088096. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Polycomb repressive complex PRC2 regulates Xenopus retina development downstream 
of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Aldiri I(1), Moore KB, Hutcheson DA, Zhang J, Vetter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

The histone methyltransferase complex PRC2 controls key steps in developmental
transitions and cell fate choices; however, its roles in vertebrate eye
development remain unknown. Here, we report that in Xenopus, PRC2 regulates the
progression of retinal progenitors from proliferation to differentiation. We show
that the PRC2 core components are enriched in retinal progenitors and
downregulated in differentiated cells. Knockdown of the PRC2 core component Ezh2 
leads to reduced retinal progenitor proliferation, in part due to upregulation of
the Cdk inhibitor p15(Ink4b). In addition, although PRC2 knockdown does not alter
eye patterning, retinal progenitor gene expression or expression of the neural
competence factor Sox2, it does cause suppression of proneural bHLH gene
expression, indicating that PRC2 is crucial for the initiation of neural
differentiation in the retina. Consistent with this, knocking down or blocking
PRC2 function constrains the generation of most retinal neural cell types and
promotes a Müller glial cell fate decision. We also show that Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling acting through the receptor Frizzled 5, but independent of Sox2,
regulates expression of key PRC2 subunits in the developing retina. This is
consistent with a role for this pathway in coordinating proliferation and the
transition to neurogenesis in the Xenopus retina. Our data establish PRC2 as a
regulator of proliferation and differentiation during eye development.

PMCID: PMC3699278
PMID: 23739135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;31(6):778-84. doi: 10.1159/000350095. Epub 2013 May
31.

SUZ12 depletion suppresses the proliferation of gastric cancer cells.

Cui Y(1), Chen J, He Z, Xiao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yantaishan Hospital, Yantai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: SUZ12 and EZH2 are two main components of polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2) that is known to be of great importance in tumorigenesis. EZH2
has been reported to play a vital role in pathogenesis of human cancer. However, 
whether SUZ12 has equivalent roles in tumorigenesis has not been demonstrated.
Here, we investigated a possible role of SUZ12 for the proliferation of gastric
cancer cells.
METHODS: Western-blot analysis was used to detected the levels of SUZ12,
H3K27me3, EZH2 and p27 in ten gastric cell lines. SUZ12 was depleted by RNA
interference. Cell cycle was detected by flow cytometry. Luciferase assays was to
analyze whether miR-200b directly regulate SUZ12.
RESULTS: We found that SUZ12 depletion mediated by RNA interference (RNAi) led to
a reduction of gastric cell numbers and arrested the cell cycle at G1/S point. As
an important G1/S phase inhibitory gene, p27 is re-induced to some extent by
SUZ12 knockdown. Furthermore, we demonstrated that SUZ12 was directly
downregulated by miR-200b.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence suggesting that SUZ12 may be a potential
therapeutic target for gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23735840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Blood. 2013 Jul 25;122(4):554-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-491936. Epub 2013
Jun 3.

Exome sequencing identifies putative drivers of progression of transient
myeloproliferative disorder to AMKL in infants with Down syndrome.

Nikolaev SI(1), Santoni F, Vannier A, Falconnet E, Giarin E, Basso G, Hoischen A,
Veltman JA, Groet J, Nizetic D, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland.

Some neonates with Down syndrome (DS) are diagnosed with self-regressing
transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD), and 20% to 30% of those progress to 
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL). We performed exome sequencing in 7
TMD/AMKL cases and copy-number analysis in these and 10 additional cases. All
TMD/AMKL samples contained GATA1 mutations. No exome-sequenced TMD/AMKL sample
had other recurrently mutated genes. However, 2 of 5 TMD cases, and all AMKL
cases, showed mutations/deletions other than GATA1, in genes proven as
transformation drivers in non-DS leukemia (EZH2, APC, FLT3, JAK1, PARK2-PACRG,
EXT1, DLEC1, and SMC3). One patient at the TMD stage revealed 2 clonal expansions
with different GATA1 mutations, of which 1 clone had an additional driver
mutation. Interestingly, it was the other clone that gave rise to AMKL after
accumulating mutations in 7 other genes. Data suggest that GATA1 mutations alone 
are sufficient for clonal expansions, and additional driver mutations at the TMD 
stage do not necessarily predict AMKL progression. Later in infancy, leukemic
progression requires "third-hit driver" mutations/somatic copy-number alterations
found in non-DS leukemias. Putative driver mutations affecting WNT
(wingless-related integration site), JAK-STAT (Janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription), or MAPK/PI3K (mitogen-activated
kinase/phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase) pathways were found in all cases, aberrant 
activation of which converges on overexpression of MYC.

PMID: 23733339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 12;288(28):20592-606. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.472183. Epub
2013 Jun 3.

Nitric oxide and KLF4 protein epigenetically modify class II transactivator to
repress major histocompatibility complex II expression during Mycobacterium bovis
bacillus Calmette-Guerin infection.

Ghorpade DS(1), Holla S, Sinha AY, Alagesan SK, Balaji KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560012, India.

Pathogenic mycobacteria employ several immune evasion strategies such as
inhibition of class II transactivator (CIITA) and MHC-II expression, to survive
and persist in host macrophages. However, precise roles for specific signaling
components executing down-regulation of CIITA/MHC-II have not been adequately
addressed. Here, we demonstrate that Mycobacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Guérin
(BCG)-mediated TLR2 signaling-induced iNOS/NO expression is obligatory for the
suppression of IFN-<U+03B3>-induced CIITA/MHC-II functions. Significantly,
NOTCH/PKC/MAPK-triggered signaling cross-talk was found critical for iNOS/NO
production. NO responsive recruitment of a bifunctional transcription factor,
KLF4, to the promoter of CIITA during M. bovis BCG infection of macrophages was
essential to orchestrate the epigenetic modifications mediated by histone
methyltransferase EZH2 or miR-150 and thus calibrate CIITA/MHC-II expression.
NO-dependent KLF4 regulated the processing and presentation of ovalbumin by
infected macrophages to reactive T cells. Altogether, our study delineates a
novel role for iNOS/NO/KLF4 in dictating the mycobacterial capacity to inhibit
CIITA/MHC-II-mediated antigen presentation by infected macrophages and thereby
elude immune surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3711323
PMID: 23733190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Transl Oncol. 2013 Jun 1;6(3):273-81. Print 2013 Jun.

The Histone Methyltransferase EZH2 Mediates Tumor Progression on the Chick
Chorioallantoic Membrane Assay, a Novel Model of Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma.

Liu M(1), Scanlon CS, Banerjee R, Russo N, Inglehart RC, Willis AL, Weiss SJ,
D'Silva NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School of Dentistry,
Ann Arbor, MI.

Current in vivo models for head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) have
limitations in simulating some essential tumorigenic phenotypes, such as
invasion. Most mouse models of human HNSCC are inadequate because tumor cells are
injected directly into the connective tissue, thereby bypassing the basement
membrane of the surface epithelium, the first barrier to invasion. In this
manuscript, we establish the chick chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay as an in 
vivomodel of human HNSCC tumor progression. Using the CAM model of HNSCC, we
investigated the role of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone
methyltransferase, in multiple aspects of HNSCC tumor progression. We found that 
knockdown of EZH2 reduced tumor size, angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis of
tumors produced by grafting human HNSCC cells onto the CAM. In addition, we
demonstrate that EZH2 expression mediates a mesenchymal phenotype in HNSCC cell
lines and mouse tumors. These findings demonstrate the advantages of the newly
proposed CAM model of human HNSCC and highlight the emerging role of EZH2 in
HSNCC tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC3660795
PMID: 23730406  [PubMed]


492. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):825-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.084301.

Trithorax and polycomb cooperation in MLL fusion acute leukemia.

Méreau H, Schwaller J.

Comment on
    Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):918-27.

PMCID: PMC3669434
PMID: 23729722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1970-1. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.132. Epub 2013 May 31.

Knocking off their Sox: lineage-specific repression by Polycomb in epidermal stem
cells.

Tumbar T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
tt252@cornell.edu

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1990-2000.

PMCID: PMC3715858
PMID: 23727885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jul 12;436(4):578-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.05.079. Epub 2013 May 29.

MicroRNA-214 provokes cardiac hypertrophy via repression of EZH2.

Yang T(1), Zhang GF, Chen XF, Gu HH, Fu SZ, Xu HF, Feng Q, Ni YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Qingchun Road 79, Hangzhou, 310003
Zhejiang, China.

Micro RNAs are small, non-coding RNA molecules that regulate gene expression via 
either translational inhibition or mRNA degredation. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 
(EZH2)-mediated hypertrophic signaling is a major regulatory response to
hypertrophic stimuli. In this study, we constructed AAC rat models and PE-induced
hypertrophic cardiomyocytes. We demonstrated that miR-214 relative levels were
upregulated, whereas EZH2 was downregulated in both vivo and vitro models.
Further, one conserved base-pairing site in the EZH2 3'-untranslated region (UTR)
was verified. Mutation of the site in the EZH2 3'-UTR completely blocked the
negative effect of miR-214 on EZH2, suggesting that EZH2 is a direct target for
miR-214 regulation. Using a gain-of-function approach, incorporating the
lentivirus constructed miR-214 and its sponge, we demonstrated that miR-214
significantly regulated endogenous levels of EZH2 gene expression; whereas,
changes in the expression of the Sine oculis homeobox homolog gene were induced
by an adrenergic receptor agonist in the AAC rat model. Having made this study it
is possible to conclude that the negative regulation of EZH2 expression
contributed to miR-214-mediated cardiac hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Nov;31(7):487-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.05.005.
Epub 2013 May 30.

The dynamics of polycomb group proteins in early embryonic nervous system in
mouse and human.

Qi L(1), Cao JL, Hu Y, Yang JG, Ji Y, Huang J, Zhang Y, Sun DG, Xia HF, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Reproductive Health, Chongqing, 
China; Graduate Schools, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China;
Reproductive and Genetic Center of National Research Institute for Family
Planning, Beijing, China.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcription regulatory proteins that control 
the expression of a variety of genes and the antero-posterior neural patterning
from early embryogenesis. Although expression of PcG genes in the nervous system 
has been noticed, but the expression pattern of PcG proteins in early embryonic
nervous system is still unclear. In this study, we analyzed the expression
pattern of PRC1 complex members (BMI-1 and RING1B) and PRC2 complex members (EED,
SUZ12 and EZH2) in early embryonic nervous system in mouse and human by Western
blot and Immunohistochemistry. The results of Western blot showed that EED
protein was significantly up-regulated with the increase of the day of pregnancy 
during the early embryogenesis in mouse. BMI-1 protein level was significantly
increased from the day 10 of pregnancy, when compared with the day 9 of
pregnancy. But the SUZ12, EZH2 and RING1B protein level did not change
significantly. From the results of Immunohistochemistry, we found that the four
PcG proteins were all expressed in the fetal brain and fetal spinal cord in
mouse. In human, the expression of EED, SUZ12, and EZH2 was not significantly
different in cerebral cortex and sacral spinal cord, but BMI-1 and RING1B
expression was enhanced with the development of embryos in early pregnancy.
Collectively, our findings showed that PRC1 and PRC2 were spatiotemporally
expressed in brain and spinal cord of early embryos.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23727134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Aug;33(8):1936-42. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.301765. Epub 2013 May 30.

Histone and DNA methylation-mediated epigenetic downregulation of endothelial
Kruppel-like factor 2 by low-density lipoprotein cholesterol.

Kumar A(1), Kumar S, Vikram A, Hoffman TA, Naqvi A, Lewarchik CM, Kim YR, Irani
K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol induces endothelial
dysfunction and is a major modifiable risk factor for coronary heart disease.
Endothelial Kruppel-like Factor 2 (KLF2) is a transcription factor that is vital 
to endothelium-dependent vascular homeostasis. The purpose of this study is to
determine whether and how LDL affects endothelial KLF2 expression.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: LDL downregulates KLF2 expression and promoter activity in 
endothelial cells. LDL-induced decrease in KLF2 parallels changes in endothelial 
KLF2 target genes thrombomodulin, endothelial NO synthase, and plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1. Pharmacological inhibition of DNA methyltransferases or
knockdown of DNA methyltransferase 1 prevents downregulation of endothelial KLF2 
by LDL. LDL induces endothelial DNA methyltransferase 1 expression and DNA
methyltransferase activity. LDL stimulates binding of the DNA methyl-CpG-binding 
protein-2 and histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2, whereas
decreases binding of the KLF2 transcriptional activator myocyte enhancing
factor-2, to the KLF2 promoter in endothelial cells. Knockdown of myocyte
enhancing factor-2, or mutation of the myocyte enhancing factor-2 site in the
KLF2 promoter, abrogates LDL-induced downregulation of endothelial KLF2 and
thrombomodulin, and KLF2 promoter activity. Similarly, knockdown of enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 negates LDL-induced downregulation of KLF2 and thrombomodulin in 
endothelial cells. Finally, overexpression of KLF2 rescues LDL-induced clotting
of platelet-rich plasma on endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: LDL represses endothelial KLF2 expression via DNA and histone
methylation. Downregulation of KLF2 by LDL leads to a dysfunctional,
hypercoagulable endothelium.

PMID: 23723375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Aug;12(8):1651-64. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0056. Epub
2013 May 29.

Preclinical evaluation of transcriptional targeting strategy for human
hepatocellular carcinoma in an orthotopic xenograft mouse model.

Sia KC(1), Huynh H, Chung AY, Ooi LL, Lim KH, Hui KM, Lam PY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Research, National Cancer Center,
Singapore.

Gene regulation of many key cell-cycle players in S-, G(2) phase, and mitosis
results from transcriptional repression in their respective promoter regions
during the G(0) and G(1) phases of cell cycle. Within these promoter regions are 
phylogenetically conserved sequences known as the cell-cycle-dependent element
(CDE) and cell-cycle genes homology regions (CHR) sites. Thus, we hypothesize
that transcriptional regulation of cell-cycle regulation via the CDE/CHR region
together with liver-specific apolipoprotein E (apoE)-hAAT promoter could bring
about a selective transgene expression in proliferating human hepatocellular
carcinoma. We show that the newly generated vector AH-6CC-L2C could mediate
hepatocyte-targeted luciferase gene expression in tumor cells and freshly
isolated short-term hepatocellular carcinoma cultures from patient biopsy. In
contrast, normal murine and human hepatocytes infected with AH-6CC-L2C expressed 
minimal or low luciferase activities. In the presence of prodrug 5-fluorocytosine
(5-FC), AH-6CC-L2C effectively suppressed the growth of orthotopic hepatocellular
carcinoma patient-derived xenograft mouse model via the expression of yeast
cytosine deaminase (yCD) that converts 5-FC to anticancer metabolite
5-fluoruracil. More importantly, we show that combination treatment of AH-6CC-L2C
with an EZH2 inhibitor, DZNep, that targets EpCAM-positive hepatocellular
carcinoma, can bring about a greater therapeutic efficacy compared with a single 
treatment of virus or inhibitor. Our study showed that targeting proliferating
human hepatocellular carcinoma cells through the transcriptional control of
therapeutic gene could represent a feasible approach against hepatocellular
carcinoma.

PMID: 23720769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4559-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-0109. Epub 
2013 May 29.

Chromatin regulator PRC2 is a key regulator of epigenetic plasticity in
glioblastoma.

Natsume A(1), Ito M, Katsushima K, Ohka F, Hatanaka A, Shinjo K, Sato S,
Takahashi S, Ishikawa Y, Takeuchi I, Shimogawa H, Uesugi M, Okano H, Kim SU,
Wakabayashi T, Issa JP, Sekido Y, Kondo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University School of Medicine, Divisions of
Epigenomics and Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute.

Tumor cell plasticity contributes to functional and morphologic heterogeneity. To
uncover the underlying mechanisms of this plasticity, we examined glioma
stem-like cells (GSC) where we found that the biologic interconversion between
GSCs and differentiated non-GSCs is functionally plastic and accompanied by gain 
or loss of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), a complex that modifies
chromatin structure. PRC2 mediates lysine 27 trimethylation on histone H3 and in 
GSC it affected pluripotency or development-associated genes (e.g., Nanog, Wnt1, 
and BMP5) together with alterations in the subcellular localization of EZH2, a
catalytic component of PRC2. Intriguingly, exogenous expression of EZH2-dNLS,
which lacks nuclear localization sequence, impaired the repression of Nanog
expression under differentiation conditions. RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
attenuation or pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 had little to no effect on
apoptosis or bromodeoxyuridine incorporation in GSCs, but it disrupted
morphologic interconversion and impaired GSC integration into the brain tissue,
thereby improving survival of GSC-bearing mice. Pathologic analysis of human
glioma specimens revealed that the number of tumor cells with nuclear EZH2 is
larger around tumor vessels and the invasive front, suggesting that nuclear EZH2 
may help reprogram tumor cells in close proximity to this microenvironment. Our
results indicate that epigenetic regulation by PRC2 is a key mediator of tumor
cell plasticity, which is required for the adaptation of glioblastoma cells to
their microenvironment. Thus, PRC2-targeted therapy may reduce tumor cell
plasticity and tumor heterogeneity, offering a new paradigm for glioma treatment.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23720055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1911. doi: 10.1038/srep01911.

PRC2 overexpression and PRC2-target gene repression relating to poorer prognosis 
in small cell lung cancer.

Sato T(1), Kaneda A, Tsuji S, Isagawa T, Yamamoto S, Fujita T, Yamanaka R, Tanaka
Y, Nukiwa T, Marquez VE, Ishikawa Y, Ichinose M, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology
(RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is a subtype of lung cancer with poor prognosis.
Expression array analysis of 23 SCLC cases and 42 normal tissues revealed that
EZH2 and other PRC2 members were highly expressed in SCLC. ChIP-seq for H3K27me3 
suggested that genes with H3K27me3(+) in SCLC were extended not only to
PRC2-target genes in ES cells but also to other target genes such as cellular
adhesion-related genes. These H3K27me3(+) genes in SCLC were repressed
significantly, and introduction of the most repressed gene JUB into SCLC cell
line lead to growth inhibition. Shorter overall survival of clinical SCLC cases
correlated to repression of JUB alone, or a set of four genes including
H3K27me3(+) genes. Treatment with EZH2 inhibitors, DZNep and GSK126, resulted in 
growth repression of SCLC cell lines. High PRC2 expression was suggested to
contribute to gene repression in SCLC, and may play a role in genesis of SCLC.

PMCID: PMC3665955
PMID: 23714854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Stem Cells. 2013 Sep;31(9):1910-20. doi: 10.1002/stem.1437.

Polycomb group gene Ezh2 regulates mammary gland morphogenesis and maintains the 
luminal progenitor pool.

Michalak EM(1), Nacerddine K, Pietersen A, Beuger V, Pawlitzky I,
Cornelissen-Steijger P, Wientjens E, Tanger E, Seibler J, van Lohuizen M, Jonkers
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Genomics Centre, Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Specification of the cellular hierarchy in the mammary gland involves complex
signaling that remains poorly defined. Polycomb group proteins are known to
contribute to the maintenance of stem cell identity through epigenetic
modifications, leading to stable alterations in gene expression. The polycomb
protein family member EZH2 is known to be important for stem cell maintenance in 
multiple tissues, but its role in mammary gland development and differentiation
remains unknown. Our analyses show that EZH2 is predominantly expressed in
luminal cells of the mouse mammary epithelium. As mammary gland development
occurs mostly after birth, the analysis of EZH2 gene function in postnatal
development is precluded by embryonic lethality of conventional EZH2 knockout
mice. To investigate the role of EZH2 in normal mammary gland epithelium, we have
generated novel transgenic mice that express doxycycline-regulatable short
hairpin (sh) RNAs directed against Ezh2. Knockdown of EZH2 results in delayed
outgrowth of the mammary epithelium during puberty, due to impaired terminal end 
bud formation and ductal elongation. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that
EZH2 is required to maintain the luminal cell pool and may limit differentiation 
of luminal progenitors into CD61(+) differentiated luminal cells, suggesting a
role for EZH2 in mammary luminal cell fate determination. Consistent with this,
EZH2 knockdown reduced lobuloalveolar expansion during pregnancy, suggesting EZH2
is required for the differentiation of luminal progenitors to alveolar cells.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23712803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1832(10):1697-707. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.05.015. Epub 2013 May 22.

Suppression of tumorigenicity by microRNA-138 through inhibition of
EZH2-CDK4/6-pRb-E2F1 signal loop in glioblastoma multiforme.

Qiu S(1), Huang D, Yin D, Li F, Li X, Kung HF, Peng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) is implicated in tumor progression. We attempt
to identify the tumor suppressive miRNA not only down-regulated in glioblastoma
multiforme (GBM) but also potent to inhibit the oncogene EZH2, and then
investigate the biological function and pathophysiologic role of the candidate
miRNA in GBM. In this study, we show that miRNA-138 is reduced in both GBM
clinical specimens and cell lines, and is effective to inhibit EZH2 expression.
Moreover, high levels of miR-138 are associated with long overall and
progression-free survival of GBM patients from The Cancer Genome Atlas dataset
(TCGA) data portal. Ectopic expression of miRNA-138 effectively inhibits GBM cell
proliferation in vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo through inducing cell cycles
G1/S arrest. Mechanism investigation reveals that miRNA-138 acquires tumor
inhibition through directly targeting EZH2, CDK6, E2F2 and E2F3. Moreover, an
EZH2-mediated signal loop, EZH2-CDK4/6-pRb-E2F1, is probably involved in GBM
tumorigenicity, and this loop can be blocked by miRNA-138. Additionally,
miRNA-138 negatively correlates to mRNA levels of EZH2 and CDK6 among GBM
clinical samples from both TCGA and our small amount datasets. In conclusion, our
data demonstrate a tumor suppressive role of miRNA-138 in GBM tumorigenicity,
suggesting a potential application in GBM therapy.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul 1;31(19):2428-36. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.47.3314. Epub 2013
May 20.

Prognostic score including gene mutations in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.

Itzykson R(1), Kosmider O, Renneville A, Gelsi-Boyer V, Meggendorfer M, Morabito 
M, Berthon C, Adès L, Fenaux P, Beyne-Rauzy O, Vey N, Braun T, Haferlach T,
Dreyfus F, Cross NC, Preudhomme C, Bernard OA, Fontenay M, Vainchenker W,
Schnittger S, Birnbaum D, Droin N, Solary E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jul 1;31(19):2374-6.

PURPOSE: Several prognostic scoring systems have been proposed for chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), a disease in which some gene mutations-including 
ASXL1-have been associated with poor prognosis in univariable analyses. We
developed and validated a prognostic score for overall survival (OS) based on
mutational status and standard clinical variables.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped ASXL1 and up to 18 other genes including
epigenetic (TET2, EZH2, IDH1, IDH2, DNMT3A), splicing (SF3B1, SRSF2, ZRSF2,
U2AF1), transcription (RUNX1, NPM1, TP53), and signaling (NRAS, KRAS, CBL, JAK2, 
FLT3) regulators in 312 patients with CMML. Genotypes and clinical variables were
included in a multivariable Cox model of OS validated by bootstrapping. A scoring
system was developed using regression coefficients from this model.
RESULTS: ASXL1 mutations (P < .0001) and, to a lesser extent, SRSF2 (P = .03),
CBL (P = .003), and IDH2 (P = .03) mutations predicted inferior OS in univariable
analysis. The retained independent prognostic factors included ASXL1 mutations,
age older than 65 years, WBC count greater than 15 ×10(9)/L, platelet count less 
than 100 ×10(9)/L, and anemia (hemoglobin < 10 g/dL in female patients, < 11g/dL 
in male patients). The resulting five-parameter prognostic score delineated three
groups of patients with median OS not reached, 38.5 months, and 14.4 months,
respectively (P < .0001), and was validated in an independent cohort of 165
patients (P < .0001).
CONCLUSION: A new prognostic score including ASXL1 status, age, hemoglobin, WBC, 
and platelet counts defines three groups of CMML patients with distinct outcomes.
Based on concordance analysis, this score appears more discriminative than those 
based solely on clinical parameters.

PMID: 23690417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1832(10):1528-37. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.05.010. Epub 2013 May 18.

linc-UBC1 physically associates with polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and
acts as a negative prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis and survival in
bladder cancer.

He W(1), Cai Q, Sun F, Zhong G, Wang P, Liu H, Luo J, Yu H, Huang J, Lin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Guangzhou, People's
Republic of China. hewang525344@126.com

OBJECTIVES: The human genome encodes many long intergenic noncoding RNAs
(lincRNAs). However, their biological functions, molecular mechanisms and
prognostic values associated with bladder cancer remain to be elucidated. Here we
investigated a lincRNA termed linc-UBC1 (Up-regulated in bladder cancer 1) and
evaluated its prognostic value in bladder cancer patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of linc-UBC1 was evaluated by quantitative
reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) in 102 bladder cancer tissue samples and
normal adjacent tissues. The functions of linc-UBC1 on cell proliferation,
migration, invasion, colony formation, tumorigenicity and metastatic potential
were evaluated by knockdown strategy in vitro and in vivo. RNA
immunoprecipitation (RIP) was performed to confirm that linc-UBC1 physically
associates with EZH2 and SUZ12, core components of polycomb repressive complex 2 
(PRC2). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was conducted to examine histone
modification status.
RESULTS: qRT-PCR confirmed that linc-UBC1 expression is up-regulated in 60 cases 
(58.8%) in bladder cancer tissues compared with normal adjacent tissues, and its 
overexpression correlates with lymph node metastasis and poor survival. Further
functional analysis demonstrated that knockdown of linc-UBC1 attenuates bladder
cancer cell proliferation, motility, invasion, colony formation ability,
tumorigenicity and metastatic potential. Importantly, the inhibitory effect of
linc-UBC1 on cell proliferation was also observed in primary bladder cancer cells
obtained from patients. RIP and ChIP assay confirmed that linc-UBC1 physically
associates with PRC2 complex and regulates histone modification status of target 
genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequently overexpressed linc-UBC1 physically associates with PRC2
complex, and acts as a negative prognostic factor for lymph node metastasis and
survival in bladder cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23688781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1833(10):2190-200. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.05.014. Epub 2013 May 17.

Downregulation of Ezh2 methyltransferase by FOXP3: new insight of FOXP3 into
chromatin remodeling?

Shen Z(1), Chen L, Yang X, Zhao Y, Pier E, Zhang X, Yang X, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China. zhushencq@gmail.com

Transcription factor FOXP3 (forkhead box P3) is found initially as a key
regulator in regulatory T cells. Recently its expression has been demonstrated in
some non-lymphoid normal and cancerous cells. Now FOXP3 has been proven to
regulate cancer-related genes, especially suppressor genes in breast cancer. But 
the mechanisms by which FOXP3 regulates suppressor genes are not fully
determined. In this study, we found the inverse correlation between FOXP3 and
Ezh2, an enzyme for histone H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and a central
epigenetic regulator in cancer. The overexpression of FOXP3 weakened Ezh2's
enhancement on the mammosphere formation, cell proliferation, directional
migration, and colony forming ability of T47D cells. We demonstrated that FOXP3
could downregulate Ezh2 protein level and this depended on not only the FOXP3
expression amount, but also the nuclear localization of FOXP3. More importantly, 
we demonstrated FOXP3 accelerated Ezh2 protein degradation through the
polyubiquitination-proteasome pathway by enhancing the transcription of E3 ligase
Praja1 directly. These results provided a new mechanism for FOXP3 in histone
modifications as an Ezh2 suppressor and supported new evidence for FOXP3 as a
tumor suppressor in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23688634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):593-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.05.002.
Epub 2013 May 17.

Canonical and non-canonical roles of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in
mammary development and cancer.

Bae WK(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD, 20892-0822, USA; Department of Hematology and Oncology, Chonnam
National University, Hwasun Hospital, Hwasun-gun, Jeollanamdo, South Korea.
Electronic address: wookyun.bae@mail.nih.gov.

Although hormones and downstream transcription factors are considered main
drivers directing mammary gland development and oncogenic transformation, an
emerging body of evidence suggests these processes are modulated by dynamic
histone methylation landscapes. The methyltransferase EZH2 catalyzes the
formation of trimethyl groups on lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3) and loss- and 
gain-of-function studies have provided insight into its role in normal mammary
development and oncogenic transformation. EZH2 controls the homeostasis of mouse 
mammary stem cells, and mammary epithelium devoid of EZH2 does not undergo
functional development during pregnancy, possibly due to a paucity of stem cells.
EZH2 levels are frequently elevated in breast cancer suggesting a link between
H3K27me3 and cell proliferation. In addition to its role as epigenetic regulator,
recent studies have placed EZH2 into the category of transcriptional
co-activators and thus opened the possibility of non-canonical signaling
pathways. In contrast to solid tumors, loss of EZH2 from hematopoietic cells has 
been linked to malignancies (Fig. 1). The challenge will be to understand not
only cell-specific functions of EZH2, but also the extent to which it relies on
its enzymatic activity versus its ability to serve as a transcriptional
co-factor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3843995
PMID: 23684884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):839-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.008. Epub 2013 
May 16.

Phosphorylation of EZH2 activates STAT3 signaling via STAT3 methylation and
promotes tumorigenicity of glioblastoma stem-like cells.

Kim E(1), Kim M, Woo DH, Shin Y, Shin J, Chang N, Oh YT, Kim H, Rheey J, Nakano
I, Lee C, Joo KM, Rich JN, Nam DH, Lee J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):711-3.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) displays cellular hierarchies harboring a
subpopulation of stem-like cells (GSCs). Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), the 
lysine methyltransferase of Polycomb repressive complex 2, mediates
transcriptional repression of prodifferentiation genes in both normal and
neoplastic stem cells. An oncogenic role of EZH2 as a transcriptional silencer is
well established; however, additional functions of EZH2 are incompletely
understood. Here, we show that EZH2 binds to and methylates STAT3, leading to
enhanced STAT3 activity by increased tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3. The
EZH2-STAT3 interaction preferentially occurs in GSCs relative to non-stem bulk
tumor cells, and it requires a specific phosphorylation of EZH2. Inhibition of
EZH2 reverses the silencing of Polycomb target genes and diminishes STAT3
activity, suggesting therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4109796
PMID: 23684459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):677-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.011.

EZH2 is required for germinal center formation and somatic EZH2 mutations promote
lymphoid transformation.

Béguelin W(1), Popovic R, Teater M, Jiang Y, Bunting KL, Rosen M, Shen H, Yang
SN, Wang L, Ezponda T, Martinez-Garcia E, Zhang H, Zheng Y, Verma SK, McCabe MT, 
Ott HM, Van Aller GS, Kruger RG, Liu Y, McHugh CF, Scott DW, Chung YR, Kelleher
N, Shaknovich R, Creasy CL, Gascoyne RD, Wong KK, Cerchietti L, Levine RL,
Abdel-Wahab O, Licht JD, Elemento O, Melnick AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):563-5.

The EZH2 histone methyltransferase is highly expressed in germinal center (GC) B 
cells and targeted by somatic mutations in B cell lymphomas. Here, we find that
EZH2 deletion or pharmacologic inhibition suppresses GC formation and functions. 
EZH2 represses proliferation checkpoint genes and helps establish bivalent
chromatin domains at key regulatory loci to transiently suppress GC B cell
differentiation. Somatic mutations reinforce these physiological effects through 
enhanced silencing of EZH2 targets. Conditional expression of mutant EZH2 in mice
induces GC hyperplasia and accelerated lymphomagenesis in cooperation with BCL2. 
GC B cell (GCB)-type diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) are mostly addicted 
to EZH2 but not the more differentiated activated B cell (ABC)-type DLBCLs, thus 
clarifying the therapeutic scope of EZH2 targeting.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3681809
PMID: 23680150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):563-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.028.

EZH2: an epigenetic gatekeeper promoting lymphomagenesis.

Heyn H(1), Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, 08908 Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 May 13;23(5):677-92.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Béguelin and colleagues highlight EZH2 as an
essential regulator for B cell activation and report an addiction of germinal
center-derived neoplasms to EZH2 activity. This reversible process is
specifically targetable and hence presents high translational value for lymphoma 
therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23680141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Mol Diagn. 2013 Jul;15(4):473-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2013.03.003. Epub 2013 
May 14.

Robustness of amplicon deep sequencing underlines its utility in clinical
applications.

Grossmann V(1), Roller A, Klein HU, Weissmann S, Kern W, Haferlach C, Dugas M,
Haferlach T, Schnittger S, Kohlmann A.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

We investigated the robustness of amplicon deep sequencing to study its utility
in routine clinical applications offering patient-specific individualized assays 
for molecular disease characterization and monitoring. Amplicons were designed
targeting RUNX1, CEBPA, CBL, NRAS, KRAS, DNMT3A, EZH2, and TP53 using different
PCR amplification strategies and Roche GS FLX Titanium and Illumina MiSeq
sequencing platforms. Thirty-three patients with leukemia were selected as an
exemplary cohort representing heterogeneous cancer specimens. Both standard
two-primer amplification and four-primer microfluidics PCRs yielded highly linear
characteristics in detecting molecular alterations in series of dilution
experiments. By fitting a linear mixed-effects model to the logarithmized data, a
slope ß of -1.000 (95% CI, ±0.046) was obtained for two-primer assays and of
-0.998 (95% CI, ±0.105) was obtained for four-primer assays, which represented a 
near-perfect decrease of the mutation load. Furthermore, data are presented on
technical precision, limit of detection, and occurrence of small subclones in
TP53- and RUNX1-mutated patients to identify clonal disease progression and
residual disease. We demonstrate that, depending on the local sequence context
for each amplicon, the limit of detection of the assay cannot be lower than a
range of 0.25% to 3.5%. In conclusion, amplicon deep sequencing enabled the
assessment of mutations in a highly robust manner and across a broad range of
relative frequencies of mutations. This assay detects residual disease or
identifies mutations with predictive relevance to direct treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23680131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochem J. 2013 Jul 15;453(2):241-7. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130439.

Convergent evolution of chromatin modification by structurally distinct enzymes: 
comparative enzymology of histone H3 Lys²7 methylation by human polycomb
repressive complex 2 and vSET.

Swalm BM(1), Hallenbeck KK, Majer CR, Jin L, Scott MP, Moyer MP, Copeland RA,
Wigle TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme Inc., 400 Technology Square, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

H3K27 (histone H3 Lys27) methylation is an important epigenetic modification that
regulates gene transcription. In humans, EZH (enhancer of zeste homologue) 1 and 
EZH2 are the only enzymes capable of catalysing methylation of H3K27. There is
great interest in understanding structure-function relationships for EZH2, as
genetic alterations in this enzyme are thought to play a causal role in a number 
of human cancers. EZH2 is challenging to study because it is only active in the
context of the multi-subunit PRC2 (polycomb repressive complex 2). vSET is a
viral lysine methyltransferase that represents the smallest protein unit capable 
of catalysing H3K27 methylation. The crystal structure of this minimal catalytic 
protein has been solved and researchers have suggested that vSET might prove
useful as an EZH2 surrogate for the development of active site-directed
inhibitors. To test this proposition, we conducted comparative enzymatic analysis
of human EZH2 and vSET and report that, although both enzymes share similar
preferences for methylation of H3K27, they diverge in terms of their
permissiveness for catalysing methylation of alternative histone lysine sites,
their relative preferences for utilization of multimeric macromolecular
substrates, their active site primary sequences and, most importantly, their
sensitivity to inhibition by drug-like small molecules. The cumulative data led
us to suggest that EZH2 and vSET have very distinct active site structures,
despite the commonality of the reaction catalysed by the two enzymes. Hence, the 
EZH2 and vSET pair of enzymes represent an example of convergent evolution in
which distinct structural solutions have developed to solve a common catalytic
need.

PMID: 23679895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Sep;34(9):1984-93. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt165. Epub 2013 May
14.

FEZF2, a novel 3p14 tumor suppressor gene, represses oncogene EZH2 and MDM2
expression and is frequently methylated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Shu XS(1), Li L, Ji M, Cheng Y, Ying J, Fan Y, Zhong L, Liu X, Tsao SW, Chan AT, 
Tao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Oncology, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sir YK Pao Center for Cancer and Li Ka
Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong and CUHK 
Shenzhen Research Institute, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is an Epstein-Barr virus-associated tumor
prevalent in southern China and southeast Asia, with the 3p14-p12 locus reported 
as a critical tumor suppressor gene (TSG) region during its pathogenesis. We
identified a novel 3p14.2 TSG, FEZF2 (FEZ family zinc finger 2), for NPC. FEZF2
is readily expressed in normal tissues including upper respiratory epithelium,
testis, brain and ovary tissues, as well as in immortalized nasopharyngeal
epithelial cell line NP69, but it is completely silenced in NPC cell lines due to
CpG methylation of its promoter, although no homozygous deletion of FEZF2 was
detected. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment restored FEZF2 expression in NPC cell 
lines along with its promoter demethylation. FEZF2 was frequently downregulated
in NPC tumors, with promoter methylation detected in 75.5% of tumors, but only in
7.1% of normal nasopharyngeal tissues. Restored FEZF2 expression suppressed NPC
cell clonogenicity through inducing G2/M cell cycle arrest and apoptosis and also
inhibited NPC cell migration and stemness. FEZF2 acted as a histone
deacetylase-associated repressor downregulating multiple oncogenes including EZH2
and MDM2, through direct binding to their promoters. Concomitantly,
overexpression of EZH2 was frequently detected in NPC tumors. Thus, we have
identified FEZF2 as a novel 3p14.2 TSG frequently inactivated by promoter
methylation in NPC, which functions as a repressor downregulating multiple
oncogene expression.

PMID: 23677067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jun;123(6):2502-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI67963. Epub 2013 May 15.

The genomic landscape of small intestine neuroendocrine tumors.

Banck MS(1), Kanwar R, Kulkarni AA, Boora GK, Metge F, Kipp BR, Zhang L, Thorland
EC, Minn KT, Tentu R, Eckloff BW, Wieben ED, Wu Y, Cunningham JM, Nagorney DM,
Gilbert JA, Ames MM, Beutler AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.
banck.michaela@mayo.edu

Small intestine neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) are the most common malignancy of
the small bowel. Several clinical trials target PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling; however,
it is unknown whether these or other genes are genetically altered in these
tumors. To address the underlying genetics, we analyzed 48 SI-NETs by massively
parallel exome sequencing. We detected an average of 0.1 somatic single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) per 106 nucleotides (range, 0-0.59), mostly
transitions (C>T and A>G), which suggests that SI-NETs are stable cancers. 197
protein-altering somatic SNVs affected a preponderance of cancer genes, including
FGFR2, MEN1, HOOK3, EZH2, MLF1, CARD11, VHL, NONO, and SMAD1. Integrative
analysis of SNVs and somatic copy number variations identified recurrently
altered mechanisms of carcinogenesis: chromatin remodeling, DNA damage,
apoptosis, RAS signaling, and axon guidance. Candidate therapeutically relevant
alterations were found in 35 patients, including SRC, SMAD family genes, AURKA,
EGFR, HSP90, and PDGFR. Mutually exclusive amplification of AKT1 or AKT2 was the 
most common event in the 16 patients with alterations of PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling.
We conclude that sequencing-based analysis may provide provisional grouping of
SI-NETs by therapeutic targets or deregulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC3668835
PMID: 23676460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS Genet. 2013 May;9(5):e1003483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003483. Epub 2013 
May 9.

Liver x receptors protect from development of prostatic intra-epithelial
neoplasia in mice.

Pommier AJ(1), Dufour J, Alves G, Viennois E, De Boussac H, Trousson A, Volle DH,
Caira F, Val P, Arnaud P, Lobaccaro JM, Baron S.

Author information: 
(1)Clermont Université, Université Blaise Pascal, Génétique Reproduction et
Développement, BP 10448 Clermont-Ferrand, France.

LXR (Liver X Receptors) act as "sensor" proteins that regulate cholesterol
uptake, storage, and efflux. LXR signaling is known to influence proliferation of
different cell types including human prostatic carcinoma (PCa) cell lines. This
study shows that deletion of LXR in mouse fed a high-cholesterol diet
recapitulates initial steps of PCa development. Elevation of circulating
cholesterol in Lxraß-/- double knockout mice results in aberrant cholesterol
ester accumulation and prostatic intra-epithelial neoplasia. This phenotype is
linked to increased expression of the histone methyl transferase EZH2 (Enhancer
of Zeste Homolog 2), which results in the down-regulation of the tumor
suppressors Msmb and Nkx3.1 through increased methylation of lysine 27 of histone
H3 (H3K27) on their promoter regions. Altogether, our data provide a novel link
between LXR, cholesterol homeostasis, and epigenetic control of tumor suppressor 
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3649972
PMID: 23675307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cancer Cytopathol. 2013 Nov;121(11):644-52. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21310. Epub 2013
May 14.

Immunohistochemical analysis of E-cadherin and zeste homolog 2 expression in
endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Gao L(1), Antic T, Hyjek E, Gong C, Mueller J, Waxman I, DeMay RM, Reeves W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated that partial or complete loss of
E-cadherin (EC) and nuclear accumulation of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) are hallmarks 
of poorly differentiated pancreatic adenocarcinoma (PAC). Depletion of EZH2
sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy in vitro. The objective of this study was
to determine EC and EZH2 expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in samples
obtained by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) as
potential biomarkers for treatment and disease prognosis.
METHODS: Thirty-eight EUS-FNA samples from patients with a PAC diagnosis were
analyzed by IHC for EC and EZH2 expression. Seven corresponding surgical
resection specimens were included in the study. The intensity of EZH2 and EC
expression in PAC and in normal gastrointestinal pick-ups (internal positive
control) was scored by using a 4-tier grading system.
RESULTS: EC demonstrated a focal, weak-to-moderate decrease in 24 PAC samples.
Complete loss of EC expression was observed in the poorly differentiated areas
represented by single tumor cells. The average staining intensity of EC in
samples of poorly differentiated PAC was significantly lower than that of
moderately differentiated PAC samples (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0005). EZH2 was variably positive in 
31 of 38 PAC samples. The average staining intensity of EZH2 in moderately and
poorly differentiated PACs did not differ significantly (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.81).
CONCLUSIONS: EC and EZH2 expression was determined reliably by IHC on paraffin
sections of EUS-FNA cell block specimens. The current results were consistent
with prior reports indicating a decrease or loss of EC expression in poorly
differentiated PAC. However, EZH2 expression did not always correlate inversely
with EC expression and was more heterogeneous.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 23674382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1990-2000. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.110. Epub 2013 May 
14.

Polycomb subunits Ezh1 and Ezh2 regulate the Merkel cell differentiation program 
in skin stem cells.

Bardot ES(1), Valdes VJ, Zhang J, Perdigoto CN, Nicolis S, Hearn SA, Silva JM,
Ezhkova E.

Author information: 
(1)Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2013 Jul 17;32(14):1970-1.

While the Polycomb complex is known to regulate cell identity in ES cells, its
role in controlling tissue-specific stem cells is not well understood. Here we
show that removal of Ezh1 and Ezh2, key Polycomb subunits, from mouse skin
results in a marked change in fate determination in epidermal progenitor cells,
leading to an increase in the number of lineage-committed Merkel cells, a
specialized subtype of skin cells involved in mechanotransduction. By dissecting 
the genetic mechanism, we showed that the Polycomb complex restricts
differentiation of epidermal progenitor cells by repressing the transcription
factor Sox2. Ablation of Sox2 results in a dramatic loss of Merkel cells,
indicating that Sox2 is a critical regulator of Merkel cell specification. We
show that Sox2 directly activates Atoh1, the obligate regulator of Merkel cell
differentiation. Concordantly, ablation of Sox2 attenuated the Ezh1/2-null
phenotype, confirming the importance of Polycomb-mediated repression of Sox2 in
maintaining the epidermal progenitor cell state. Together, these findings define 
a novel regulatory network by which the Polycomb complex maintains the progenitor
cell state and governs differentiation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3715854
PMID: 23673358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Blood. 2013 May 9;121(19):3811-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-451757.

The myelodysplastic syndrome as a prototypical epigenetic disease.

Issa JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, 
USA.jpissa@temple.edu

The myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a clonal disorder characterized by
increased stem cell proliferation coupled with aberrant differentiation resulting
in a high rate of apoptosis and eventual symptoms related to bone marrow failure.
Cellular differentiation is an epigenetic process that requires specific and
highly ordered DNA methylation and histone modification programs. Aberrant
differentiation in MDS can often be traced to abnormal DNA methylation (both
gains and losses of DNA methylation genome wide and at specific loci) as well as 
mutations in genes that regulate epigenetic programs (TET2 and DNMT3a, both
involved in DNA methylation control; EZH2 and ASXL1, both involved in histone
methylation control). The epigenetic nature of MDS may explain in part the
serendipitous observation that it is the disease most responsive to DNA
methylation inhibitors; other epigenetic-acting drugs are being explored in MDS
as well. Progression in MDS is characterized by further acquisition of epigenetic
defects as well as mutations in growth-controlling genes that seem to tip the
proliferation/apoptosis balance and result in the development of acute
myelogenous leukemia. Although MDS is clinically and physiologically
heterogeneous, a case can be made that subsets of the disease can be largely
explained by disordered stem cell epigenetics.

PMCID: PMC3650703
PMID: 23660859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Aug;11(8):815-27. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0695. Epub
2013 May 3.

The changing mutational landscape of acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic
syndrome.

Larsson CA(1), Cote G, Quintás-Cardama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Unit 428, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
aquintas@mdanderson.org

Over the past few years, large-scale genomic studies of patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) have unveiled
recurrent somatic mutations in genes involved in epigenetic regulation (DNMT3A,
IDH1/2, TET2, ASXL1, EZH2 and MLL) and the spliceosomal machinery (SF3B1, U2AF1, 
SRSF2, ZRSR2, SF3A1, PRPF40B, U2AF2, and SF1). The identification of these
mutations and their impact on prognostication has led to improvements in
risk-stratification strategies and has also provided new potential targets for
the treatment of these myeloid malignancies. In this review, we discuss the most 
recently identified genetic abnormalities described in MDS and AML and appraise
the current status quo of the dynamics of acquisition of mutant alleles in the
pathogenesis of AML, during the transformation from MDS to AML, and in the
context of relapse after conventional chemotherapy.IMPLICATIONS: Identification
of somatic mutations in AML and MDS suggests new targets for therapeutic
development.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4123851
PMID: 23645565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Epigenetics. 2013 May;8(5):464-76. doi: 10.4161/epi.24532. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Multifaceted role of EZH2 in breast and prostate tumorigenesis: epigenetics and
beyond.

Deb G(1), Thakur VS, Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Overexpression of EZH2 and other PRC2 subunits, such as SUZ12, is associated with
tumor progression and poor prognosis in several human malignancies. Nevertheless,
the underlying mechanisms driving aberrant EZH2 expression are poorly understood.
This review provides molecular insights into the essential role of EZH2 in breast
and prostate tumorigenesis. We addressed the current understanding on the
oncogenic role of EZH2, with an emphasis on: (1) the less known PRC2-independent 
role of EZH2 in gene activation, in addition to its canonical role in
transcriptional silencing as a histone methyltransferase catalyzing the
trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27; (2) causes and consequences of its
deregulation in tumor cells and; (3) collaboration of EZH2 with other epigenetic 
and hormone receptor-mediated oncogenic signaling pathways. We also summarize how
EZH2 has emerged as a promising therapeutic target in hormone-refractory cancers 
and the prospects for integrating EZH2 blockade with available pharmacological
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3741216
PMID: 23644490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Diagn Cytopathol. 2014 Feb;42(2):111-6. doi: 10.1002/dc.22999. Epub 2013 May 2.

EZH2, a unique marker of malignancy in effusion cytology.

Jiang H(1), Gupta R, Somma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York.

Distinguishing reactive mesothelial cells from metastatic disease, typically
adenocarcinoma, in effusion cytology can be challenging at times. We currently
use a panel of immunocytochemical markers for select cases including MOC-31 and
BerEp4, but difficulties still exist. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) plays 
important roles in epigenetic silencing and cell cycle regulation and is
upregulated in a wide variety of malignancies. Thus, we hypothesized that EZH2
immunocytochemistry, which to our knowledge has not yet been reported on cytology
material, might serve as a unique marker of malignancy in morphologically
equivocal effusion specimens by highlighting aberrant protein expression in
malignant cells. A total of 96 (48 benign and 48 malignant) effusion cases were
selected retrospectively from our department archives. All malignant cases were
metastatic adenocarcinomas except for three high grade neuroendocrine carcinomas 
(two lungs and one ovary), one cervical squamous cell carcinoma, and one
epithelioid endometrial stromal sarcoma. The 48 benign cases were all negative
for EZH2, and 43 of 48 malignant effusions were positive. As a solitary marker,
EZH2 exhibited a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 100% (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). EZH2 
functioned as a unique and accurate marker of malignancy in this series of
effusions. Relative to published data, EZH2 demonstrated a sensitivity comparable
to MOC-31 and superior to BerEp4, and a specificity superior to both of these
commonly used immunostains. Thus, EZH2 is likely to be of great value as an
adjunct to morphology in diagnosing malignancy in effusion specimens.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23636867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Protein Cell. 2013 May;4(5):331-41. doi: 10.1007/s13238-013-2093-2. Epub 2013 Apr
30.

EZH2, an epigenetic driver of prostate cancer.

Yang YA(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 has been in the limelight of the field of
cancer epigenetics for a decade now since it was first discovered to exhibit an
elevated expression in metastatic prostate cancer. It persists to attract much
scientific attention due to its important role in the process of cancer
development and its potential of being an effective therapeutic target. Thus here
we review the dysregulation of EZH2 in prostate cancer, its function, upstream
regulators, downstream effectors, and current status of EZH2-targeting
approaches. This review therefore provides a comprehensive overview of EZH2 in
the context of prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC4131440
PMID: 23636686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 1;73(11):3470-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4524-T. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

Growth of triple-negative breast cancer cells relies upon coordinate autocrine
expression of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8.

Hartman ZC(1), Poage GM, den Hollander P, Tsimelzon A, Hill J, Panupinthu N,
Zhang Y, Mazumdar A, Hilsenbeck SG, Mills GB, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention and Systems Biology, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 1;12(17):2705-6.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC) are aggressive with no effective targeted
therapies. A combined database analysis identified 32 inflammation-related genes 
differentially expressed in TNBCs and 10 proved critical for
anchorage-independent growth. In TNBC cells, an LPA-LPAR2-EZH2 NF-<U+03BA>B signaling
cascade was essential for expression of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and CXCL1.
Concurrent inhibition of IL-6 and IL-8 expression dramatically inhibited colony
formation and cell survival in vitro and stanched tumor engraftment and growth in
vivo. A Cox multivariable analysis of patient specimens revealed that IL-6 and
IL-8 expression predicted patient survival times. Together these findings offer a
rationale for dual inhibition of IL-6/IL-8 signaling as a therapeutic strategy to
improve outcomes for patients with TNBCs.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3853111
PMID: 23633491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. EMBO J. 2013 May 29;32(11):1584-97. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.95. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

BRCA1 is a negative modulator of the PRC2 complex.

Wang L(1), Zeng X, Chen S, Ding L, Zhong J, Zhao JC, Wang L, Sarver A, Koller A, 
Zhi J, Ma Y, Yu J, Chen J, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

The Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is important for maintenance of stem
cell pluripotency and suppression of cell differentiation by promoting histone H3
lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and transcriptional repression of
differentiation genes. Here we show that the tumour-suppressor protein BRCA1
interacts with the Polycomb protein EZH2 in mouse embryonic stem (ES) and human
breast cancer cells. The BRCA1-binding region in EZH2 overlaps with the noncoding
RNA (ncRNA)-binding domain, and BRCA1 expression inhibits the binding of EZH2 to 
the HOTAIR ncRNA. Decreased expression of BRCA1 causes genome-wide EZH2
re-targeting and elevates H3K27me3 levels at PRC2 target loci in both mouse ES
and human breast cancer cells. BRCA1 deficiency blocks ES cell differentiation
and enhances breast cancer migration and invasion in an EZH2-dependent manner.
These results reveal that BRCA1 is a key negative modulator of PRC2 and that loss
of BRCA1 inhibits ES cell differentiation and enhances an aggressive breast
cancer phenotype by affecting PRC2 function.

PMCID: PMC3671259
PMID: 23624935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. EMBO J. 2013 May 29;32(11):1598-612. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.93. Epub 2013 Apr
26.

The chromodomain helicase Chd4 is required for Polycomb-mediated inhibition of
astroglial differentiation.

Sparmann A(1), Xie Y, Verhoeven E, Vermeulen M, Lancini C, Gargiulo G, Hulsman D,
Mann M, Knoblich JA, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Center for Biomedical Genetics and Netherlands
Proteomics Center, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066CX Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form transcriptional repressor complexes with
well-established functions during cell-fate determination. Yet, the mechanisms
underlying their regulation remain poorly understood. Here, we extend the role of
Polycomb complexes in the temporal control of neural progenitor cell (NPC)
commitment by demonstrating that the PcG protein Ezh2 is necessary to prevent the
premature onset of gliogenesis. In addition, we identify the chromodomain
helicase DNA-binding protein 4 (Chd4) as a critical interaction partner of Ezh2
required specifically for PcG-mediated suppression of the key astrogenic marker
gene GFAP. Accordingly, in vivo depletion of Chd4 in the developing neocortex
promotes astrogenesis. Collectively, these results demonstrate that PcG proteins 
operate in a highly dynamic, developmental stage-dependent fashion during neural 
differentiation and suggest that target gene-specific mechanisms regulate
Polycomb function during sequential cell-fate decisions.

PMCID: PMC3671258
PMID: 23624931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7922-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303800110. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Durable tumor regression in genetically altered malignant rhabdoid tumors by
inhibition of methyltransferase EZH2.

Knutson SK(1), Warholic NM, Wigle TJ, Klaus CR, Allain CJ, Raimondi A, Porter
Scott M, Chesworth R, Moyer MP, Copeland RA, Richon VM, Pollock RM, Kuntz KW,
Keilhack H.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Inactivation of the switch/sucrose nonfermentable complex component SMARCB1 is
extremely prevalent in pediatric malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) or atypical
teratoid rhabdoid tumors. This alteration is hypothesized to confer oncogenic
dependency on EZH2 in these cancers. We report the discovery of a potent,
selective, and orally bioavailable small-molecule inhibitor of EZH2 enzymatic
activity,
(N-((4,6-dimethyl-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl)methyl)-5-(ethyl(tetrahydro-2H-py
ran-4-yl)amino)-4-methyl-4'-(morpholinomethyl)-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-carboxamide).
The compound induces apoptosis and differentiation specifically in
SMARCB1-deleted MRT cells. Treatment of xenograft-bearing mice with
(N-((4,6-dimethyl-2-oxo-1,2-dihydropyridin-3-yl)methyl)-5-(ethyl(tetrahydro-2H-py
ran-4-yl)amino)-4-methyl-4'-(morpholinomethyl)-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-carboxamide)
leads to dose-dependent regression of MRTs with correlative diminution of
intratumoral trimethylation levels of lysine 27 on histone H3, and prevention of 
tumor regrowth after dosing cessation. These data demonstrate the dependency of
SMARCB1 mutant MRTs on EZH2 enzymatic activity and portend the utility of
EZH2-targeted drugs for the treatment of these genetically defined cancers.

PMCID: PMC3651445
PMID: 23620515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Front Med. 2013 Jun;7(2):231-41. doi: 10.1007/s11684-013-0253-7. Epub 2013 Apr
26.

Epigenetic dysregulation in hepatocellular carcinoma: focus on polycomb group
proteins.

Au SL(1), Ng IO, Wong CM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Liver Research and Department of Pathology, Li Ka
Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development is characterized by the presence of
epigenetic alterations, including promoter DNA hypermethylation and
post-translational modifications of histone, which profoundly affect expression
of a wide repertoire of genes critical for cancer development. Emerging data
suggest that deregulation of polycomb group (PcG) proteins, which are key
chromatin modifiers repressing gene transcription during developmental stage,
plays a causative role in oncogenesis. PcG proteins assemble into polycomb
repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) to impose
the histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) modification for repression.
In this review, we will first recapitulate the mechanisms of two key epigenetic
pathways: DNA methylation and histone modifications. Specifically, we will focus 
our discussion on the molecular roles of PcG proteins. Next, we will highlight
recent findings on PcG proteins, their clinicopathological implication and their 
downstream molecular consequence in hepatocarcinogenesis. Last but not least, we 
will consider the therapeutic potential of targeting enhancer of zeste homolog 2 
(EZH2) as a possible treatment for HCC. Improving our understanding on the roles 
of PcG proteins in hepatocarcinogenesis can benefit the development of
epigenetic-based therapy.

PMID: 23620257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Leukemia. 2013 Sep;27(9):1861-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.119. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

Mutations and prognosis in primary myelofibrosis.

Vannucchi AM(1), Lasho TL, Guglielmelli P, Biamonte F, Pardanani A, Pereira A,
Finke C, Score J, Gangat N, Mannarelli C, Ketterling RP, Rotunno G, Knudson RA,
Susini MC, Laborde RR, Spolverini A, Pancrazzi A, Pieri L, Manfredini R,
Tagliafico E, Zini R, Jones A, Zoi K, Reiter A, Duncombe A, Pietra D, Rumi E,
Cervantes F, Barosi G, Cazzola M, Cross NC, Tefferi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. amvannucchi@unifi.it

Patient outcome in primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is significantly influenced by
karyotype. We studied 879 PMF patients to determine the individual and
combinatorial prognostic relevance of somatic mutations. Analysis was performed
in 483 European patients and the seminal observations were validated in 396 Mayo 
Clinic patients. Samples from the European cohort, collected at time of
diagnosis, were analyzed for mutations in ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, TET2, DNMT3A, CBL, 
IDH1, IDH2, MPL and JAK2. Of these, ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations
inter-independently predicted shortened survival. However, only ASXL1 mutations
(HR: 2.02; P<0.001) remained significant in the context of the International
Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS). These observations were validated in the Mayo
Clinic cohort where mutation and survival analyses were performed from time of
referral. ASXL1, SRSF2 and EZH2 mutations were independently associated with poor
survival, but only ASXL1 mutations held their prognostic relevance (HR: 1.4;
P=0.04) independent of the Dynamic IPSS (DIPSS)-plus model, which incorporates
cytogenetic risk. In the European cohort, leukemia-free survival was negatively
affected by IDH1/2, SRSF2 and ASXL1 mutations and in the Mayo cohort by IDH1 and 
SRSF2 mutations. Mutational profiling for ASXL1, EZH2, SRSF2 and IDH identifies
PMF patients who are at risk for premature death or leukemic transformation.

PMID: 23619563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Med. 2013 May 20;19:115-23. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2013.00005.

Differential microRNA profiles and their functional implications in different
immunogenetic subsets of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.

Papakonstantinou N(1), Ntoufa S, Chartomatsidou E, Papadopoulos G, Hatzigeorgiou 
A, Anagnostopoulos A, Chlichlia K, Ghia P, Muzio M, Belessi C, Stamatopoulos K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunobiology, Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece.

Critical processes of B-cell physiology, including immune signaling through the
B-cell receptor (BcR) and/or Toll-like receptors (TLRs), are targeted by
microRNAs. With this in mind and also given the important role of BcR and TLR
signaling and microRNAs in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), we investigated
whether microRNAs could be implicated in shaping the behavior of CLL clones with 
distinct BcR and TLR molecular and functional profiles. To this end, we examined 
79 CLL cases for the expression of 33 microRNAs, selected on the following
criteria: (a) deregulated in CLL versus normal B-cells; (b) differentially
expressed in CLL subgroups with distinct clinicobiological features; and, (c) if 
meeting (a) + (b), having predicted targets in the immune signaling pathways.
Significant upregulation of miR-150, miR-29c, miR-143 and miR-223 and
downregulation of miR-15a was found in mutated versus unmutated CLL, with miR-15a
showing the highest fold difference. Comparison of two major subsets with
distinct stereotyped BcRs and signaling signatures, namely subset 1
[IGHV1/5/7-IGKV1(D)-39, unmutated, bad prognosis] versus subset 4
[IGHV4-34/IGKV2-30, mutated, good prognosis] revealed differences in the
expression of miR-150, miR-29b, miR-29c and miR-101, all down-regulated in subset
1. We were also able to link these distinct microRNA profiles with cellular
phenotypes, importantly showing that, in subset 1, miR-101 downregulation is
associated with overexpression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) protein,
which has been associated with clinical aggressiveness in other B-cell lymphomas.
In conclusion, specific miRNAs differentially expressed among CLL subgroups with 
distinct BcR and/or TLR signaling may modulate the biological and clinical
behavior of the CLL clones.

PMCID: PMC3667214
PMID: 23615967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. ACS Chem Biol. 2013;8(6):1324-34. doi: 10.1021/cb400133j. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

An orally bioavailable chemical probe of the Lysine Methyltransferases EZH2 and
EZH1.

Konze KD(1), Ma A, Li F, Barsyte-Lovejoy D, Parton T, Macnevin CJ, Liu F, Gao C, 
Huang XP, Kuznetsova E, Rougie M, Jiang A, Pattenden SG, Norris JL, James LI,
Roth BL, Brown PJ, Frye SV, Arrowsmith CH, Hahn KM, Wang GG, Vedadi M, Jin J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Division of
Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy,
§Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, <U+2225>Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, <U+22A5>National Institute of Mental Health
Psychoactive Drug Screening Program, and ¶Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, 
United States.

EZH2 or EZH1 is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb repressive complex 2 that
catalyzes methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27). The trimethylation of
H3K27 (H3K27me3) is a transcriptionally repressive post-translational
modification. Overexpression of EZH2 and hypertrimethylation of H3K27 have been
implicated in a number of cancers. Several selective inhibitors of EZH2 have been
reported recently. Herein we disclose UNC1999, the first orally bioavailable
inhibitor that has high in vitro potency for wild-type and mutant EZH2 as well as
EZH1, a closely related H3K27 methyltransferase that shares 96% sequence identity
with EZH2 in their respective catalytic domains. UNC1999 was highly selective for
EZH2 and EZH1 over a broad range of epigenetic and non-epigenetic targets,
competitive with the cofactor SAM and non-competitive with the peptide substrate.
This inhibitor potently reduced H3K27me3 levels in cells and selectively killed
diffused large B cell lymphoma cell lines harboring the EZH2(Y641N) mutant.
Importantly, UNC1999 was orally bioavailable in mice, making this inhibitor a
valuable tool for investigating the role of EZH2 and EZH1 in chronic animal
studies. We also designed and synthesized UNC2400, a close analogue of UNC1999
with potency >1,000-fold lower than that of UNC1999 as a negative control for
cell-based studies. Finally, we created a biotin-tagged UNC1999 (UNC2399), which 
enriched EZH2 in pull-down studies, and a UNC1999-dye conjugate (UNC2239) for
co-localization studies with EZH2 in live cells. Taken together, these compounds 
represent a set of useful tools for the biomedical community to investigate the
role of EZH2 and EZH1 in health and disease.

PMCID: PMC3773059
PMID: 23614352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 17;8(4):e61341. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061341. Print 2013.

EZH2 mutations are related to low blast percentage in bone marrow and -7/del(7q) 
in de novo acute myeloid leukemia.

Wang X(1), Dai H, Wang Q, Wang Q, Xu Y, Wang Y, Sun A, Ruan J, Chen S, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, People's Republic of China.

The purpose of the present work was to determine the incidence and clinical
implications of somatic EZH2 mutations in 714 patients with de novo acute
myelogenous leukemia by sequencing the entire coding region. EZH2 mutations were 
identified in 13/714 (1.8%) of AML patients were found to be more common in males
(P = 0.033). The presence of EZH2 mutations was significantly associated with
lower blast percentage (21-30%) in bone marrow (P<0.0001) and -7/del(7q) (P =
0.025). There were no differences in the incidence of mutation in 13 genes,
ASXL1, CBL, c-KIT, DNMT3A, FLT3, IDH1, IDH2, MLL, NPM1, NRAS, RUNX1, TET2, and
WT1, between patients with and without EZH2 mutations. No difference in complete 
remission, event-free survival, or overall survival was observed between patients
with and without EZH2 mutation (P>0.05). Overall, these results showed EZH2
mutation in de novo acute myeloid leukemia as a recurrent genetic abnormality to 
be associated with lower blast percentage in BM and -7/del(7q).

PMCID: PMC3629223
PMID: 23613835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ther Adv Hematol. 2013 Apr;4(2):81-91. doi: 10.1177/2040620712466864.

Epigenetic therapy of hematological malignancies: where are we now?

Popovic R(1), Shah MY, Licht JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

A growing amount of evidence points towards alterations in epigenetic machinery
as a leading cause in disease initiation and progression. Like genetic
alterations, misregulation of the epigenetic regulators can lead to abnormal gene
expression. However, unlike genetic events, the epigenetic machinery may be
targeted pharmacologically, potentially resulting in the reversal of a particular
epigenetic state. The success of DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase
inhibitors represents a proof of concept for the use of therapies intended to
target the epigenome in the treatment of hematological malignancies.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms underlying the efficacy of these agents
have not been completely elucidated. Recently, a large number of studies
sequencing cancer cell genomes identified recurring mutations of epigenetic
regulators, providing new insights into the molecular underpinnings of cancer.
Consequently, the efforts to identify specific epigenetic inhibitors have been
expanded in order to target particular subsets of patients. This review will
summarize the progress made using the currently available epigenetic therapies
and discuss some of the more recently identified targets whose inhibition may
present potential avenues for the treatment of hematologic malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3629753
PMID: 23610616  [PubMed]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jun;41(11):5704-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt285. Epub 2013
Apr 22.

The Scaffold attachment factor b1 (Safb1) regulates myogenic differentiation by
facilitating the transition of myogenic gene chromatin from a repressed to an
activated state.

Hernández-Hernández JM(1), Mallappa C, Nasipak BT, Oesterreich S, Imbalzano AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The regulation of skeletal muscle gene expression during myogenesis is mediated
by lineage-specific transcription factors in combination with numerous cofactors,
many of which modify chromatin structure. However, the involvement of scaffolding
proteins that organize chromatin and chromatin-associated regulatory proteins has
not extensively been explored in myogenic differentiation. Here, we report that
Scaffold attachment factor b1 (Safb1), primarily associated with transcriptional 
repression, functions as a positive regulator of myogenic differentiation.
Knockdown of Safb1 inhibited skeletal muscle marker gene expression and
differentiation in cultured C2C12 myoblasts. In contrast, over-expression
resulted in the premature expression of critical muscle structural proteins and
formation of enlarged thickened myotubes. Safb1 co-immunoprecipitated with MyoD
and was co-localized on myogenic promoters. Upon Safb1 knockdown, the repressive 
H3K27me3 histone mark and binding of the Polycomb histone methyltransferase Ezh2 
persisted at differentiation-dependent gene promoters. In contrast, the
appearance of histone marks and regulators associated with myogenic gene
activation, such as myogenin and the SWI/SNF chromatin remodelling enzyme ATPase,
Brg1, was blocked. These results indicate that the scaffold protein Safb1
contributes to the activation of skeletal muscle gene expression during myogenic 
differentiation by facilitating the transition of promoter sequences from a
repressive chromatin structure to one that is transcriptionally permissive.

PMCID: PMC3675494
PMID: 23609547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2013 May;163C(2):71-5. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31362. Epub 2013 Apr 18.

Molecular mechanisms of childhood overgrowth.

Tatton-Brown K(1), Weksberg R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, St George's University of London and the Royal
Marsden Hospital, London, UK. kate.tatton-brown@icr.ac.uk

This issue of the Seminar Series C is dedicated to the molecular mechanisms of
childhood overgrowth and celebrates the last decade of unprecedented gene
discovery. Constitutional gene disorders, somatic gene disorders and imprinting
dysregulation are each considered. The constitutional overgrowth genes discussed 
include NSD1, EZH2, GPC3, DIS3L2, and PTEN whilst the somatic overgrowth genes
include AKT3, PIK3R2, and PIK3CA. Abnormalities of imprinting, exemplified by
disruption of the (epi)genetic regulation of the imprinted 11p15 gene cluster,
constitutes the final section of this issue. Many of the genes discussed in this 
issue encode components of the PI3K/mTOR growth regulatory pathway. This
signaling cascade consists of dual, parallel branches, anchored by the
serine-threonine kinase, mTOR, and has diverse downstream effects including
inhibition of apoptosis, activation of protein synthesis, and enhanced cell
survival. Activation of the PI3K/mTOR pathway promotes growth whereas inhibition,
or abrogation, results in decreased cellular growth. Despite the rapid advances
of the last decade, there is still an enormous amount to discover. We hope that
some of the work reviewed in this issue will facilitate the next decade's
discoveries and we look forward to a 10 years as productive as the last.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23606607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genes Dev. 2013 May 1;27(9):985-90. doi: 10.1101/gad.217778.113. Epub 2013 Apr
19.

The histone H3.3K27M mutation in pediatric glioma reprograms H3K27 methylation
and gene expression.

Chan KM(1), Fang D, Gan H, Hashizume R, Yu C, Schroeder M, Gupta N, Mueller S,
James CD, Jenkins R, Sarkaria J, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of California at 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Recent studies have identified a Lys 27-to-methionine (K27M) mutation at one
allele of H3F3A, one of the two genes encoding histone H3 variant H3.3, in 60% of
high-grade pediatric glioma cases. The median survival of this group of patients 
after diagnosis is ~1 yr. Here we show that the levels of H3K27 di- and
trimethylation (H3K27me2 and H3K27me3) are reduced globally in H3.3K27M patient
samples due to the expression of the H3.3K27M mutant allele. Remarkably, we also 
observed that H3K27me3 and Ezh2 (the catalytic subunit of H3K27
methyltransferase) at chromatin are dramatically increased locally at hundreds of
gene loci in H3.3K27M patient cells. Moreover, the gain of H3K27me3 and Ezh2 at
gene promoters alters the expression of genes that are associated with various
cancer pathways. These results indicate that H3.3K27M mutation reprograms
epigenetic landscape and gene expression, which may drive tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3656328
PMID: 23603901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Lett. 2013 Aug 9;336(1):53-60. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.04.012. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

EZH2 blockade by RNA interference inhibits growth of ovarian cancer by
facilitating re-expression of p21(waf1/cip1) and by inhibiting mutant p53.

Seward S(1), Semaan A, Qazi AM, Gruzdyn OV, Chamala S, Bryant CC, Kumar S,
Cameron D, Sethi S, Ali-Fehmi R, Morris R, Bouwman DL, Munkarah AR, Weaver DW,
Gruber SA, Batchu RB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical Oncology & Developmental Therapeutics, Department of
Surgery, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) methyltransferase is a transcriptional
repressor. EZH2 is abnormally elevated in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). We
demonstrated that EZH2 knockdown inhibited cell growth, activated apoptosis, and 
enhanced chemosensitivity. Further, silencing of EZH2 resulted in re-expression
of p21(waf1/cip1) and down-regulation of mutant p53. Finally, EZH2 knockdown
contributed to attenuated EOC growth in SCID mice.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23603558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell Signal. 2013 Oct;25(10):2069-78. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.04.002. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

Wnt signaling pathway in rheumatoid arthritis, with special emphasis on the
different roles in synovial inflammation and bone remodeling.

Miao CG(1), Yang YY, He X, Li XF, Huang C, Huang Y, Zhang L, Lv XW, Jin Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University, 
Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230032, China.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic symmetrical autoimmune disease of unknown 
etiology that affects primarily the diarthrodial joints. Characteristic features 
of RA pathogenesis are synovial inflammation and proliferation accompanied by
cartilage erosion and bone loss. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) display an
important role in the pathogenesis of RA. Several lines of evidence show that the
Wnt signaling pathway significantly participates in the RA pathogenesis. The Wnt 
proteins are glycoproteins that bind to the Fz receptors on the cell surface,
which leads to several important biological functions, such as cell
differentiation, embryonic development, limb development and joint formation.
Accumulated evidence has suggested that this signaling pathway plays a key role
in the FLS activation, bone resorption and joint destruction during RA
development. Greater knowledge of the role of the Wnt signaling pathway in RA
could improve understanding of the RA pathogenesis and the differences in RA
clinical presentation and prognosis. In this review, new advances of the Wnt
signaling pathway in RA pathogenesis are discussed, with special emphasis on its 
different roles in synovial inflammation and bone remodeling. Further studies are
needed to reveal the important role of the members of the Wnt signaling pathway
in the RA pathogenesis and treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23602936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Oncol Lett. 2013 Apr;5(4):1223-1228. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

miR-26a inhibits invasion and metastasis of nasopharyngeal cancer by targeting
EZH2.

Yu L(1), Lu J, Zhang B, Liu X, Wang L, Li SY, Peng XH, Xu X, Tian WD, Li XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, P.R. China ;

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly invasive and metastatic type of cancer
that is widely prevalent in Southern China. Studies have shown that several
microRNAs (miRNAs) are implicated in NPC metastasis. Our previous studies have
demonstrated that miRNA miR-26a inhibits cell growth and tumorigenesis of NPC
through the repression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). However, the role
of miR-26a in NPC metastasis remains unknown. In this study, we showed that
ectopic expression of miR-26a inhibited the migratory and invasive capacities of 
NPC cells in vitro. Additionally, we used a murine model to investigate the role 
of miR-26a in NPC metastasis and results showed that miR-26a overexpression
suppresses the metastatic behavior of NPC cells in vivo. Furthermore, the data
demonstrated that miR-26a decreased the expression levels of EZH2 in vitro and in
vivo, suggesting that the antimetastatic effect of miR-26a in NPC was mediated by
regulating EZH2. Therefore, these findings indicate that miR-26a functions as an 
antimetastatic miRNA in NPC and that its antimetastatic effects are mediated
mainly by repressing EZH2 expression.

PMCID: PMC3629195
PMID: 23599767  [PubMed]


37. Oncol Lett. 2013 Apr;5(4):1149-1154. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Repression of Dicer is associated with invasive phenotype and chemoresistance in 
ovarian cancer.

Kuang Y(1), Cai J, Li D, Han Q, Cao J, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022; ;
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital, GuangXi
Medical University, Nanning 530021, P.R. China.

Dicer is a key enzyme that processes microRNA (miRNA) precursors into their
mature form, enabling them to regulate gene expression. However, the effects of
Dicer on the biological behavior of cancer cells remain largely unclear. In this 
study, it was demonstrated that Dicer down-regulation promoted cell
proliferation, migration and cell cycle progression in A2780 and SKOV3 ovarian
cancer cells. Furthermore, Dicer expression was significantly decreased in
cisplatin-resistant A2780 cells (A2780/DDP) compared with parental A2780 cells.
Knockdown of Dicer by RNA interference decreased the sensitivity of A2780 cells
to cisplatin. Moreover, EZH2 depletion by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) increased the
expression of Dicer in vitro. Our data suggest that Dicer is involved in numerous
biological/pathological processes, including drug resistance in ovarian cancer,
and that its expression may be regulated by EZH2.

PMCID: PMC3629258
PMID: 23599754  [PubMed]


38. Clin Adv Hematol Oncol. 2013 Feb;11(2):106-8.

Understanding and utilizing new molecular genetics in MDS.

Figueroa ME.

PMID: 23598913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 9;8(4):e60122. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060122. Print 2013.

Focused examination of the intestinal epithelium reveals transcriptional
signatures consistent with disturbances in enterocyte maturation and
differentiation during the course of SIV infection.

Mohan M(1), Kaushal D, Aye PP, Alvarez X, Veazey RS, Lackner AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Comparative Pathology, Tulane National Primate Research Center,
Covington, Louisiana, United States of America.

The Gastrointestinal (GI) tract plays a pivotal role in AIDS pathogenesis as it
is the primary site for viral transmission, replication and CD4(+) T cell
destruction. Accordingly, GI disease (enteropathy) has become a well-known
complication and a driver of AIDS progression. To better understand the molecular
mechanisms underlying GI disease we analyzed global gene expression profiles
sequentially in the intestinal epithelium of the same animals before SIV
infection and at 21 and 90 days post infection (DPI). More importantly we
obtained sequential excisional intestinal biopsies and examined distinct mucosal 
components (epithelium. intraepithelial lymphocytes, lamina propria lymphocytes, 
fibrovascular stroma) separately. Here we report data pertaining to the
epithelium. Overall genes associated with epithelial cell
renewal/proliferation/differentiation, permeability and adhesion were
significantly down regulated (<1.5-7 fold) at 21 and 90DPI. Genes regulating
focal adhesions (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6), gap junctions (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3), ErbB (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>3) and Wnt signaling
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>4) were markedly down at 21DPI and the number of genes in each of these
groups that were down regulated doubled between 21 and 90DPI. Notable genes
included FAK, ITGA6, PDGF, TGFß3, Ezrin, FZD6, WNT10A, and TCF7L2. In addition,
at 90DPI genes regulating ECM-receptor interactions (laminins and ITGB1),
epithelial cell gene expression (PDX1, KLF6), polarity/tight junction formation
(PARD3B&6B) and histone demethylase (JMJD3) were also down regulated. In
contrast, expression of NOTCH3, notch target genes (HES4, HES7) and EZH2 (histone
methyltransferase) were significantly increased at 90DPI. The altered expression 
of genes linked to Wnt signaling together with decreased expression of PDX1,
PARD3B, PARD6B and SDK1 suggests marked perturbations in intestinal epithelial
function and homeostasis leading to breakdown of the mucosal barrier. More
importantly, the divergent expression patterns of EZH2 and JMJD3 suggests that an
epigenetic mechanism involving histone modifications may contribute to the
massive decrease in gene expression at 90DPI leading to defects in enterocyte
maturation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3621888
PMID: 23593167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2013 May;163C(2):86-91. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31359. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

The NSD1 and EZH2 overgrowth genes, similarities and differences.

Tatton-Brown K(1), Rahman N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, St George's University of London and the Royal
Marsden Hospital, London, UK. kate.tatton-brown@icr.ac.uk

NSD1 and EZH2 are SET domain-containing histone methyltransferases that play key 
roles in the regulation of transcription through histone modification and
chromatin modeling: NSD1 preferentially methylates lysine residue 36 of histone 3
(H3K36) and is primarily associated with active transcription, while EZH2 shows
specificity for lysine residue 27 (H3K27) and is associated with transcriptional 
repression. Somatic dysregulation of NSD1 and EZH2 have been associated with
tumorigenesis. NSD1, as a fusion transcript with NUP98, plays a key role in
leukemogenesis, particularly childhood acute myeloid leukemia. EZH2 is a major
proto-oncogene and mono- and biallelic activating and inactivating somatic
mutations occur as early events in the development of tumors, particularly poor
prognosis hematopoietic malignancies. Constitutional NSD1 and EZH2 mutations
cause Sotos and Weaver syndromes respectively, overgrowth syndromes with
considerable phenotypic overlap. NSD1 mutations that cause Sotos syndrome are
loss-of-function, primarily truncating mutations or missense mutations at key
residues in functional domains. EZH2 mutations that cause Weaver syndrome are
primarily missense variants and the rare truncating mutations reported to date
are in the last exon, suggesting that simple haploinsufficiency is unlikely to be
generating the overgrowth phenotype although the exact mechanism has not yet been
determined. Many additional questions about the molecular and clinical features
of NSD1 and EZH2 remain unanswered. However, studies are underway to address
these and, as more cases are ascertained and technology improves, it is hoped
that these will, in time, be answered.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23592277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Onco Targets Ther. 2013 Apr 4;6:321-4. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S42453. Print 2013.

Update of research on the role of EZH2 in cancer progression.

Shen L(1), Cui J, Liang S, Pang Y, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University,
Jinan, People's Republic of China.

Accumulating evidence shows that enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (E2H2) is
upregulated in a broad range of cancer types, such as breast cancer, prostate
cancer, ovarian cancer, and colon cancer. Therefore, inhibiting EZH2 expression
may be a promising strategy for anticancer therapy. This review focuses on the
current understanding of the mechanisms underlying EZH2 regulation that are
involved in cancer progression. Also, it introduces two EZH2 inhibitors that
target EZH2 and could be potentially applied in the treatment of cancer in the
future.

PMCID: PMC3622432
PMID: 23589697  [PubMed]


42. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Jun 10;319(10):1463-70. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.04.006. Epub
2013 Apr 12.

Pharmacological inhibition of polycomb repressive complex-2 activity induces
apoptosis in human colon cancer stem cells.

Benoit YD(1), Witherspoon MS, Laursen KB, Guezguez A, Beauséjour M, Beaulieu JF, 
Lipkin SM, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY 10065, USA.
yannick.benoit@usherbrooke.ca

Colorectal cancer is among the leading causes of cancer death in the USA. The
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), including core components SUZ12 and EZH2,
represents a key epigenetic regulator of digestive epithelial cell physiology and
was previously shown to promote deleterious effects in a number of human cancers,
including colon. Using colon cancer stem cells (CCSC) isolated from human primary
colorectal tumors, we demonstrate that SUZ12 knockdown and treatment with DZNep, 
one of the most potent EZH2 inhibitors, increase apoptosis levels, marked by
decreased Akt phosphorylation, in CCSCs, while embryonic stem (ES) cell survival 
is not affected. Moreover, DZNep treatments lead to increased PTEN expression in 
these highly tumorigenic cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that
pharmacological inhibition of PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity may
constitute a new, epigenetic therapeutic strategy to target highly tumorigenic
and metastatic colon cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3880229
PMID: 23588203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Rev Genet. 2013 May;14(5):347-59. doi: 10.1038/nrg3413. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

From neural development to cognition: unexpected roles for chromatin.

Ronan JL(1), Wu W, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2013 Jun;14(6):440.

Recent genome-sequencing studies in human neurodevelopmental and psychiatric
disorders have uncovered mutations in many chromatin regulators. These human
genetic studies, along with studies in model organisms, are providing insight
into chromatin regulatory mechanisms in neural development and how alterations to
these mechanisms can cause cognitive deficits, such as intellectual disability.
We discuss several implicated chromatin regulators, including BAF (also known as 
SWI/SNF) and CHD8 chromatin remodellers, HDAC4 and the Polycomb component EZH2.
Interestingly, mutations in EZH2 and certain BAF complex components have roles in
both neurodevelopmental disorders and cancer, and overlapping point mutations are
suggesting functionally important residues and domains. We speculate on the
contribution of these similar mutations to disparate disorders.

PMCID: PMC4010428
PMID: 23568486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Life Sci. 2013 May 20;92(17-19):896-902. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.03.010. Epub
2013 Apr 3.

Silencing the EZH2 gene by RNA interference reverses the drug resistance of human
hepatic multidrug-resistant cancer cells to 5-Fu.

Zhang Y(1), Liu G, Lin C, Liao G, Tang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, 410008, PR China.

AIMS: The EZH2 gene, which is expressed in various solid tumours, including liver
cancer, can regulate gene transcription and promote the generation and
progression of tumours. Our aim was to investigate the relationship between EZH2 
and multidrug-resistance of human hepatic cancer cells using RNA interference.
MAIN METHODS: We detected the expression of EZH2 in the human hepatic
multidrug-resistant cancer cell line Bel/Fu by RT-PCR and western blot; then
knocked EZH2 gene by RNA interference to investigate the proliferation, the cell 
cycle and cell apoptosis by MTT and flow cytometry; finally we checked the
alteration of MDR1 methylation and MDR1 expression after EZH2 silencing by
MS-PCR, RT-PCR and western blot.
KEY FINDINGS: EZH2 is highly expressed in Bel/Fu cells. After EZH2-depleted
Bel/Fu cells were treated with 5-Fu, the cell proliferation was inhibited, the
cell cycle arrested at G1, which may be associated with the alteration of G1/S
checkpoint regulators, meanwhile the apoptotic rate of the cells increased.
Furthermore, the expression of MDR1 decreased and the corresponding methylation
levels of MDR1 were significantly increased in EZH2-depleted Bel/Fu cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate the relationship between EZH2 and
multidrug-resistance in hepatic cancer for the first time. EZH2 may become a new 
target for gene therapy to reverse multidrug-resistance in hepatic cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23562851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 4;14:224. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-224.

Identification of microRNA-mRNA functional interactions in UVB-induced senescence
of human diploid fibroblasts.

Greussing R(1), Hackl M, Charoentong P, Pauck A, Monteforte R, Cavinato M, Hofer 
E, Scheideler M, Neuhaus M, Micutkova L, Mueck C, Trajanoski Z, Grillari J,
Jansen-Dürr P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Rennweg
10, Innsbruck 6020, Austria. Pidder.Jansen-Duerr@uibk.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: Cellular senescence can be induced by a variety of extrinsic stimuli,
and sustained exposure to sunlight is a key factor in photoaging of the skin.
Accordingly, irradiation of skin fibroblasts by UVB light triggers cellular
senescence, which is thought to contribute to extrinsic skin aging, although
molecular mechanisms are incompletely understood. Here, we addressed molecular
mechanisms underlying UVB induced senescence of human diploid fibroblasts.
RESULTS: We observed a parallel activation of the p53/p21(WAF1) and
p16(INK4a)/pRb pathways. Using genome-wide transcriptome analysis, we identified 
a transcriptional signature of UVB-induced senescence that was conserved in three
independent strains of human diploid fibroblasts (HDF) from skin. In parallel, a 
comprehensive screen for microRNAs regulated during UVB-induced senescence was
performed which identified five microRNAs that are significantly regulated during
the process. Bioinformatic analysis of miRNA-mRNA networks was performed to
identify new functional mRNA targets with high confidence for miR-15a, miR-20a,
miR-20b, miR-93, and miR-101. Already known targets of these miRNAs were
identified in each case, validating the approach. Several new targets were
identified for all of these miRNAs, with the potential to provide new insight in 
the process of UVB-induced senescence at a genome-wide level. Subsequent analysis
was focused on miR-101 and its putative target gene Ezh2. We confirmed that Ezh2 
is regulated by miR-101 in human fibroblasts, and found that both overexpression 
of miR-101 and downregulation of Ezh2 independently induce senescence in the
absence of UVB irradiation. However, the downregulation of miR-101 was not
sufficient to block the phenotype of UVB-induced senescence, suggesting that
other UVB-induced processes induce the senescence response in a pathway redundant
with upregulation of miR-101.
CONCLUSION: We performed a comprehensive screen for UVB-regulated microRNAs in
human diploid fibroblasts, and identified a network of miRNA-mRNA interactions
mediating UVB-induced senescence. In addition, miR-101 and Ezh2 were identified
as key players in UVB-induced senescence of HDF.

PMCID: PMC4008267
PMID: 23557329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Ther Adv Hematol. 2012 Jun;3(3):131-46. doi: 10.1177/2040620712437754.

Myelofibrosis 2012: it's complicated.

Hubbeling HG(1), Frank DM, Hexner EO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Major advances in myeloproliferative neoplasms in the last decade have cast light
on their complexity. The identification of JAK2 (V617F) briefly promised a
unifying mechanism of pathogenesis with a single pathway that could be
efficiently targeted. Instead, there have been major advances in understanding
acquired and background genetic and epigenetic contributors to this group of
disorders, with refined risk prediction models and experimental therapeutics that
have provided a more nuanced model of disease. In aggregate these observations
likely explain the heterogeneity of these disorders and their generally
unpredictable response to therapy. Molecular studies, beginning with the
identification of JAK2 (V617F), have led to a concept of MPN subtypes existing on
a continuum, and additional discoveries such as TET2 and EZH2 mutations have
provided the molecular underpinnings to begin to explain overlapping phenotypes
in myeloid malignancies more generally. In many ways the pace of molecular
discovery is outstripping our ability to integrate these observations into
clinical care, both in terms of molecular diagnostics and medical decision
making. This review will attempt to summarize, within a clinical context, our
evolving understanding of myeloproliferative neoplasms. It focuses on biology,
histopathology, prognostic scoring systems, stem cell transplantation as well as 
selected clinical/preclinical therapeutic observations.

PMCID: PMC3573437
PMID: 23556120  [PubMed]


47. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;19(14):3732-7. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0021.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Molecular pathways: environmental estrogens activate nongenomic signaling to
developmentally reprogram the epigenome.

Wong RL(1), Walker CL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Cancer Research, Institute of Biosciences and
Technology, The Texas A&M University System Health Science Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. cwalker@ibt.tamhsc.edu

Exposure to environmental xenoestrogens is a major health concern because of the 
ability of these compounds to perturb estrogen receptor (ER) signaling and act as
endocrine disrupting compounds (EDC). Inappropriate exposure to EDCs during
development, even at low doses, can predispose individuals to an increased
lifetime risk of disease, including cancer. Recent data indicate that perinatal
exposure to EDCs increases cancer risk by (re)programming the epigenome via
alterations in DNA and histone methylation. We and others have begun to dissect
the mechanisms by which xenoestrogens disrupt the epigenetic machinery to
reprogram the epigenome and induce developmental reprogramming. Our studies
revealed that xenoestrogens induce nongenomic ER signaling to activate PI3K/AKT, 
resulting in AKT phosphorylation and inactivation of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2, thus providing a direct link to disruption of the
epigenome. Other epigenetic "readers, writers, and erasers" may also be targeted 
by nongenomic signaling, suggesting this is a central mechanism by which
xenoestrogens and other EDCs disrupt the epigenome to induce developmental
reprogramming. Elucidating mechanisms of developmental reprogramming of the
epigenome is important for understanding how environmental exposures increase
cancer risk, and provides a rationale for developing epigenetic interventions
that can reverse the effects of environmental exposures to reduce cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3879948
PMID: 23549878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Apr;138(3):741-52. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2498-x. 
Epub 2013 Mar 29.

EZH2 inhibition decreases p38 signaling and suppresses breast cancer motility and
metastasis.

Moore HM(1), Gonzalez ME, Toy KA, Cimino-Mathews A, Argani P, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

EZH2 is a Polycomb group protein that exerts oncogenic functions in breast
cancer, where its overexpression is associated with metastatic disease. While it 
reportedly acts a transcriptional repressor through trimethylation of histone H3 
at lysine 27, EZH2 may exhibit context-dependent activating functions. Despite
associations with worse outcome and metastasis in breast cancer, a functional
role of EZH2 in breast cancer metastasis in vivo has not been demonstrated.
Furthermore, whether EZH2 regulates cancer cell phenotype and motility are
unknown. In this study, we discovered that knockdown of EZH2 induces a phenotypic
reprogramming from mesenchymal to epithelial, reduces motility, and blocks
invasion in breast cancer cell lines. In vivo, EZH2 downregulation in MDA-MB-231 
cells decreases spontaneous metastasis to the lungs. We uncover an unexpected
role of EZH2 in inducing the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling
pathway, an important regulator of breast cancer invasion and metastasis. In
breast cancer cells, EZH2 binds to phosphorylated p38 (p-p38) in association with
other core members of the Polycomb repressive complex 2, EED, and SUZ12, and EZH2
overexpression leads to increased levels of p-p38 and of activated, downstream
pathway proteins. The effect on p-p38 was confirmed in vivo, where it correlated 
with decreased spontaneous metastasis. In clinical specimens of matched primary
and invasive breast carcinomas, we found that EZH2 expression was upregulated in 
100 % of the metastases, and that EZH2 and p-p38 were coexpressed in 63 % of
cases, consistent with the functional results. Together our findings reveal a new
mechanism by which EZH2 functions in breast cancer, and provide direct evidence
that EZH2 inhibition reduces breast cancer metastasis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3690767
PMID: 23539298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Science. 2013 May 17;340(6134):857-61. doi: 10.1126/science.1232245. Epub 2013
Mar 28.

Inhibition of PRC2 activity by a gain-of-function H3 mutation found in pediatric 
glioblastoma.

Lewis PW(1), Müller MM, Koletsky MS, Cordero F, Lin S, Banaszynski LA, Garcia BA,
Muir TW, Becher OJ, Allis CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 May 17;340(6134):823-4.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 May;13(5):294.

Sequencing of pediatric gliomas has identified missense mutations Lys27Met (K27M)
and Gly34Arg/Val (G34R/V) in genes encoding histone H3.3 (H3F3A) and H3.1
(HIST3H1B). We report that human diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas (DIPGs)
containing the K27M mutation display significantly lower overall amounts of H3
with trimethylated lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and that histone H3K27M transgenes are
sufficient to reduce the amounts of H3K27me3 in vitro and in vivo. We find that
H3K27M inhibits the enzymatic activity of the Polycomb repressive complex 2
through interaction with the EZH2 subunit. In addition, transgenes containing
lysine-to-methionine substitutions at other known methylated lysines (H3K9 and
H3K36) are sufficient to cause specific reduction in methylation through
inhibition of SET-domain enzymes. We propose that K-to-M substitutions may
represent a mechanism to alter epigenetic states in a variety of pathologies.

PMCID: PMC3951439
PMID: 23539183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Leukemia. 2013 Dec;27(12):2341-50. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.94. Epub 2013 Mar 29.

Disruption of the MYC-miRNA-EZH2 loop to suppress aggressive B-cell lymphoma
survival and clonogenicity.

Zhao X(1), Lwin T, Zhang X, Huang A, Wang J, Marquez VE, Chen-Kiang S, Dalton WS,
Sotomayor E, Tao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Malignant Hematology and Experimental Therapeutics Program, H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.

c-MYC (hereafter MYC) overexpression has been recognized in aggressive B-cell
lymphomas and linked to adverse prognosis. MYC activation results in widespread
repression of micro-RNA (miRNA) expression and associated with lymphoma
aggressive progression. Our recent study identified a MYC-miRNA-EZH2 feed-forward
loop linking overexpression of MYC, EZH2 and miRNA repression. Here, using a
novel small-molecule BET bromodomain inhibitor, JQ1, and the EZH2 inhibitor,
DZNep, we demonstrated that combined treatment of JQ1 and DZNep cooperatively
disrupted MYC activation, resulting in a greater restoration of miR-26a
expression and synergistically suppressed lymphoma growth and clonogenicity in
aggressive lymphoma cells. Furthermore, CHIP assay demonstrated that MYC
recruited EZH2 to miR-26a promoter and cooperatively repressed miR-26a expression
in aggressive lymphoma cell lines, as well as primary lymphoma cells. Loss- or
gain-of-function approaches revealed that miR-26a functioned as a tumor
suppressor miRNA and mediated the combinatorial effects of JQ1 and DZNep. These
findings represent a novel promising approach for silencing MYC-miRNA-EZH2
amplification loop for combinatorial therapy of aggressive B-cell lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC4015113
PMID: 23538750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. EMBO J. 2013 Apr 17;32(8):1168-82. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.66. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

YY1 controls Ig<U+03BA> repertoire and B-cell development, and localizes with condensin 
on the Ig<U+03BA> locus.

Pan X(1), Papasani M, Hao Y, Calamito M, Wei F, Quinn Iii WJ, Basu A, Wang J,
Hodawadekar S, Zaprazna K, Liu H, Shi Y, Allman D, Cancro M, Atchison ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Conditional knock-out (KO) of Polycomb Group (PcG) protein YY1 results in pro-B
cell arrest and reduced immunoglobulin locus contraction needed for distal
variable gene rearrangement. The mechanisms that control these crucial functions 
are unknown. We deleted the 25 amino-acid YY1 REPO domain necessary for YY1 PcG
function, and used this mutant (YY1<U+0394>REPO), to transduce bone marrow from YY1
conditional KO mice. While wild-type YY1 rescued B-cell development, YY1<U+0394>REPO
failed to rescue the B-cell lineage yielding reduced numbers of B lineage cells. 
Although the IgH rearrangement pattern was normal, there was a selective impact
at the Ig<U+03BA> locus that showed a dramatic skewing of the expressed Ig<U+03BA> repertoire. 
We found that the REPO domain interacts with proteins from the condensin and
cohesin complexes, and that YY1, EZH2 and condensin proteins co-localize at
numerous sites across the Ig kappa locus. Knock-down of a condensin subunit
protein or YY1 reduced rearrangement of Ig<U+03BA> V<U+03BA> genes suggesting a direct role for
YY1-condensin complexes in Ig<U+03BA> locus structure and rearrangement.

PMCID: PMC3630362
PMID: 23531880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Blood. 2013 May 30;121(22):4512-20. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-450494. Epub 2013 
Mar 25.

EZH2 overexpression in natural killer/T-cell lymphoma confers growth advantage
independently of histone methyltransferase activity.

Yan J(1), Ng SB, Tay JL, Lin B, Koh TL, Tan J, Selvarajan V, Liu SC, Bi C, Wang
S, Choo SN, Shimizu N, Huang G, Yu Q, Chng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, 1E
Kent Ridge Road, Singapore.

The role of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in cancer is complex and may vary 
depending on the cellular context. We found that EZH2 is aberrantly overexpressed
in the majority of natural killer/T-cell lymphoma (NKTL), an aggressive lymphoid 
malignancy with very poor prognosis. We show that EZH2 upregulation is mediated
by MYC-induced repression of its regulatory micro RNAs and EZH2 exerts oncogenic 
properties in NKTL. Ectopic expression of EZH2 in both primary NK cells and NKTL 
cell lines leads to a significant growth advantage. Conversely, knock-down of
EZH2 in NKTL cell lines results in cell growth inhibition. Intriguingly, ectopic 
EZH2 mutant deficient for histone methyltransferase activity is also able to
confer growth advantage and rescue growth inhibition on endogenous EZH2 depletion
in NKTL cells, indicating an oncogenic role of EZH2 independent of its
gene-silencing activity. Mechanistically, we show that EZH2 directly promotes the
transcription of cyclin D1 and this effect is independent of its enzymatic
activity. Furthermore, depletion of EZH2 using a PRC2 inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin
A significantly inhibits growth of NK tumor cells. Therefore, our study uncovers 
an oncogenic role of EZH2 independent of its methyltransferase activity in NKTL
and suggests that targeting EZH2 may have therapeutic usefulness in this
lymphoma.

PMID: 23529930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Apr;5(4):531-47. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201201783. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Smurf2-mediated degradation of EZH2 enhances neuron differentiation and improves 
functional recovery after ischaemic stroke.

Yu YL(1), Chou RH, Shyu WC, Hsieh SC, Wu CS, Chiang SY, Chang WJ, Chen JN, Tseng 
YJ, Lin YH, Lee W, Yeh SP, Hsu JL, Yang CC, Hung SC, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Biotechnology, Asia
University, Taichung, Taiwan. ylyu@mail.cmu.edu.tw

EZH2 plays an important role in stem cell renewal and maintenance by inducing
gene silencing via its histone methyltransferase activity. Previously, we showed 
that EZH2 downregulation enhances neuron differentiation of human mesenchymal
stem cells (hMSCs); however, the underlying mechanisms of EZH2-regulated neuron
differentiation are still unclear. Here, we identify Smurf2 as the E3 ubiquitin
ligase responsible for the polyubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation
of EZH2, which is required for neuron differentiation. A ChIP-on-chip screen
combined with gene microarray analysis revealed that PPAR<U+03B3> was the only gene
involved in neuron differentiation with significant changes in both its
modification and expression status during differentiation. Moreover, knocking
down PPAR<U+03B3> prevented cells from undergoing efficient neuron differentiation. In
animal model, rats implanted with intracerebral EZH2-knocked-down hMSCs or hMSCs 
plus treatment with PPAR<U+03B3> agonist (rosiglitazone) showed better improvement than 
those without EZH2 knockdown or rosiglitazone treatment after a stroke. Together,
our results support Smurf2 as a regulator of EZH2 turnover to facilitate PPAR<U+03B3>
expression, which is specifically required for neuron differentiation, providing 
a molecular mechanism for clinical applications in the neurodegenerative
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3628108
PMID: 23526793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Apr 19;433(4):470-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.03.037. Epub 2013 Mar 21.

The role of EZH2 and DNA methylation in hMLH1 silencing in epithelial ovarian
cancer.

Wang J(1), Yu L, Cai J, Jia J, Gao Y, Liang M, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in various malignancies and
associated with poor prognosis and drug-resistance. A recent study suggested that
there is a link between EZH2 expression and the mediation of gene silencing in
association with aberrant DNA methylation. In the present study, we showed an
inverse correlation between EZH2 and human mutL homolog 1 gene (hMLH1) expression
in 30 epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) tissues. Moreover, we found that EZH2
downregulation could induce the re-expression of the unmethylated, basally
expressed hMLH1 gene without affecting DNA methylation in the hMLH1 promoter.
These results suggest that EZH2 can modulate the transcription of basally
expressed hMLH1 via a non-DNA-methylation-dependent pathway, but it has no effect
on hMLH1 silencing that is mediated by DNA hypermethylation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23523787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2013 Jun;39(6):655-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2013.02.023. Epub
2013 Mar 21.

Global histone modification of H3K27 correlates with the outcomes in patients
with metachronous liver metastasis of colorectal cancer.

Tamagawa H(1), Oshima T, Numata M, Yamamoto N, Shiozawa M, Morinaga S, Nakamura
Y, Yoshihara M, Sakuma Y, Kameda Y, Akaike M, Yukawa N, Rino Y, Masuda M, Miyagi 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Kanagawa Cancer Center, 1-1-2 Nakao,
Asahi, Yokohama, Japan. rinta77-nosuke@amber.plala.or.jp

BACKGROUND: We evaluated the methylation patterns of histone H3 lysine 27
(H3K27), H3 lysine 36 (H3K36) and the expression of H3K27 methylase EZH2 in
patients with colorectal carcinomas with metachronous liver metastasis to search 
for biomarkers identifying these patients.
METHODS: Double 2-mm core tissue microarrays were made from 54 paraffin-embedded 
samples of primary colorectal adenocarcinomas and corresponding liver metastases 
and examined using an immunohistochemical analysis of dimethylation and
trimethylation in H3K27, H3K36 and EZH2. Positive tumor cell staining for each
histone modification (H-score) was used to classify patients into low- and
high-staining groups, which were then examined to identify any correlations
between the clinicopathological parameters and the clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: The H-scores of H3K27me2 were lower in the liver metastases than in the 
corresponding primary tumors, while the H-scores of H3K36me2 were higher in the
liver metastases than in the corresponding primary tumors (P < 0.001). H3K27me2
in the primary tumors correlated with tumor size (P = 0.016), H3K36me2 in the
primary tumors correlated with histological type (P = 0.038), and H3K36me3 in the
primary tumors correlated with lymph node metastasis (P = 0.017). In addition,
lower levels of H3K27me2 in the primary tumors correlated with poorer survival
rates (P = 0.039). The multivariate survival analysis showed that the H3K27me2
status is an independent prognostic factor for colorectal cancer patients
(P = 0.047).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the methylation level of H3K27me2 detected
with immunohistochemistry may be an independent prognostic factor for
metachronous liver metastasis of colorectal carcinomas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23523318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Mar;9(3):e1003186. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003186. Epub 2013
Mar 14.

Epstein - Barr virus transforming protein LMP-1 alters B cells gene expression by
promoting accumulation of the oncoprotein <U+0394>Np73a.

Accardi R(1), Fathallah I, Gruffat H, Mariggiò G, Le Calvez-Kelm F, Voegele C,
Bartosch B, Hernandez-Vargas H, McKay J, Sylla BS, Manet E, Tommasino M.

Author information: 
(1)International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, 
France.

Many studies have proved that oncogenic viruses develop redundant mechanisms to
alter the functions of the tumor suppressor p53. Here we show that Epstein-Barr
virus (EBV), via the oncoprotein LMP-1, induces the expression of <U+0394>Np73a, a
strong antagonist of p53. This phenomenon is mediated by the LMP-1 dependent
activation of c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 1 (JNK-1) which in turn favours the
recruitment of p73 to <U+0394>Np73a promoter. A specific chemical inhibitor of JNK-1 or 
silencing JNK-1 expression strongly down-regulated <U+0394>Np73a mRNA levels in
LMP-1-containing cells. Accordingly, LMP-1 mutants deficient to activate JNK-1
did not induce <U+0394>Np73a accumulation. The recruitment of p73 to the <U+0394>Np73a promoter
correlated with the displacement of the histone-lysine N-methyltransferase EZH2
which is part of the transcriptional repressive polycomb 2 complex. Inhibition of
<U+0394>Np73a expression in lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs) led to the stimulation of
apoptosis and up-regulation of a large number of cellular genes as determined by 
whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing (RNA-seq). In particular, the expression
of genes encoding products known to play anti-proliferative/pro-apoptotic
functions, as well as genes known to be deregulated in different B cells
malignancy, was altered by <U+0394>Np73a down-regulation. Together, these findings
reveal a novel EBV mechanism that appears to play an important role in the
transformation of primary B cells.

PMCID: PMC3597522
PMID: 23516355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Lab Invest. 2013 May;93(5):543-52. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.47. Epub 2013 Mar 
18.

Epigenetic changes in renal genes dysregulated in mouse and rat models of type 1 
diabetes.

Komers R(1), Mar D, Denisenko O, Xu B, Oyama TT, Bomsztyk K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR, USA.

Epigenetic processes are increasingly being recognized as factors in the
pathophysiology of diabetes complications, but few chromatin studies have been
done in diabetic nephropathy (DN). We hypothesized that changes in mRNA
expression of DN-related genes are associated with epigenetic alterations and
aberrant expression of histone-modifying enzymes. RT-PCR and a matrix-chromatin
immunoprecipitation platform were used to examine renal mRNA expression, RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment, and epigenetic marks at DN-related genes in
the mouse (OVE26) and streptozotocin-induced rat models of type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes induced renal expression of Cox2, S100A4/FSP-1, and vimentin genes in
both the mouse and the rat models of DN. Mcp-1 and laminin <U+03B3>1 (Lamc1) expression 
were increased in diabetic mice but not in rats. Comparison of mRNA and Pol II
levels suggested that the diabetes-induced expression of these transcripts is
mediated by transcriptional and posttranscriptional processes. Decreases in
histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation (H3K27m3, silencing mark) and increases in
H3 lysine 4 di-methylation (H3K4m2, activating mark) levels were the most
consistent epigenetic alterations in the tested genes. In agreement with these
results, immunoblot analysis showed increased protein abundance of renal
H3K27m2/3 demethylase KDM6A, but no changes in cognate methyltransferase Ezh2 in 
kidneys of the OVE26 mice compared with controls. In diabetic rats, Ezh2
expression was higher without changes in KDM6A, demonstrating that mechanisms of 
DN-induced H3K27m3 loss could be species specific. In summary, we show that
altered mRNA expression of some DN-related genes is associated with changes in
Pol II recruitment and a corresponding decrease in repressive H3K27m3 at the
selected loci, and at least in mice with equivalent changes in renal expression
of cognate histone-modifying enzymes. This pattern could contribute to
diabetes-mediated transitions in chromatin that facilitate transcriptional
changes in the diabetic kidney.

PMID: 23508046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Med Oncol. 2013 Jun;30(2):513. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0513-z. Epub 2013 Mar 16.

High expressions of histone methylation- and phosphorylation-related proteins are
associated with prognosis of oral squamous cell carcinoma in male population of
Taiwan.

Chen JH(1), Yeh KT, Yang YM, Chang JG, Lee HE, Hung SY.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, College of Dental Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 80756, Taiwan.

Since 2008, oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) has climbed to the fourth place
in cancer mortality in the male population of Taiwan. Epigenetic regulations
including DNA methylation and histone modification control gene expression and
play important roles during cancer progression. Since the relationship between
histone modification and prognosis of OSCC is inconclusive, we collected 215
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues from male patients having OSCC and
surveyed them by tissue microarray-based immunohistochemical staining. The
association between five histone modification-related genes, clinicopathological 
parameters, and prognosis of OSCC was examined. From tissue microarray
immunohistochemistry staining results, we found that the nuclear staining
intensity of ARK2 (Aurora kinase B-a serine/threonine-protein kinase of H3S10)
was associated with poor clinical outcomes (=3-year survival, p = 0.005). The
cytosolic staining intensity of the ARK2 protein was associated with tumor stage 
(p = 0.006) and tumor size (T) of TNM staging system (p = 0.026). Cytoplasmic
staining intensity of G9a (H3K9 methyltransferase) was associated with
histological grade of differentiation (p = 0.026). EZH2 (H3K27 methyltransferase)
and SUV39H1 (H3K9 methyltransferase) overexpressions in nuclei were,
respectively, associated with lymph node metastasis (N, p = 0.016) and stage (p =
0.009). Our result suggests that overexpressions of histone modification-related 
proteins-ARK2, G9a, EZH2, and SUV39H1 but not SUV39H2 are associated with
prognosis of OSCC in the male population of Taiwan. These proteins, especially
ARK2, may serve as effective prognostic factors and can also be used as
biomarkers for predicting various clinical outcomes of OSCCs in the Taiwanese
population.

PMID: 23504335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1448-57. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.77. Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Regulation of several androgen-induced genes through the repression of the
miR-99a/let-7c/miR-125b-2 miRNA cluster in prostate cancer cells.

Sun D(1), Layer R(2), Mueller AC(1), Cichewicz MA(1), Negishi M(1), Paschal
BM(3), Dutta A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia
Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (2)1] Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia Health Sciences
Center, Charlottesville, VA, USA [2] Department of Computer Science, University
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA. (3)1] Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, VA, USA [2] Center for Cell Signaling, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) stimulates and represses gene expression to promote
the initiation and progression of prostate cancer. Here, we report that androgen 
represses the miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster through AR and anti-androgen drugs
block the androgen-repression of the miRNA cluster. AR directly binds to the host
gene of the miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster, LINC00478. Expression of the cluster is
repressed or activated by chromatin remodelers EZH2 or JMJD3 in the presence or
absence of androgen, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis reveals a significant 
enrichment of targets of miR-99a, let-7c and miR-125b in androgen-induced gene
sets, suggesting that downregulation of the miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster by
androgen protects many of their target mRNAs from degradation and indirectly
assists in the gene induction. We validated the hypothesis with 12 potential
targets of the miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster induced by androgen: 9 out of the 12 
mRNAs are downregulated by the microRNA cluster. To ascertain the biological
significance of this hypothesis, we focused on IGF1R, a known prostate cancer
growth factor that is induced by androgen and directly targeted by the
miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster. The androgen-induced cell proliferation is
ameliorated to a similar extent as anti-androgen drugs by preventing the
repression of the microRNAs or induction of IGF1R in androgen-dependent prostate 
cancer cells. Expression of a microRNA-resistant form of IGF1R protects these
cells from inhibition by the miR-99a/let7c/125b-2 cluster. These results indicate
that a thorough understanding of how androgen stimulates prostate cancer growth
requires not only an understanding of genes directly induced/repressed by AR, but
also of genes indirectly induced by AR through the repression of key microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3915043
PMID: 23503464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Front Oncol. 2013 Mar 13;3:47. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00047. eCollection 2013.

Role of EZH2 in Epithelial Ovarian Cancer: From Biological Insights to
Therapeutic Target.

Li H(1), Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which
generates a methylation epigenetic mark at lysine 27 residue of histone H3
(H3K27me3) to silence gene expression. EZH2 target genes are involved in a
variety of biological processes such as stem cell pluripotency, cell
proliferation, and oncogenic transformation. EZH2 is often over-expressed in
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) cells and in ovarian cancer-associated stromal
endothelial cells. Notably, EZH2 promotes cell proliferation, inhibits apoptosis 
and enhances angiogenesis in EOCs. In contrast to genetic alterations, which are 
typically non-reversible, epigenetic alterations are reversible. Thus, inhibiting
EZH2/PRC2 activity represents an attractive strategy for developing ovarian
cancer therapeutics by targeting both ovarian cancer cells and ovarian tumor
microenvironment. Here we discuss the progress recently obtained in understanding
how EZH2/PRC2 promotes malignant phenotypes of EOC. In addition, we focus on
strategies for targeting EZH2/PRC2 to develop novel EOC epigenetic therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3595978
PMID: 23494175  [PubMed]


61. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1301-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.80. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Multiple mechanisms deregulate EZH2 and histone H3 lysine 27 epigenetic changes
in myeloid malignancies.

Khan SN(1), Jankowska AM, Mahfouz R, Dunbar AJ, Sugimoto Y, Hosono N, Hu Z,
Cheriyath V, Vatolin S, Przychodzen B, Reu FJ, Saunthararajah Y, O'Keefe C,
Sekeres MA, List AF, Moliterno AR, McDevitt MA, Maciejewski JP, Makishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2013;5(5):481.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in trimethylation of histone H3 
lysine 27 (H3K27), chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. The
silencing function of PRC2 complex is mostly attributed to its intrinsic activity
for methylating H3K27. Unlike in B-cell lymphomas, enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) mutations in myeloid malignancies are inactivating/hypomorphic. When we
assessed the mutational status in myeloid malignancies (N=469 cases examined), we
found EZH2 and EED/SUZ12 mutations in 8% and 3.3% of cases, respectively. In
addition to mutant cases, reduced EZH2 expression was also found in 78% cases
with hemizygous deletion (-7/del7q cases involving EZH2 locus) and 41% of cases
with diploid chromosome 7, most interestingly cases with spliceosomal mutations
(U2AF1/SRSF2 mutations; 63% of cases). EZH2 mutations were characterized by
decreased H3K27 trimethylation and increased chromatin relaxation at specific
gene loci accompanied by higher transcriptional activity. One of the major
downstream target is HOX gene family, involved in the regulation of stem cell
self-renewal. HOXA9 was found to be overexpressed in cases with decreased EZH2
expression either by EZH2/spliceosomal mutations or because of -7/del7q. In
summary, our results suggest that loss of gene repression through a variety of
mutations resulting in reduced H3K27 trimethylation may contribute to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23486531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Apr;209(4):249-54. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.01.005. Epub
2013 Feb 26.

Primary liver sarcomatous carcinoma: report of two cases and review of the
literature.

Giunchi F(1), Vasuri F, Baldin P, Rosini F, Corti B, D'Errico-Grigioni A.

Author information: 
(1)"F. Addarii" Institute of Oncology and Transplantation Pathology, S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University, Italy.

Primary liver sarcomatous carcinomas (PLSCs) are very aggressive tumors. They are
characterized by a fast clinical course, and therefore need a prompt histological
diagnosis. Here, we report two cases of PLSC. One arises in a non-cirrhotic liver
and the other in cirrhosis, with differences in onset and histological features. 
Special emphasis is put on the expression of albumin and HCC markers, and their
possible usefulness in the diagnosis. The English literature of the last 20 years
was revised (92 cases). Immunohistochemistry was performed manually or
automatically; in situ hybridization (ISH) technique for albumin mRNA detection
was carried out. The sarcomatoid components in both cases were immunoreactive for
K8/18, Glutamine Synthetase and EZH2, and negative for Glypican 3, SMA,
caldesmon, desmin, DOG-1, CD34, CD31, CD117, CD56, and alpha-fetoprotein. The
detection of albumin mRNA by ISH was negative in the sarcomatoid component in
both cases. PLSC represents a diagnostic challenge for pathologists, especially
in its "pure" form: neither albumin mRNA detection nor HCC markers are useful for
the diagnosis: positivity for K8/18 and the negativity for the mesenchymal
markers seem to represent the main tools for the histological diagnosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23484778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Feb;21(1):39-44. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.01.009.

[Clinical significance of common leukemia gene mutations in patients with acute
promyelocytic leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Yin J(1), Sun AN, Tian XP, Tian H, Wang RX, Yang Z, Wang XL, Wu DP, Qiu HY, Pan
JL, Cen JN, Liang JY, Chen SN.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Jiangsu Province, China.

This study was aimed to explore whether multiple common gene mutations of
leukemia synergistically involved in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
pathogenesis, and to investigate their relevance to clinical features,
cytogenetics and molecular risk stratification. 84 specimens of admitted de novo 
APL patients from February 2005 to October 2010 were collected, the gene
mutations of bone marrow mononuclear cells and clinical features of
mutation-positive patients were analyzed by genomic DNA-PCR. The results
indicated that the prevalence of mutations was 60.7% (51/84), in which the
mutations with the highest incidence were found as FLT3-ITD, reaching 27.4%
(23/84). Next, there were 12 cases WT1 mutation, 9 for FLT3-TKD, 7 for TET2, 5
for N-RAS, 4 for ASXL1, 2 for EZH2 mutation and 1 positive case in MLL-PTD, IDH1 
and CBL mutation respectively. No mutation was found in other JAK1, DNMT3, c-Kit,
NPM1, IDH2, RUNX1 and JAK2 (V617F) common leukemia-related genes. Combined
analysis with clinical data demonstrated that the patients with FLT3-ITD mutation
displayed higher white blood cell counts, while the patients with N-RAS mutation 
showed lower platelet counts. Overall survival of these patients was obviously
shorten as compared with patients with wild-type. This difference between mutant 
and wild-type of all above mentioned cases was statistically significant (P <
0.05). The difference between APL with simple t (15;17) and additional abnormal
karyotype was not statistically significant. It is concluded that the FLT3-ITD
mutation is recurrent genetic change in APL, and together with N-RAS mutation
indicates poor prognosis. Additional abnormal karyotype does not associate with
prognosis of APL.

PMID: 23484688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58083. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058083. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

The immediate early gene product EGR1 and polycomb group proteins interact in
epigenetic programming during chondrogenesis.

Spaapen F(1), van den Akker GG, Caron MM, Prickaerts P, Rofel C, Dahlmans VE,
Surtel DA, Paulis Y, Schweizer F, Welting TJ, Eijssen LM, Voncken JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Initiation of and progression through chondrogenesis is driven by changes in the 
cellular microenvironment. At the onset of chondrogenesis, resting mesenchymal
stem cells are mobilized in vivo and a complex, step-wise chondrogenic
differentiation program is initiated. Differentiation requires coordinated
transcriptomic reprogramming and increased progenitor proliferation; both
processes require chromatin remodeling. The nature of early molecular responses
that relay differentiation signals to chromatin is poorly understood. We here
show that immediate early genes are rapidly and transiently induced in response
to differentiation stimuli in vitro. Functional ablation of the immediate early
factor EGR1 severely deregulates expression of key chondrogenic control genes at 
the onset of differentiation. In addition, differentiating cells accumulate DNA
damage, activate a DNA damage response and undergo a cell cycle arrest and
prevent differentiation associated hyper-proliferation. Failed differentiation in
the absence of EGR1 affects global acetylation and terminates in overall histone 
hypermethylation. We report novel molecular connections between EGR1 and Polycomb
Group function: Polycomb associated histone H3 lysine27 trimethylation (H3K27me3)
blocks chromatin access of EGR1. In addition, EGR1 ablation results in abnormal
Ezh2 and Bmi1 expression. Consistent with this functional interaction, we
identify a number of co-regulated targets genes in a chondrogenic gene network.
We here describe an important role for EGR1 in early chondrogenic epigenetic
programming to accommodate early gene-environment interactions in chondrogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3590300
PMID: 23483971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e56954. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056954. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Bortezomib reduces the tumorigenicity of multiple myeloma via downregulation of
upregulated targets in clonogenic side population cells.

Nara M(1), Teshima K, Watanabe A, Ito M, Iwamoto K, Kitabayashi A, Kume M, Hatano
Y, Takahashi N, Iida S, Sawada K, Tagawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nephrology, and Rheumatology, Akita University
Graduate School of Medicine, Akita, Japan.

Side population (SP) cells in cancers, including multiple myeloma, exhibit
tumor-initiating characteristics. In the present study, we isolated SP cells from
human myeloma cell lines and primary tumors to detect potential therapeutic
targets specifically expressed in SP cells. We found that SP cells from myeloma
cell lines (RPMI 8226, AMO1, KMS-12-BM, KMS-11) express CD138 and that non-SP
cells include a CD138-negative population. Serial transplantation of SP and
non-SP cells into NOD/Shi-scid IL-2<U+03B3>nul mice revealed that clonogenic myeloma SP 
cells are highly tumorigenic and possess a capacity for self-renewal. Gene
expression analysis showed that SP cells from five MM cell lines (RPMI 8226,
AMO1, KMS-12-BM, KMS-11, JJN3) express genes involved in the cell cycle and
mitosis (e.g., CCNB1, CDC25C, CDC2, BIRC5, CENPE, SKA1, AURKB, KIFs, TOP2A,
ASPM), polycomb (e.g., EZH2, EPC1) and ubiquitin-proteasome (e.g., UBE2D3, UBE3C,
PSMA5) more strongly than do non-SP cells. Moreover, CCNB1, AURKB, EZH2 and PSMA5
were also upregulated in the SPs from eight primary myeloma samples. On that
basis, we used an aurora kinase inhibitor (VX-680) and a proteasome inhibitor
(bortezomib) with RPMI 8226 and AMO1 cells to determine whether these agents
could be used to selectively target the myeloma SP. We found that both these
drugs reduced the SP fraction, though bortezomib did so more effectively than
VX-680 due to its ability to reduce levels of both phospho-histone H3 (p-hist.
H3) and EZH2; VX-680 reduced only p-hist. H3. This is the first report to show
that certain oncogenes are specifically expressed in the myeloma SP, and that
bortezomib effectively downregulates expression of their products. Our approach
may be useful for screening new agents with which to target a cell population
possessing strong tumor initiating potential in multiple myeloma.

PMCID: PMC3587640
PMID: 23469177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003292. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003292. Epub 2013 Feb 
28.

Cell reprogramming requires silencing of a core subset of polycomb targets.

Fragola G(1), Germain PL, Laise P, Cuomo A, Blasimme A, Gross F, Signaroldi E,
Bucci G, Sommer C, Pruneri G, Mazzarol G, Bonaldi T, Mostoslavsky G, Casola S,
Testa G.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, IFOM-IEO Campus, Milan, Italy.

Transcription factor (TF)-induced reprogramming of somatic cells into induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) is associated with genome-wide changes in chromatin
modifications. Polycomb-mediated histone H3 lysine-27 trimethylation (H3K27me3)
has been proposed as a defining mark that distinguishes the somatic from the iPSC
epigenome. Here, we dissected the functional role of H3K27me3 in TF-induced
reprogramming through the inactivation of the H3K27 methylase EZH2 at the onset
of reprogramming. Our results demonstrate that surprisingly the establishment of 
functional iPSC proceeds despite global loss of H3K27me3. iPSC lacking EZH2
efficiently silenced the somatic transcriptome and differentiated into tissues
derived from the three germ layers. Remarkably, the genome-wide analysis of
H3K27me3 in Ezh2 mutant iPSC cells revealed the retention of this mark on a
highly selected group of Polycomb targets enriched for developmental regulators
controlling the expression of lineage specific genes. Erasure of H3K27me3 from
these targets led to a striking impairment in TF-induced reprogramming. These
results indicate that PRC2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation is required on a highly 
selective core of Polycomb targets whose repression enables TF-dependent cell
reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3585017
PMID: 23468641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Apr;41(8):e94. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt142. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

RIPSeeker: a statistical package for identifying protein-associated transcripts
from RIP-seq experiments.

Li Y(1), Zhao DY, Greenblatt JF, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
2E4, Canada.

RIP-seq has recently been developed to discover genome-wide RNA transcripts that 
interact with a protein or protein complex. RIP-seq is similar to both RNA-seq
and ChIP-seq, but presents unique properties and challenges. Currently, no
statistical tool is dedicated to RIP-seq analysis. We developed RIPSeeker
(http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/2.12/bioc/html/RIPSeeker.html), a free
open-source Bioconductor/R package for de novo RIP peak predictions based on HMM.
To demonstrate the utility of the software package, we applied RIPSeeker and six 
other published programs to three independent RIP-seq datasets and two PAR-CLIP
datasets corresponding to six distinct RNA-binding proteins. Based on receiver
operating curves, RIPSeeker demonstrates superior sensitivity and specificity in 
discriminating high-confidence peaks that are consistently agreed on among a
majority of the comparison methods, and dominated 9 of the 12 evaluations,
averaging 80% area under the curve. The peaks from RIPSeeker are further
confirmed based on their significant enrichment for biologically meaningful
genomic elements, published sequence motifs and association with canonical
transcripts known to interact with the proteins examined. While RIPSeeker is
specifically tailored for RIP-seq data analysis, it also provides a suite of
bioinformatics tools integrated within a self-contained software package
comprehensively addressing issues ranging from post-alignments' processing to
visualization and annotation.

PMCID: PMC3632129
PMID: 23455476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2013 Feb 28;6(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-6-3.

Functional characterization of EZH2ß reveals the increased complexity of EZH2
isoforms involved in the regulation of mammalian gene expression.

Grzenda A(1), Lomberk G, Svingen P, Mathison A, Calvo E, Iovanna J, Xiong Y,
Faubion W, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA. urrutia.raul@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) forms 
an obligate repressive complex with suppressor of zeste 12 and embryonic ectoderm
development, which is thought, along with EZH1, to be primarily responsible for
mediating Polycomb-dependent gene silencing. Polycomb-mediated repression
influences gene expression across the entire gamut of biological processes,
including development, differentiation and cellular proliferation. Deregulation
of EZH2 expression is implicated in numerous complex human diseases. To date,
most EZH2-mediated function has been primarily ascribed to a single protein
product of the EZH2 locus.
RESULTS: We report that the EZH2 locus undergoes alternative splicing to yield at
least two structurally and functionally distinct EZH2 methyltransferases. The
longest protein encoded by this locus is the conventional enzyme, which we refer 
to as EZH2a, whereas EZH2ß, characterized here, represents a novel isoform. We
find that EZH2ß localizes to the cell nucleus, complexes with embryonic ectoderm 
development and suppressor of zeste 12, trimethylates histone 3 at lysine 27, and
mediates silencing of target promoters. At the cell biological level, we find
that increased EZH2ß induces cell proliferation, demonstrating that this protein 
is functional in the regulation of processes previously attributed to EZH2a.
Biochemically, through the use of genome-wide expression profiling, we
demonstrate that EZH2ß governs a pattern of gene repression that is often
ontologically redundant from that of EZH2a, but also divergent for a wide variety
of specific target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined, these results demonstrate that an expanded repertoire of
EZH2 writers can modulate histone code instruction during histone 3 lysine
27-mediated gene silencing. These data support the notion that the regulation of 
EZH2-mediated gene silencing is more complex than previously anticipated and
should guide the design and interpretation of future studies aimed at
understanding the biochemical and biological roles of this important family of
epigenomic regulators.

PMCID: PMC3606351
PMID: 23448518  [PubMed]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 22;432(4):612-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.036. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Downregulated LncRNA-ANCR promotes osteoblast differentiation by targeting EZH2
and regulating Runx2 expression.

Zhu L(1), Xu PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Dental Clinic of Xuhui District, 685 Zhaojiabang 
Road, Shanghai 200032, People's Republic of China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are key regulators of diverse biological processes 
such as transcriptional regulation, cell growth and differentiation. Previous
studies have demonstrated that the lncRNA-ANCR (anti-differentiation ncRNA) is
required to maintain the undifferentiated cell state within the epidermis.
However, little is known about whether ANCR regulates osteoblast differentiation.
In this study, we found that the ANCR expression level is significantly decreased
during hFOB1.19 cell differentiation. ANCR-siRNA blocks the expression of
endogenous ANCR, resulting in osteoblast differentiation, whereas ANCR
overexpression is sufficient to inhibit osteoblast differentiation. We further
demonstrated that ANCR is associated with enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and 
that this association results in the inhibition of both Runx2 expression and
subsequent osteoblast differentiation. These data suggest that ANCR is an
essential mediator of osteoblast differentiation, thus offering a new target for 
the development of therapeutic agents to treat bone diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23438432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 27;33(9):1148-57. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.46. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

JARID2 is a direct target of the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion protein and inhibits myogenic 
differentiation of rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

Walters ZS(1), Villarejo-Balcells B(1), Olmos D(2), Buist TW(3), Missiaglia E(4),
Allen R(1), Al-Lazikani B(5), Garrett MD(6), Blagg J(7), Shipley J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer 
Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, London, UK. (2)1]
Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer
Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, London, UK [2]
Sarcoma Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital NHS Trust, London, UK. (3)1] Sarcoma
Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular Pathology and Cancer
Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, London, UK [2]
Computational Biology and Chemogenomics, Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics
Unit, Division of Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
London, UK. (4)1] Sarcoma Molecular Pathology Team, Divisions of Molecular
Pathology and Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton,
Surrey, London, UK [2] Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Bioinformatics Core
Facility, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (5)Computational Biology
and Chemogenomics, Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division of
Cancer Therapeutics, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, London, UK. (6)Cell
Cycle Control Team, Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division of
Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, London,
UK. (7)Medicinal Chemistry, Cancer Research UK Cancer Therapeutics Unit, Division
of Cancer Therapeutics, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, London, UK.

Rhabdomyosarcomas (RMS) are the most frequent soft-tissue sarcoma in children and
characteristically show features of developing skeletal muscle. The alveolar
subtype is frequently associated with a PAX3-FOXO1 fusion protein that is known
to contribute to the undifferentiated myogenic phenotype of RMS cells. Histone
methylation of lysine residues controls developmental processes in both normal
and malignant cell contexts. Here we show that JARID2, which encodes a protein
known to recruit various complexes with histone-methylating activity to their
target genes, is significantly overexpressed in RMS with PAX3-FOXO1 compared with
the fusion gene-negative RMS (t-test; P < 0.0001). Multivariate analyses showed
that higher JARID2 levels are also associated with metastases at diagnosis,
independent of fusion gene status and RMS subtype (n = 120; P = 0.039). JARID2
levels were altered by silencing or overexpressing PAX3-FOXO1 in RMS cell lines
with and without the fusion gene, respectively. Consistent with this, we
demonstrated that JARID2 is a direct transcriptional target of the PAX3-FOXO1
fusion protein. Silencing JARID2 resulted in reduced cell proliferation coupled
with myogenic differentiation, including increased expression of Myogenin (MYOG) 
and Myosin Light Chain (MYL1) in RMS cell lines representative of both the
alveolar and embryonal subtypes. Induced myogenic differentiation was associated 
with a decrease in JARID2 levels and this phenotype could be rescued by
overexpressing JARID2. Furthermore, we that showed JARID2 binds to and alters the
methylation status of histone H3 lysine 27 in the promoter regions of MYOG and
MYL1 and that the interaction of JARID2 at these promoters is dependent on EED, a
core component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Therefore, JARID2 is 
a downstream effector of PAX3-FOXO1 that maintains an undifferentiated myogenic
phenotype that is characteristic of RMS. JARID2 and other components of PRC2 may 
represent novel therapeutic targets for treating RMS patients.

PMCID: PMC3982124
PMID: 23435416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Pathol. 2013 Jul;230(3):277-90. doi: 10.1002/path.4179.

Role of STAT3 and vitamin D receptor in EZH2-mediated invasion of human
colorectal cancer.

Lin YW(1), Ren LL, Xiong H, Du W, Yu YN, Sun TT, Weng YR, Wang ZH, Wang JL, Wang 
YC, Cui Y, Sun DF, Han ZG, Shen N, Zou W, Xu J, Chen HY, Cao W, Hong J, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai
Institution of Digestive Disease, Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Ministry of Health, State Key Laboratory of Oncogene and Related
Genes, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, 145 Middle Shandong
Road, Shanghai, 200001, China.

Erratum in
    J Pathol. 2016 Mar;238(4):599.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), which has
histone methyltransferase (HMT) activity, is overexpressed in malignant tumours. 
However, the role of EZH2 in colorectal cancer (CRC) invasion is little known.
Here we investigated the clinical significance, biological effects, and
mechanisms of EZH2 signalling. Knockdown of EZH2 significantly reduced cell
invasion and secretion of matrix metalloproteinases 2/9 (MMP2/9) in in vitro
studies. Knockdown of EZH2 dramatically increased overall survival and decreased 
metastasis of lung in in vivo studies. Conversely, overexpression of EZH2
significantly increased lung metastasis and shortened overall survival when
compared with control tumours. EZH2-induced CRC cell invasion may depend on
down-regulation of vitamin D receptor (VDR), which is considered to be a marker
of CRC invasion. EZH2 regulates the histone trimethylation of lysine 27
(H3K27me3) in the VDR promoter. Moreover, we found that STAT3 directly binds to
the EZH2 promoter and regulates VDR down-regulation in CRC cells. Significant
inverse correlations were observed between the expression of EZH2 and pSTAT3 and 
that of VDR in CRC tissues compared with normal tissue in patients. We show the
role of EZH2 in CRC metastasis and identify VDR as a target gene of EZH2. EZH2
expression may be directly regulated by STAT3, and STAT3 may play an important
role in EZH2-mediated VDR down-regulation in CRC. This pathway may provide
potential targets in aggressive CRC.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23424038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cancer Sci. 2013 Jun;104(6):750-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12132. Epub 2013 Mar 24.

Sorafenib suppresses growth and survival of hepatoma cells by accelerating
degradation of enhancer of zeste homolog 2.

Wang S(1), Zhu Y, He H, Liu J, Xu L, Zhang H, Liu H, Liu W, Liu Y, Pan D, Chen L,
Wu Q, Xu J, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a mammalian histone methyltransferase that 
contributes to the epigenetic silencing of target genes that regulate cancer cell
growth and survival. It is overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with a
clinical significance that remains obscure. Sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor,
has been used as a first-line therapeutic drug and shown clinical efficiency for 
advanced-stage HCC patients. In the present study, we found that sorafenib
lowered the protein level of EZH2 through accelerating proteasome-mediated EZH2
degradation in hepatoma cells. Overexpression of EZH2 reversed sorafenib-induced 
cell growth arrest, cell cycle arrest, and cell apoptosis dependent on histone
methyltransferase activity in hepatoma cells. More importantly, shRNA-mediated
EZH2 knockdown or EZH2 inhibition with 3-deazaneplanocin A treatment promoted
sorafenib-induced hepatoma cell growth arrest and apoptosis. Sorafenib altered
the hepatoma epigenome by reducing EZH2 and H3K27 trimethylation. These results
revealed a novel therapeutic mechanism underlying sorafenib treatment in
suppressing hepatoma growth and survival by accelerating EZH2 degradation.
Genetic deletion or pharmacological ablation of EZH2 made hepatoma cells more
sensitive to sorafenib, which helps provide a strong framework for exploring
innovative combined therapies for advanced-stage HCC patients.

© 2013 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23421437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Epigenomics. 2013 Feb;5(1):51-63. doi: 10.2217/epi.12.74.

Histone lysine trimethylation or acetylation can be modulated by phytoestrogen,
estrogen or anti-HDAC in breast cancer cell lines.

Dagdemir A(1), Durif J, Ngollo M, Bignon YJ, Bernard-Gallon D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Jean Perrin, Département d'Oncogénétique, CBRV, Clermont-Ferrand,
France.

AIM: The isoflavones genistein, daidzein and equol (daidzein metabolite) have
been reported to interact with epigenetic modifications, specifically
hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes. The objective of this study was to
analyze and understand the mechanisms by which phytoestrogens act on chromatin in
breast cancer cell lines.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Two breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231, were
treated with genistein (18.5 µM), daidzein (78.5 µM), equol (12.8 µM),
17ß-estradiol (10 nM) and suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (1 µM) for 48 h. A
control with untreated cells was performed. 17ß-estradiol and an anti-HDAC were
used to compare their actions with phytoestrogens. The chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with quantitative PCR was used to follow soy
phytoestrogen effects on H3 and H4 histones on H3K27me3, H3K9me3, H3K4me3, H4K8ac
and H3K4ac marks, and we selected six genes (EZH2, BRCA1, ERa, ERß, SRC3 and
P300) for analysis.
RESULTS: Soy phytoestrogens induced a decrease in trimethylated marks and an
increase in acetylating marks studied at six selected genes.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that soy phytoestrogens tend to modify transcription 
through the demethylation and acetylation of histones in breast cancer cell
lines.

PMID: 23414320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Brain Pathol. 2013 Sep;23(5):558-64. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12042. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Evaluation of histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and enhancer of Zest 
2 (EZH2) in pediatric glial and glioneuronal tumors shows decreased H3K27me3 in
H3F3A K27M mutant glioblastomas.

Venneti S(1), Garimella MT, Sullivan LM, Martinez D, Huse JT, Heguy A, Santi M,
Thompson CB, Judkins AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, USA.

H3F3A mutations are seen in ~30% of pediatric glioblastoma (GBMs) and involve
either the lysine residue at position 27 (K27M) or glycine at position 34
(G34R/V). Sixteen genes encode histone H3, each variant differing in only a few
amino acids. Therefore, how mutations in a single H3 gene contribute to
carcinogenesis is unknown. H3F3A K27M mutations are predicted to alter
methylation of H3K27. H3K27me3 is a repressive mark critical to stem cell
maintenance and is mediated by EZH2, a member of the polycomb-group (PcG) family.
We evaluated H3K27me3 and EZH2 expression using immunohistochemistry in 76
pediatric brain tumors. H3K27me3 was lowered/absent in tumor cells but preserved 
in endothelial cells and infiltrating lymphocytes in six out of 20 GBMs. H3K27me3
showed strong immunoreactivity in all other tumor subtypes. Sequencing of GBMs
showed H3F3A K27M mutations in all six cases with lowered/absent H3K27me3. EZH2
expression was high in GBMs, but absent/focal in other tumors. However, no
significant differences in EZH2 expression were observed between H3F3A K27M
mutant and wild type GBMs, suggesting that EZH2 mediated trimethylation of H3K27 
is inhibited in GBM harboring K27M mutations. Our results indicate that H3F3A
K27M mutant GBMs show decreased H3K27me3 that may be of both diagnostic and
biological relevance.

© 2013 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMCID: PMC3701028
PMID: 23414300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. BMC Genomics. 2013 Feb 15;14:104. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-104.

A highly expressed miR-101 isomiR is a functional silencing small RNA.

Llorens F(1), Bañez-Coronel M, Pantano L, del Río JA, Ferrer I, Estivill X, Martí
E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Neurobiotechnology Group, Institut de Bioenginyeria de 
Catalunya, Parc Científic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding regulatory RNAs that control 
gene expression usually producing translational repression and gene silencing.
High-throughput sequencing technologies have revealed heterogeneity at length and
sequence level for the majority of mature miRNAs (IsomiRs). Most isomiRs can be
explained by variability in either Dicer1 or Drosha cleavage during miRNA
biogenesis at 5' or 3' of the miRNA (trimming variants). Although isomiRs have
been described in different tissues and organisms, their functional validation as
modulators of gene expression remains elusive. Here we have characterized the
expression and function of a highly abundant miR-101 5'-trimming variant
(5'-isomiR-101).
RESULTS: The analysis of small RNA sequencing data in several human tissues and
cell lines indicates that 5'-isomiR-101 is ubiquitously detected and a highly
abundant, especially in the brain. 5'-isomiR-101 was found in Ago-2
immunocomplexes and complementary approaches showed that 5'-isomiR-101 interacted
with different members of the silencing (RISC) complex. In addition,
5'-isomiR-101 decreased the expression of five validated miR-101 targets,
suggesting that it is a functional variant. Both the binding to RISC members and 
the degree of silencing were less efficient for 5'-isomiR-101 compared with
miR-101. For some targets, both miR-101 and 5'-isomiR-101 significantly decreased
protein expression with no changes in the respective mRNA levels. Although a high
number of overlapping predicted targets suggest similar targeted biological
pathways, a correlation analysis of the expression profiles of miR-101 variants
and predicted mRNA targets in human brains at different ages, suggest specific
functions for miR-101- and 5'-isomiR-101.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that isomiRs are functional variants and
further indicate that for a given miRNA, the different isomiRs may contribute to 
the overall effect as quantitative and qualitative fine-tuners of gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3751341
PMID: 23414127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Assay Drug Dev Technol. 2013 Apr;11(3):152-62. doi: 10.1089/adt.2012.481. Epub
2013 Feb 14.

Development and implementation of a high-throughput AlphaLISA assay for
identifying inhibitors of EZH2 methyltransferase.

Simard JR(1), Plant M, Emkey R, Yu V.

Author information: 
(1)Amgen, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA. simard@amgen.com

The methylation state of lysine residues within histone H3 is a major determinant
of active and inactive regions of the genome. Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) 
is a histone lysine methyltransferase that is part of the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2). Elevated EZH2 expression levels have been linked to
hypertrimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), repression of tumor
repressor genes, and the onset of several types of cancers. We used the AlphaLISA
technology to develop a high-throughput assay for identifying small molecule
inhibitors of EZH2. AlphaLISA Acceptor Beads coated with antibodies directed
against methylated H3K27 provided a sensitive method of detecting EZH2 activity
through measurement of K27 methylation of a biotinylated H3-based peptide
substrate. Optimized assay conditions resulted in a robust assay (Z'>0.7) which
was successfully implemented in a high-throughput screening campaign. Small
molecule inhibitors identified by this method may serve as powerful tools to
further elucidate the potential importance of EZH2 in the development and
treatment of cancer.

PMID: 23409774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Mar 1;54(3):2248-56. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-10977.

MicroRNA-124a is epigenetically regulated and acts as a tumor suppressor by
controlling multiple targets in uveal melanoma.

Chen X(1), He D, Dong XD, Dong F, Wang J, Wang L, Tang J, Hu DN, Yan D, Tu L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Ophthalmology and Optometry, Eye Hospital, Wenzhou Medical College, 
Wenzhou, Zhejiang, China.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2013 Jun;5(3):251-52.

PURPOSE: MicroRNA-124a (miR-124a), an abundant microRNA in the central neuron
system, has been linked to tumor progression. Here, we investigated the role of
miR-124a in uveal melanoma development.
METHODS: Expression of miR-124a in uveal melanoma cells was examined using real
time RT-PCR. The effect of miR-124a on cell proliferation, migration, and
invasion was analyzed using MTS assay, flow cytometry, and transwell experiments.
The ability of miR-124a to repress tumor growth was tested in vivo. Target genes 
of miR-124a were first predicted by bioinformatics, confirmed using a luciferase 
assay, and their expression determined by Western blotting. DNA methylation and
histone modification of miR-124a was analyzed by methylation-specific PCR and
ChIP assay. Finally, epigenetic drugs were used to alter the expression of
miR-124a.
RESULTS: miR-124a expression was downregulated in both uveal melanoma cells and
clinical specimens. Transient transfection of miR-124a into uveal melanoma cells 
inhibited cell growth, migration, and invasion. Moreover, introduction of
miR-124a suppressed in vivo growth of tumor. Potential targets of miR-124a were
found to include CDK4, CDK6, cyclin D2, and EZH2. Knockdown of EZH2 by siRNA
resulted in inhibition of uveal melanoma cell migration and invasion. In
addition, miR-124a expression was found to be regulated via epigenetic
mechanisms, with its expression restored when cells were treated with a DNA
hypomethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, and a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, trichostatin A.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that miR-124a could function as a potent
tumor suppressor by regulation of multiple targets, and was epigenetically
silenced in the development of uveal melanoma.

PMID: 23404119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cell Rep. 2013 Feb 21;3(2):291-300. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.01.011. Epub 2013 
Feb 9.

Dynamics of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine and chromatin marks in Mammalian
neurogenesis.

Hahn MA(1), Qiu R, Wu X, Li AX, Zhang H, Wang J, Jui J, Jin SG, Jiang Y, Pfeifer 
GP, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

DNA methylation in mammals is highly dynamic during germ cell and preimplantation
development but is relatively static during the development of somatic tissues.
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), created by oxidation of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) by
Tet proteins and most abundant in the brain, is thought to be an intermediary
toward 5mC demethylation. We investigated patterns of 5mC and 5hmC during
neurogenesis in the embryonic mouse brain. 5hmC levels increase during neuronal
differentiation. In neuronal cells, 5hmC is not enriched at enhancers but
associates preferentially with gene bodies of activated neuronal function-related
genes. Within these genes, gain of 5hmC is often accompanied by loss of H3K27me3.
Enrichment of 5hmC is not associated with substantial DNA demethylation,
suggesting that 5hmC is a stable epigenetic mark. Functional perturbation of the 
H3K27 methyltransferase Ezh2 or of Tet2 and Tet3 leads to defects in neuronal
differentiation, suggesting that formation of 5hmC and loss of H3K27me3 cooperate
to promote brain development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582786
PMID: 23403289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gastroenterology. 2013 May;144(5):1086-1097.e9. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2013.01.058. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 silences microRNA-218 in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells by inducing formation of heterochromatin.

Li CH(1), To KF, Tong JH, Xiao Z, Xia T, Lai PB, Chow SC, Zhu YX, Chan SL,
Marquez VE, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone
methyltransferase that is overexpressed by pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC) cells and increases their aggressiveness. We identified microRNAs (miRs)
that are regulated by EZH2 and studied their functions in PDAC cells.
METHODS: We performed miR profile analysis of PDAC cells incubated with EZH2
inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A, and pancreatic ductal epithelial cells that
overexpressed EZH2. Expression levels of miRs and the targets of miRs were
analyzed by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry. We expressed different forms of EZH2 to analyze functional 
domains and used small interfering RNAs to reduce its level in PDAC cells.
RESULTS: Expression of miR-218 was repressed by EZH2 in PDAC cells. Levels of
miR-218 were significantly reduced in primary PDAC tumor samples compared with
paired, adjacent nontumor tissue. Overexpression of miR-218 in SW1990 cells
reduced their proliferation and tumor formation and metastasis in nude mice. Loss
of miR-218 from SW1990 cells increased levels of UDP-glycosyltransferase 8 and
miR-218 was found to bind to its 3'-UTR. Levels of UDP-glycosyltransferase
protein and messenger RNA were associated with the metastatic potential of PDAC
cell lines and progression of tumors in patients. EZH2 was found to silence
miR-218 by binding to its promoter, promoting heterochromatin formation, and
recruiting the DNAs methyltransferase 1, 3A, and 3B.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 is up-regulated in PDAC samples from patients and silences
miR-218. MicroRNA-218 prevents proliferation of PDAC cells in culture, and tumor 
growth and metastasis in nude mice. MicroRNA-218 reduces levels of
UDP-glycosyltransferase, which is associated with the metastatic potential of
PDAC tumors in mice and progression of human PDAC.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23395645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Hematology. 2013 Jul;18(4):217-23. doi: 10.1179/1607845412Y.0000000056. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

The roles of epigenetic modifications of proapoptotic BID and BIM genes in
imatinib-resistant chronic myeloid leukemia cells.

Bozkurt S(1), Özkan T, Özmen F, Baran Y, Sunguroglu A, Kansu E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Oncology, Insitute of Oncology, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey. subozkurt@yahoo.com

In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), epigenetic modifications such as promoter
hypermethylation and inactive histone modification are known mechanisms of drug
resistance. In our study, we investigated the roles of promoter hypermethylation 
of BIM and BID genes and H3K27me3 histone modification on imatinib resistance. We
detected higher expression levels of BIM and BID genes and lower expression
levels of EZH2, EED2, SIRT1, and SUZ12 genes in imatinib-resistant K562/IMA-3
cells compared to imatinib-non-resistant K562 cells. While we determined the EZH2
and DNMT enzymes as bounded to the promoter of the BIM gene, we did not detect
hypermethylation of this promoter. We also found the H3K27me3 histone
modification promoter of BIM and BID genes in both cell lines. In conclusion, our
results support the notion that DNA promoter methylation may be formed
independently from EZH2-H3K27me3 and pro-apoptotic BIM and BID genes are not
methyllated in the imatinib resistance of CML cells.

PMID: 23394612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(30):5362-73.

How recent advances in high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome physiopathology may
impact future treatments.

Cluzeau T(1), Robert G, Jacquel A, Auberger P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1065, Centre Mediterraneen de Médecine Moléculaire (C3M), Team Cell
Death, Differentiation, Inflammation and Cancer, Nice, France.

Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDSs) are clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders
characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis that often develop into acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). MDSs are predominant in the elderly with an incidence of
20/100000 at 70 years of age. To date, the only curative treatment is allogeneic 
stem cell transplantation; however, a majority of patients are not eligible for
this therapy. Azacitidine (AZA), a hypomethylating agent, remains the primary
treatment for MDS patients, which leads to a significant increase in overall
survival (OS), although it is not curative. Although it is well known that the
impairment of apoptosis and differentiation are important features of this
complex disease, the implication of autophagy in the pathogenesis of MDS is an
emerging concept. Another significant advance in MDS pathogenesis research is the
recent identification of mutations in genes encoding transcription factors
implicated in hematopoiesis and proteins involved in splicing (SF3B1),
methylation (DNMT3A), regulation of methylation (TET2 and IDH), DNA conformation 
(EZH2 and ASXL1) and differentiation (N- and K-RAS). Additionally, BCL2 family
member expression and regulation may also affect the physiopathology of this
disease. We have recently reported that targeting autophagy may be an interesting
option for the treatment of AZA-resistant patients. Thus, targeting the products 
of the above-mentioned genes or the signaling pathways affected by the
corresponding proteins may be of great interest for the development of a new
arsenal of molecules to fight MDS. In this review, we discuss the new aspects of 
MDS physiopathology and how recent advances in MDS pathogenesis research may
impact future treatments to improve the outcome of MDS patients.

PMID: 23394086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. N Biotechnol. 2013 May 25;30(4):381-4. doi: 10.1016/j.nbt.2013.01.007. Epub 2013 
Feb 4.

Genetics and epigenetics of liver cancer.

Ozen C(1), Yildiz G, Dagcan AT, Cevik D, Ors A, Keles U, Topel H, Ozturk M.

Author information: 
(1)Bilkent University, BilGen Genetics and Biotechnology Center, Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, 06800 Ankara, Turkey.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents a major form of primary liver cancer in
adults. Chronic infections with hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) viruses and alcohol
abuse are the major factors leading to HCC. This deadly cancer affects more than 
500,000 people worldwide and it is quite resistant to conventional chemo- and
radiotherapy. Genetic and epigenetic studies on HCC may help to understand better
its mechanisms and provide new tools for early diagnosis and therapy. Recent
literature on whole genome analysis of HCC indicated a high number of mutated
genes in addition to well-known genes such as TP53, CTNNB1, AXIN1 and CDKN2A, but
their frequencies are much lower. Apart from CTNNB1 mutations, most of the other 
mutations appear to result in loss-of-function. Thus, HCC-associated mutations
cannot be easily targeted for therapy. Epigenetic aberrations that appear to
occur quite frequently may serve as new targets. Global DNA hypomethylation,
promoter methylation, aberrant expression of non-coding RNAs and dysregulated
expression of other epigenetic regulatory genes such as EZH2 are the best-known
epigenetic abnormalities. Future research in this direction may help to identify 
novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets for HCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23392071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Reprogram. 2013 Feb;15(1):92-9. doi: 10.1089/cell.2012.0043.

Higher methylation in genomic DNA indicates incomplete reprogramming in induced
pluripotent stem cells.

Zhou W(1), Wang K, Ruan W, Bo Z, Liu L, Cao Z, Chai L, Cao G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Henan University, Kaifeng, PR China.

Pluripotent stem cells can be created successfully through the inner cell mass
(ICM), nuclear transfer, and defined-factor induction. Unfortunately, the
epigenetic characteristics of the cells produced are poorly understood. In this
article, we compared expression levels of enzymes involved in epigenetic
modifications across six pluripotent stem cell lines. Six of the 11 genes
evaluated here (Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Tet1, Ezh2, Mll1, and Lsd1) showed abnormally low
levels of expression in the two germ-line chimeric induced pluripotent stem cell 
(iPSC) lines. We also conducted locus-specific analysis of DNA methylation at 9
loci. Although iPSCs did express Oct4, the Oct4 promoter region was shown to have
a higher level of DNA methylation. The Xist and Line-1 repeating sequences
differed relatively little in methylation level across the cell lines, but Peg3, 
Peg10, and H19 exhibited high degrees of variation in the pattern of DNA
methylation. Meg3 in the Dlk1-Dio3 imprinting cluster was incompletely methylated
in embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and nuclear transfer (nt) ESCs. However, in
germ-line chimeric iPSCs, Meg3 was almost entirely methylated. ESC and ntESC
lines showed twice as much Meg3 expression than in the iPSC lines. The genomic
5mC contents detected by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) indicated that, despite their germ-line chimeric abilities, iPSCs remained
incompletely reprogrammed, even though no direct evidence is shown here.

PMCID: PMC3567703
PMID: 23379582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Rep. 2013 Feb 21;3(2):411-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.12.020. Epub 2013
Jan 31.

Global changes in the mammary epigenome are induced by hormonal cues and
coordinated by Ezh2.

Pal B(1), Bouras T, Shi W, Vaillant F, Sheridan JM, Fu N, Breslin K, Jiang K,
Ritchie ME, Young M, Lindeman GJ, Smyth GK, Visvader JE.

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville VIC 3052, Australia.

The mammary epithelium is a dynamic, highly hormone-responsive tissue. To explore
chromatin modifications underlying its lineage specification and hormone
responsiveness, we determined genome-wide histone methylation profiles of mammary
epithelial subpopulations in different states. The marked differences in H3K27
trimethylation between subpopulations in the adult gland suggest that epithelial 
cell-fate decisions are orchestrated by polycomb-complex-mediated repression.
Remarkably, the mammary epigenome underwent highly specific changes in different 
hormonal contexts, with a profound change being observed in the global H3K27me3
map of luminal cells during pregnancy. We therefore examined the role of the key 
H3K27 methyltransferase Ezh2 in mammary physiology. Its expression and
phosphorylation coincided with H3K27me3 modifications and peaked during
pregnancy, driven in part by progesterone. Targeted deletion of Ezh2 impaired
alveologenesis during pregnancy, preventing lactation, and drastically reduced
stem/progenitor cell numbers. Taken together, these findings reveal that Ezh2
couples hormonal stimuli to epigenetic changes that underpin progenitor activity,
lineage specificity, and alveolar expansion in the mammary gland.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23375371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Front Oncol. 2013 Jan 25;3:1. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00001. eCollection 2013.

MYCN and the epigenome.

He S(1), Liu Z, Oh DY, Thiele CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute Bethesda, MD, USA.

It is well known that Neuroblastoma (NB) patients whose tumors have an
undifferentiated histology and a transcriptome enriched in cell cycle genes have 
a worse prognosis. This contrasts with the good prognoses of patients whose
tumors have histologic evidence of differentiation and a transcriptome enriched
in differentiation genes. Tumor cell lines from poor prognosis, high-risk
patients contain a number of genetic alterations, including amplification of
MYCN, 1pLOH, and unbalanced 11q or gains of Chr 17 and 7, and exhibit
uncontrolled growth and an undifferentiated phenotype in in vitro culture. Yet
treatment of such NB cell lines with retinoic acid results in growth control and 
induction of differentiation. This indicates that the signaling pathways that
regulate cell growth and differentiation are not functionally lost but
dysregulated. Agents such as retinoic acid normalize the signaling pathways and
impose growth control and induction of differentiation. Recent studies in
embryonic stem cells indicate that polycomb repressor complex proteins (PRC1 and 
PRC2) play a major role in regulating stem cell lineage specification and
coordinating the shift from a transcriptome that supports self-renewal or growth 
to one that specifies lineage and controls growth. We have shown that in NB, the 
PRC2 complex is elevated in undifferentiated NB tumors and functions to suppress 
a number of tumor suppressor genes. This study will review the role of MYC genes 
in regulating the epigenome in normal development and explore how this role may
be altered during tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3555505
PMID: 23373009  [PubMed]


86. J Biol Chem. 2013 Mar 22;288(12):8332-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.454280. Epub 2013
Jan 28.

Physical interaction between MYCN oncogene and polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) in neuroblastoma: functional and therapeutic implications.

Corvetta D(1), Chayka O, Gherardi S, D'Acunto CW, Cantilena S, Valli E,
Piotrowska I, Perini G, Sala A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, University College London
Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

CLU (clusterin) is a tumor suppressor gene that we have previously shown to be
negatively modulated by the MYCN proto-oncogene, but the mechanism of repression 
was unclear. Here, we show that MYCN inhibits the expression of CLU by direct
interaction with the non-canonical E box sequence CACGCG in the 5'-flanking
region. Binding of MYCN to the CLU gene induces bivalent epigenetic marks and
recruitment of repressive proteins such as histone deacetylases and Polycomb
members. MYCN physically binds in vitro and in vivo to EZH2, a component of the
Polycomb repressive complex 2, required to repress CLU. Notably, EZH2 interacts
with the Myc box domain 3, a segment of MYC known to be essential for its
transforming effects. The expression of CLU can be restored in MYCN-amplified
cells by epigenetic drugs with therapeutic results. Importantly, the anticancer
effects of the drugs are ablated if CLU expression is blunted by RNA
interference. Our study implies that MYC tumorigenesis can be effectively
antagonized by epigenetic drugs that interfere with the recruitment of chromatin 
modifiers at repressive E boxes of tumor suppressor genes such as CLU.

PMCID: PMC3605651
PMID: 23362253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cancer Cytopathol. 2013 Jul;121(7):377-86. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21262. Epub 2013 Jan
29.

EZH2 and CD79B mutational status over time in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas
detected by high-throughput sequencing using minimal samples.

Saieg MA(1), Geddie WR, Boerner SL, Bailey D, Crump M, da Cunha Santos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Numerous genomic abnormalities in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs)
have been revealed by novel high-throughput technologies, including recurrent
mutations in EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) and CD79B (B cell antigen
receptor complex-associated protein beta chain) genes. This study sought to
determine the evolution of the mutational status of EZH2 and CD79B over time in
different samples from the same patient in a cohort of B-cell NHLs, through use
of a customized multiplex mutation assay.
METHODS: DNA that was extracted from cytological material stored on FTA cards as 
well as from additional specimens, including archived frozen and formalin-fixed
histological specimens, archived stained smears, and cytospin preparations, were 
submitted to a multiplex mutation assay specifically designed for the detection
of point mutations involving EZH2 and CD79B, using MassARRAY spectrometry
followed by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: All 121 samples from 80 B-cell NHL cases were successfully analyzed.
Mutations in EZH2 (Y646) and CD79B (Y196) were detected in 13.2% and 8% of the
samples, respectively, almost exclusively in follicular lymphomas and diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas. In one-third of the positive cases, a wild type was
detected in a different sample from the same patient during follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Testing multiple minimal tissue samples using a high-throughput
multiplex platform exponentially increases tissue availability for molecular
analysis and might facilitate future studies of tumor progression and the related
molecular events. Mutational status of EZH2 and CD79B may vary in B-cell NHL
samples over time and support the concept that individualized therapy should be
based on molecular findings at the time of treatment, rather than on results
obtained from previous specimens. Cancer (Cancer Cytopathol) 2013;121:377-386. © 
2013 American Cancer Society.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3799012
PMID: 23361872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Apr;11(4):360-9. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0661. Epub
2013 Jan 29.

NF-YA underlies EZH2 upregulation and is essential for proliferation of human
epithelial ovarian cancer cells.

Garipov A(1), Li H, Bitler BG, Thapa RJ, Balachandran S, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) accounts for the most gynecologic
malignancy-associated deaths in the United States. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2), which silences gene expression through generating trimethylation on
lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3), is often overexpressed in EOCs and
has been suggested as a therapeutic target. However, the mechanism underlying
EZH2 overexpression in EOCs is unknown. Here, we show that EZH2 is upregulated at
the transcription level, and two CCAAT boxes in the proximal regions of the human
EZH2 gene promoter are critical for its transcription in EOC cells. Indeed,
NF-YA, the regulatory subunit of the CCAAT-binding transcription factor NF-Y, is 
expressed at higher levels in human EOCs than in primary human ovarian surface
epithelial (HOSE) cells. In addition, there is a positive correlation between
expression of NF-YA and EZH2 in EOCs. Notably, high NF-YA expression predicts
shorter overall survival in patients with EOCs. The association of NF-YA with the
promoter of the human EZH2 gene is enhanced in human EOC cells compared with
primary HOSE cells. Significantly, knockdown of NF-YA downregulates EZH2,
decreases H3K27Me3 levels, and suppresses the growth of human EOC cells both in
vitro and in a xenograft mouse model. Notably, NF-YA knockdown induces apoptosis 
of EOC cells and ectopic EZH2 expression partially rescues apoptosis induced by
NF-YA knockdown. Together, these data reveal that NF-Y is a key regulator of EZH2
expression and is required for EOC cell proliferation, thus representing a novel 
target for developing EOC therapeutics.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3631279
PMID: 23360797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55119. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055119. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations, ubiquitous in human cancers.

Shain AH(1), Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America.

SWI/SNF is a multi-subunit chromatin remodeling complex that uses the energy of
ATP hydrolysis to reposition nucleosomes, thereby modulating gene expression.
Accumulating evidence suggests that SWI/SNF functions as a tumor suppressor in
some cancers. However, the spectrum of SWI/SNF mutations across human cancers has
not been systematically investigated. Here, we mined whole-exome sequencing data 
from 24 published studies representing 669 cases from 18 neoplastic diagnoses.
SWI/SNF mutations were widespread across diverse human cancers, with an excess of
deleterious mutations, and an overall frequency approaching TP53 mutation.
Mutations occurred most commonly in the SMARCA4 enzymatic subunit, and in
subunits thought to confer functional specificity (ARID1A, ARID1B, PBRM1, and
ARID2). SWI/SNF mutations were not mutually-exclusive of other mutated cancer
genes, including TP53 and EZH2 (both previously linked to SWI/SNF). Our findings 
implicate SWI/SNF as an important but under-recognized tumor suppressor in
diverse human cancers, and provide a key resource to guide future investigations.

PMCID: PMC3552954
PMID: 23355908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jun 10;333(2):213-21. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.01.033. Epub
2013 Jan 24.

Long non-coding RNA H19 increases bladder cancer metastasis by associating with
EZH2 and inhibiting E-cadherin expression.

Luo M(1), Li Z, Wang W, Zeng Y, Liu Z, Qiu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Tenth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji
University, Shanghai 200072, China.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Dec;190(6):2306.

lncRNA H19 is essential for human tumor growth. However, little is known about
whether H19 regulates bladder cancer metastasis. Here we found that H19 levels
are remarkably increased in bladder cancer tissues, and upregulated H19 promotes 
bladder cancer cell migration in vitro and in vivo. H19 is associated with
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), and that this association results in
Wnt/ß-catenin activation and subsequent downregulation of E-cadherin. A
significant negative correlation is also observed between H19 levels and E-cad
levels in vivo. These data suggest that upregulated H19 enhances bladder cancer
metastasis by associating with EZH2 and inhibiting E-cad expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23354591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Jan;33(1):99-102.

[Expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 
and its prognostic value in postoperative patients].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Wang M, Lian G, Wu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital,
Guangzhou, China. piaozhuimeng@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and its association with the prognosis of
postoperative patients.
METHODS: Surgical specimens were obtained from 102 patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma undergoing radical resection in our hospital from 1996 to
2006. Immunochemistry was employed to examine EZH2 protein expressions in the
specimens, including 102 carcinoma tissue specimens, 30 adjacent tissue specimens
and 30 normal esophageal tissue specimens. The expression levels of EZH2 were
analyzed in relation to the clinicopathological parameters of the patients
including gender, age, tumor differentiation, TNM, and lymph node metastasis. The
postoperative patients were followed up to analyze the association of EZH2
expression with the clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: The esophageal squamous cell carcinoma tissue showed a higher EZH2
expression than the adjacent and normal esophageal tissues. EZH2 expression was
higher in poorly differentiated carcinoma than in well differentiated tissue, and
also higher in cases with lymph node metastasis than those without; the
expression was higher in TNM stage II/III patients than in stage I patients but
lower than in stage IV patients. The patients with low EZH2 expression was found 
to have a longer survival time than those with high EZH2 expression (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 plays an important role in the differentiation and metastasis of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, and a high EZH2 expression is associated with
a poor outcome in the the postoperative patients.

PMID: 23353165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):918-27. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.074195. Epub
2013 Jan 24.

The trithorax protein partner menin acts in tandem with EZH2 to suppress C/EBPa
and differentiation in MLL-AF9 leukemia.

Thiel AT(1), Feng Z, Pant DK, Chodosh LA, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology,
Abramson Cancer Center, the University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):825-7.

Trithorax and polycomb group proteins antagonistically regulate the transcription
of many genes, and cancer can result from the disruption of this regulation.
Deregulation of trithorax function occurs through chromosomal translocations
involving the trithorax gene MLL, leading to the expression of MLL fusion
proteins and acute leukemia. It is poorly understood how MLL fusion proteins
block differentiation, a hallmark of leukemogenesis. We analyzed the effect of
acute depletion of menin, a close partner of MLL that is critical for MLL and
MLL-AF9 recruitment to target genes, on MLL-AF9 leukemia cell differentiation
using an in vivo model. We performed cDNA microarray analysis of menin-regulated 
genes from primary leukemia cells to determine menin-regulated pathways involved 
in suppressing MLL-AF9 leukemia cell differentiation. We found that menin binds
the promoter of the polycomb gene Ezh2, and promotes its expression. EZH2
interacts with the differentiation-promoting transcription factor C/EBPa and
represses C/EBPa target genes. Menin depletion reduces MLL binding to the Ezh2
locus, EZH2 expression, and EZH2 binding and repressive H3K27 methylation at
C/EBPa target genes, thereby inducing the expression of pro-differentiation
C/EBPa targets. In conclusion, our results show that in contrast to its classical
role antagonizing trithorax function, the polycomb group protein EZH2
collaborates with trithorax-associated menin to block MLL-AF9 leukemia cell
differentiation, uncovering a novel mechanism for suppression of C/EBPa and
leukemia cell differentiation, through menin-mediated upregulation of EZH2.

PMCID: PMC3669449
PMID: 23349306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Haematologica. 2013 Jun;98(6):908-12. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.076729. Epub
2013 Jan 24.

Mutational analysis of therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute
myelogenous leukemia.

Shih AH(1), Chung SS, Dolezal EK, Zhang SJ, Abdel-Wahab OI, Park CY, Nimer SD,
Levine RL, Klimek VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Leukemia Service, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA.

Therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemia comprise
a poor-risk subset of myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemia.
Large-scale mutation profiling efforts in de novo myelodysplastic syndromes have 
identified mutations that correlate with clinical features, but such mutations
have not been investigated in therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and acute
myelogenous leukemia. Genomic DNA from 38 patient samples were subjected to high 
throughput polymerase chain reaction and sequenced for TP53, TET2, DNMT3A, ASXL1,
IDH1, IDH2, EZH2, EED, SUZ12, RBBP4, SRSF2, U2AF35, and SF3B1. We identified
somatic mutations in 16 of 38 (42%) patients. TP53 mutations were the most common
lesion, detected in 8 of 38 (21%) patients, followed by TET2 in 4 of 38 (10.5%). 
Cases with a TP53 mutation or loss of the TP53 locus had a worse overall survival
compared to those with wild-type TP53 (8.8 vs. 37.4 months; P=0.0035).

PMCID: PMC3669447
PMID: 23349305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Am J Hematol. 2013 Feb;88(2):141-50. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23384.

Primary myelofibrosis: 2013 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and
management.

Tefferi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA. tefferi.ayalew@mayo.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hematol. 2013 May;88(5):437-45.

DISEASE OVERVIEW: Primary myelofibrosis (PMF) is a myeloproliferative neoplasm
characterized by stem cell-derived clonal myeloproliferation, abnormal cytokine
expression, bone marrow fibrosis, anemia, splenomegaly, extramedullary
hematopoiesis (EMH), constitutional symptoms, cachexia, leukemic progression, and
shortened survival.
DIAGNOSIS: Diagnosis is based on bone marrow morphology. The presence of
fibrosis, JAK2/MPL mutation, or +9/13q- cytogenetic abnormality is supportive but
not essential for diagnosis. Prefibrotic PMF mimics essential thrombocythemia in 
its presentation and the distinction is prognostically relevant. Differential
diagnosis of myelofibrosis should include chronic myeloid leukemia,
myelodysplastic syndromes, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and acute myeloid
leukemia.
RISK STRATIFICATION: The Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System-plus
(DIPSS-plus) prognostic model for PMF can be applied at any point during the
disease course and uses eight independent predictors of inferior survival: age
>65 years, hemoglobin <10 g/dL, leukocytes >25 × 10<U+2079>/L, circulating blasts = 1%, 
constitutional symptoms, red cell transfusion dependency, platelet count <100 ×
10<U+2079>/L, and unfavorable karyotype (i.e., complex karyotype or sole or two
abnormalities that include +8, -7/7q-, i(17q), inv(3), -5/5q-, 12p-, or 11q23
rearrangement). The presence of 0, 1, "2 or 3," and = 4 adverse factors defines
low, intermediate-1, intermediate-2, and high-risk disease with median survivals 
of approximately 15.4, 6.5, 2.9, and 1.3 years, respectively. A >80% two-year
mortality is predicted by monosomal karyotype, inv(3)/i(17q) abnormalities, or
any two of circulating blasts >9%, leukocytes = 40 × 10<U+2079>/L or other unfavorable
karyotype. Most recently, mutations involving ASXL1, SRSF2, EZH2, and IDH1/2 or
increased plasma IL-2R, IL-8, or serum-free light chain levels have been shown to
adversely affect survival.
RISK-ADAPTED THERAPY: Observation alone is adequate for asymptomatic
low/intermediate-1 risk disease. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) is
often considered for high risk disease. Conventional or experimental drug therapy
is reasonable for symptomatic intermediate-1 or intermediate-2 risk disease;
however, ASCT is an acceptable treatment option for such patients in the presence
of ASXL1 or other prognostically adverse mutations. Splenectomy and low-dose
radiotherapy are used for drug-refractory splenomegaly. Radiotherapy is also used
for the treatment of non-hepatosplenic EMH, PMF-associated pulmonary
hypertension, and extremity bone pain.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23349007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 15;12(4):684-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.23598. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Phospho-<U+0394>Np63a/microRNA feedback regulation in squamous carcinoma cells upon
cisplatin exposure.

Huang Y(1), Kesselman D, Kizub D, Guerrero-Preston R, Ratovitski EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Our previous reports showed that the cisplatin exposure induced the ATM-dependent
phosphorylation of <U+0394>Np63a, which is subsequently involved in transcriptional
regulation of gene promoters encoding mRNAs and microRNAs in squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) cells upon cisplatin-induced cell death. We showed that
phosphorylated (p)-<U+0394>Np63a plays a role in upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins,
while non-p-<U+0394>Np63a is implicated in pro-survival signaling. In contrast to
non-p-<U+0394>Np63a, p-<U+0394>Np63a modulated expression of specific microRNAs in SCC cells
exposed to cisplatin. These microRNAs were shown to attenuate the expression of
several proteins involved in cell death/survival, suggesting the critical role
for p-<U+0394>Np63a in regulation of tumor cell resistance to cisplatin. Here, we
studied the function of <U+0394>Np63a in transcriptional activation and repression of
the specific microRNA promoters whose expression is affected by cisplatin
treatment of SCC cells. We quantitatively studied chromatin-associated proteins
bound to tumor protein (TP) p63-responsive element, we found that p-<U+0394>Np63a along 
with certain transcription coactivators (e.g., CARM1, KAT2B, TFAP2A, etc.)
necessary to induce gene promoters for microRNAs (630 and 885-3p) or with
transcription corepressors (e.g., EZH2, CTBP1, HDACs, etc.) needed to repress
promoters for microRNAs (181a-5p, 374a-5p and 519a-3p) in SCC cells exposed to
cisplatin.

PMCID: PMC3594269
PMID: 23343772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2013;31(1):56-65. doi: 10.1159/000343349. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

MiR-138 inhibits tumor growth through repression of EZH2 in non-small cell lung
cancer.

Zhang H(1), Zhang H, Zhao M, Lv Z, Zhang X, Qin X, Wang H, Wang S, Su J, Lv X,
Liu H, Du W, Zhou W, Chen X, Fei K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, 
Shanghai.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in tumorigenesis. We
investigated the roles and mechanisms of miR-138 in human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: The expression of miR-138 was first examined in NSCLC cell lines and
tumour tissues by real-time PCR The in vitro and in vivo functional effect of
miR-138 was examined further. A luciferase reporter assay was conducted to
confirm target association between miR-138 and the enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2).
RESULTS: miR-138 was frequently downregulated in NSCLC cells and tissues.
Overexpression of miR-138 inhibited proliferation of NSCLC cells in vitro and
tumor growth in vivo. The EZH2 oncogene, which is often overexpressed in various 
human cancers and acts as an important regulator of cell growth and tumor
invasion, was identified as a novel target of miR-138. miR-138 can bind to the 3'
untranslated region (3' UTR) of EZH2 and suppress the expression of EZH2 at both 
mRNA and protein levels. Furthermore, knockdown of EZH2 phenocopied the tumor
suppressive effects of miR-138 in cell models, whereas ectopic expression of EZH2
rescued the suppressive effects of miR-138.
CONCLUSION: These findings define a tumor suppressor function for miR-138 in
NSCLC and further suggest that miR-138 may represent a potential therapeutic
target for NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23343715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Sep;33(9):705-9. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-2727.2012.09.004.

[JAK2 exon 12 mutations in patients with Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome-negative
myeloproliferative neoplasms].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JY(1), Ai XF, Xu JQ, Li QH, Xu ZF, Qin TJ, Zang Y, Xiao ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, CAMS & PUMC, The State
Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate JAK2 exon 12 mutations in patients with Philadelphia
(Ph) chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) and the clinical
characteristics of patients with JAK2 exon 12 mutants.
METHODS: Allele-specific PCR (AS-PCR) was applied to identify JAK2 V617F
mutation. Genomic DNA corresponding to exon 12 of JAK2 gene and epigenetic
regulator gene (TET2, ASXL1, EZH2) were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR). Identification of mutants was by direct sequencing and classification of
mutation types by sequencing followed by plasmid cloning. SNP genotyping of two
46/1 tag SNPs, rs12340895 and rs10974944, was analyzed using commercially
available Taqman assays on the 7500HT real-time PCR instrument according to
standard protocols.
RESULTS: No JAK2 exon 12 mutation was detected in patients with ET, PMF or JAK2
V617F positive PV. Among 13 JAK2 V617F negative PV patients, JAK2 exon 12
mutation was detected as N542-E543del in 2(15.4%) patients who presented with a
phenotype of predominant erythrocytosis and erythroid colonic grown from their
bone marrow samples in the absence of exogenous EPO, reduced serum erythropoietin
(EPO) level, and no mutations in TET2, ASXL1 or EZH2 genes. One of the affected
patients was heterozygous for 46/1 but the second was negative for this
haplotype.
CONCLUSION: There was no need to detect JAK2 exon 12 mutation in ET, PMF or MPN-U
patients without JAK2 V67F mutation. Ph negative MPN patients with JAK2 exon 12
mutations had somewhat unique clinical and laboratory features.

PMID: 23336221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genome Res. 2013 Mar;23(3):555-67. doi: 10.1101/gr.147942.112. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Dynamic DNA methylation across diverse human cell lines and tissues.

Varley KE(1), Gertz J, Bowling KM, Parker SL, Reddy TE, Pauli-Behn F, Cross MK,
Williams BA, Stamatoyannopoulos JA, Crawford GE, Absher DM, Wold BJ, Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL 35806, USA.

As studies of DNA methylation increase in scope, it has become evident that
methylation has a complex relationship with gene expression, plays an important
role in defining cell types, and is disrupted in many diseases. We describe
large-scale single-base resolution DNA methylation profiling on a diverse
collection of 82 human cell lines and tissues using reduced representation
bisulfite sequencing (RRBS). Analysis integrating RNA-seq and ChIP-seq data
illuminates the functional role of this dynamic mark. Loci that are
hypermethylated across cancer types are enriched for sites bound by NANOG in
embryonic stem cells, which supports and expands the model of a stem/progenitor
cell signature in cancer. CpGs that are hypomethylated across cancer types are
concentrated in megabase-scale domains that occur near the telomeres and
centromeres of chromosomes, are depleted of genes, and are enriched for
cancer-specific EZH2 binding and H3K27me3 (repressive chromatin). In noncancer
samples, there are cell-type specific methylation signatures preserved in primary
cell lines and tissues as well as methylation differences induced by cell
culture. The relationship between methylation and expression is
context-dependent, and we find that CpG-rich enhancers bound by EP300 in the
bodies of expressed genes are unmethylated despite the dense gene-body
methylation surrounding them. Non-CpG cytosine methylation occurs in human
somatic tissue, is particularly prevalent in brain tissue, and is reproducible
across many individuals. This study provides an atlas of DNA methylation across
diverse and well-characterized samples and enables new discoveries about DNA
methylation and its role in gene regulation and disease.

PMCID: PMC3589544
PMID: 23325432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 1;12(3):383-4. doi: 10.4161/cc.23550. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

New epigenetic pathway for stemness maintenance mediated by the histone
methyltransferase Ezh1.

Hidalgo I, Gonzalez S.

PMCID: PMC3587432
PMID: 23324339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 23;33(4):504-13. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.602. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

CCN3/NOV gene expression in human prostate cancer is directly suppressed by the
androgen receptor.

Wu L(1), Runkle C(1), Jin HJ(1), Yu J(1), Li J(1), Yang X(2), Kuzel T(3), Lee
C(2), Yu J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Robert H Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA. (3)1] Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, 
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA [2] Robert 
H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) has essential roles during prostate cancer progression.
With genome-wide AR-binding sites mapped to high resolution, studies have
recently reported AR as a transcriptional repressor. How AR inhibits gene
expression and how this contributes to prostate cancer, however, are incompletely
understood. Through meta-analysis of microarray data, here we nominate
nephroblastoma overexpressed (NOV) as a top androgen-repressed gene. We show that
NOV is directly suppressed by androgen through the AR. AR occupies the NOV
enhancer and communicates with the NOV promoter through DNA looping. AR
activation recruits the polycomb group protein EZH2, which subsequently catalyzes
histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation around the NOV promoter, thus leading to
repressive chromatin remodeling and epigenetic silencing. Concordantly, AR and
EZH2 inhibition synergistically restored NOV expression. NOV is downregulated in 
human prostate cancer wherein AR and EZH2 are upregulated. Functionally, NOV
inhibits prostate cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo. NOV reconstitution
reverses androgen-induced cell growth and NOV knockdown drives
androgen-independent cell growth. In addition, NOV expression is restored by
hormone-deprivation therapies in mice and prostate cancer patients. Therefore,
using NOV as a model gene we gained further understanding of the mechanisms
underlying AR-mediated transcriptional repression. Our findings establish a
tumor-suppressive role of NOV in prostate cancer and suggest that one important, 
but previously underestimated, manner by which AR contributes to prostate cancer 
progression is through inhibition of key tumor-suppressor genes.

PMCID: PMC3796014
PMID: 23318417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Science. 2013 Jan 11;339(6116):204-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1229326.

Ezh2 orchestrates topographic migration and connectivity of mouse precerebellar
neurons.

Di Meglio T(1), Kratochwil CF, Vilain N, Loche A, Vitobello A, Yonehara K, Hrycaj
SM, Roska B, Peters AH, Eichmann A, Wellik D, Ducret S, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058
Basel, Switzerland.

We investigated the role of histone methyltransferase Ezh2 in tangential
migration of mouse precerebellar pontine nuclei, the main relay between neocortex
and cerebellum. By counteracting the sonic hedgehog pathway, Ezh2 represses
Netrin1 in dorsal hindbrain, which allows normal pontine neuron migration. In
Ezh2 mutants, ectopic Netrin1 derepression results in abnormal migration and
supernumerary nuclei integrating in brain circuitry. Moreover, intrinsic
topographic organization of pontine nuclei according to rostrocaudal progenitor
origin is maintained throughout migration and correlates with patterned cortical 
input. Ezh2 maintains spatially restricted Hox expression, which, in turn,
regulates differential expression of the repulsive receptor Unc5b in migrating
neurons; together, they generate subsets with distinct responsiveness to
environmental Netrin1. Thus, Ezh2-dependent epigenetic regulation of intrinsic
and extrinsic transcriptional programs controls topographic neuronal guidance and
connectivity in the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway.

PMID: 23307742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052984. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

EZH2 promotes malignant behaviors via cell cycle dysregulation and its mRNA level
associates with prognosis of patient with non-small cell lung cancer.

Cao W(1), Ribeiro Rde O, Liu D, Saintigny P, Xia R, Xue Y, Lin R, Mao L, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Department of Oral Maxillofacial-Head 
and Neck Oncology, Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic silencing is a common mechanism to inactivate tumor
suppressor genes during carcinogenesis. Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) is the histone
methyltransferase subunit in polycomb repressive complex 2 which mediates
transcriptional repression through histone methylation. EZH2 overexpression has
been linked to aggressive phenotypes of certain cancers. However, the mechanism
that EZH2 played in promoting malignancy in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
remains unclear. In addition, the correlation of EZH2 overexpression and the
prognosis of NSCLC patients in non-Asian cohort need to be determined.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Up-regulation of EZH2 was found in NSCLC cells
compared with normal human bronchial epithelial cells by western blot assay. Upon
EZH2 knockdown using small interfering RNA (siRNA), the proliferation,
anchorage-independent growth and invasion of NSCLC cells were remarkably
suppressed with profound induction of G1 arrest. Furthermore, the expression of
cyclin D1 was notably reduced whereas p15(INK4B), p21(Waf1/Cip1) and p27(Kip1)
were increased in NSCLC cells after EZH2-siRNA delivery. To determine whether
EZH2 expression contributes to disease progression in patients with NSCLC, Taqman
quantitative real-time RT-PCR was used to measure the expression of EZH2 in
paired tumor and normal samples. Univariate analysis revealed that patients with 
NSCLC whose tumors had a higher EZH2 expression had significantly inferior
overall, disease-specific, and disease-free survivals compared to those whose
tumors expressed lower EZH2 (P = 0.005, P = 0.001 and P = 0.003, respectively).
In multivariate analysis, EZH2 expression was an independent predictor of
disease-free survival (hazard ratio = 0.450, 95% CI: 0.270 to 0.750, P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results demonstrate that EZH2 overexpression is
critical for NSCLC progression. EZH2 mRNA levels may serve as a prognostic
predictor for patients with NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3534094
PMID: 23300840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051967. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Nicotine promotes acquisition of stem cell and epithelial-to-mesenchymal
properties in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Yu MA(1), Kiang A, Wang-Rodriguez J, Rahimy E, Haas M, Yu V, Ellies LG, Chen J,
Fan JB, Brumund KT, Weisman RA, Ongkeko WM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

The ability of nicotine to enhance the malignancy of cancer cells is known;
however, the possibility that nicotine could regulate a cancer stem cell
phenotype remains to be well-established. In this study we sought to determine
whether long-term exposure to nicotine could promote cancer stem cell-like
properties in two head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, UMSCC-10B and
HN-1. Nicotine treatment induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in
both cell lines by repressing E-cadherin expression, and led to the induction of 
stem cell markers Oct-4, Nanog, CD44 and BMI-1, which was reversed upon ectopic
re-expression of E-cadherin. Nicotine-treated cells formed spheres at a higher
efficiency than non-treated cells, formed larger tumors when injected into mice, 
and formed tumors with 4-fold greater efficiency compared to control cells when
injected at limiting doses. Consistent with previous literature, nicotine-treated
cells demonstrated a greater capacity for survival and also a higher tendency to 
invade. Comparison of microRNA profiles between nicotine and control cells
revealed the upregulation of miR-9, a repressor of E-cadherin, and the
downregulation of miR-101, a repressor of EZH2. Taken together, these results
suggest that nicotine may play a critical role in the development of
tobacco-induced cancers by regulating cancer stem cell characteristics, and that 
these effects are likely mediated through EMT-promoting, microRNA-mediated
pathways. Further characterization of such pathways remains a promising avenue
for the understanding and treatment of tobacco-related cancers.

PMCID: PMC3530520
PMID: 23300583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Molecules. 2013 Jan 8;18(1):701-20. doi: 10.3390/molecules18010701.

Curcumin induces cell death and restores tamoxifen sensitivity in the
antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer cell lines MCF-7/LCC2 and MCF-7/LCC9.

Jiang M(1), Huang O, Zhang X, Xie Z, Shen A, Liu H, Geng M, Shen K.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Breast Health Center, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Curcumin, a principal component of turmeric (Curcuma longa), has potential
therapeutic activities against breast cancer through multiple signaling pathways.
Increasing evidence indicates that curcumin reverses chemo-resistance and
sensitizes cancer cells to chemotherapy and targeted therapy in breast cancer. To
date, few studies have explored its potential antiproliferation effects and
resistance reversal in antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer. In this study, we
therefore investigated the efficacy of curcumin alone and in combination with
tamoxifen in the established antiestrogen-resistant breast cancer cell lines
MCF-7/LCC2 and MCF-7/LCC9. We discovered that curcumin treatment displayed
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic activities and induced cell cycle arrest at 
G2/M phase. Of note, the combination of curcumin and tamoxifen resulted in a
synergistic survival inhibition in MCF-7/LCC2 and MCF-7/LCC9 cells. Moreover, we 
found that curcumin targeted multiple signals involved in growth maintenance and 
resistance acquisition in endocrine resistant cells. In our cell models, curcumin
could suppress expression of pro-growth and anti-apoptosis molecules, induce
inactivation of NF-<U+03BA>B, Src and Akt/mTOR pathways and downregulate the key
epigenetic modifier EZH2. The above findings suggested that curcumin alone and
combinations of curcumin with endocrine therapy may be of therapeutic benefit for
endocrine-resistant breast cancer.

PMID: 23299550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Curr Opin Hematol. 2013 Mar;20(2):169-75. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e32835d82fe.

Polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia: new developments in biology with
therapeutic implications.

Soriano G(1), Heaney M.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.
sorianog@mskcc.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes current understanding of the molecular 
genetics of polycythemia vera and essential thrombocythemia, with an emphasis on 
JAK2V617F pathophysiology and effect on disease phenotype.
RECENT FINDINGS: JAK2V617F exerts its effects on cell growth via janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK-STAT) signalling and
interactions with other molecules that normally negatively regulate signalling,
such as suppressor of cell signalling 3. The role of mutant JAK2 on phenotype is 
discussed, as not all polycythemia vera patients appear to be homozygous for the 
JAK2V617F mutation. Other mutations in the JAK-STAT signalling cascade are
reviewed, including JAK2 exon 12, myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene, LNK
(also known as SH2B3) mutations, and epigenetic changes in
ten-eleven-translocation-2 (TET2), additional sex combs like 1 (ASXL1), PcG
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A).
Mutations associated with disease progression such as isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDH) 1, IDH2, EZH2, serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 2 (SRSF2), p53, casitas
B-lineage lymphoma (c-CBL), ikaros zinc fingers (IKZF), neurofibromin 1 (NF1) and
runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) are described.
SUMMARY: In this chapter, current knowledge regarding the role of the JAK2V617F
mutation on the pathogenesis and disease phenotype of polycythemia vera and
essential thrombocythemia are highlighted. Other more recently recognized
mutations in the JAK-STAT signalling cascade, epigenetic changes and mutations
associated with disease progression are summarized.

PMID: 23298878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;29(1):82-4, 88.

[Expressions of EZH2 and RUNX3 in renal cell carcinoma and their clinical
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang G(1), Qin W, Zheng J, Wei M, Zhou X, Wang H, Wen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710032, China. wangguodong021014@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression levels of enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) and human runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3) in renal cell
carcinoma (RCC), and analyze their clinical significance and expression
correlation.
METHODS: Expressions of EZH2 and RUNX3 proteins were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in 56 RCC tissues and corresponding adjacent normal renal
tissues, respectively. Statistic analysis was conducted using SPSS17.0 software.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry revealed that the positive rates of EZH2 and RUNX3 
expressions were 67.9% and 37.5% in RCC tissues, respectively, and they were
28.6% and 67.3% in adjacent normal renal tissues. The expressions of EZHZ and
RUNX3 between RCC and normal renal tissues were significantly different (P<0.05).
High expression of EZH2 and low expression of RUNX3 in RCC were associated with
the clinical stage (P<0.05), but not associated with pathological
differentiation, age or gender (P>0.05). No statistically significant negative
correlation was observed in the expressions of EZH2 and RUNX3 in RCC (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Both EZH2 and RUNX3 may play important roles in the development and
progression of RCC, and the detection on EZH2 and RUNX3 expressions will be
helpful for early diagnosis and prognosis prediction of RCC.

PMID: 23294722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncol Rep. 2013 Mar;29(3):946-50. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2219. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Clinical significance of the expression of long non-coding RNA HOTAIR in primary 
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Ishibashi M(1), Kogo R, Shibata K, Sawada G, Takahashi Y, Kurashige J, Akiyoshi
S, Sasaki S, Iwaya T, Sudo T, Sugimachi K, Mimori K, Wakabayashi G, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kyushu University Beppu Hospital, Beppu, Oita 874-0838,
Japan.

The functions of many long non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) in human cancers have not yet
been elucidated. The long ncRNA HOTAIR is expressed from the developmental HOXC
locus located on chromosome 12q13.13. Previous reports have demonstrated that
HOTAIR associates with chromatin modifications in cooperation with the Polycomb
complex PRC2, and promotes breast and colorectal cancer metastasis. In this
study, we examined the clinical significance of HOTAIR expression in patients
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HOTAIR expression was detected in primary
HCCs in 13 out of 64 patients. Patients with HOTAIR expression had significantly 
poorer prognoses and a larger primary tumor size than those without HOTAIR
expression, similar to studies in breast and colorectal cancers. Moreover,
introduction of human HOTAIR into liver cancer cells revealed that HOTAIR
promoted more rapid proliferation compared to control cells. Thus, although the
clinical significance of HOTAIR expression in HCC may not be as pronounced as
that in breast and colorectal cancers, the current study demonstrates that HOTAIR
expression is associated with HCC progression, warranting further studies.

PMID: 23292722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Oncol Rep. 2013 Mar;29(3):1037-42. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2222. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

RNAi-mediated EZH2 depletion decreases MDR1 expression and sensitizes
multidrug-resistant hepatocellular carcinoma cells to chemotherapy.

Tang B(1), Zhang Y, Liang R, Gao Z, Sun D, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian
Medical University, Dalian 116027, PR China.

The histone-lysine N-methyltransferase, enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2),
functions as a transcriptional repressor and plays an important role in the
development of various types of cancer. In this study, we observed the increased 
EZH2 expression in the Bel/FU multidrug-resistant hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
cell line. The RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated depletion of EZH2 expression in
the Bel/FU cells led to decreased multidrug resistance protein 1 (MDR1)
expression, which resulted in increased apoptosis and sustained G1/S phase
arrest. Moreover, siRNA targeting EZH2 sensitized Bel/FU cells to 5-fluorouracil 
treatment. These findings suggest that EZH2 plays a role in the development of
multidrug resistance and may represent a novel therapeutic target for
multidrug-resistant HCC.

PMID: 23291714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;34(10):730-3. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.10.003.

[Construction of a recombinant shRNA expression vector targeting EZH2 gene and
its inhibitory effect on colon adenocarcinoma SW480 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JX(1), Lü YF, Han BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anoproctology, the Second Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan
250033, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a recombinant short hairpin RNA (shRNA) expression vector
targeting EZH2 gene, and to determine its effect on the proliferation of colon
adenocarcinoma SW480 cells.
METHODS: The DNA sequence with short hairpin structure was designed according to 
the EZH2 cDNA sequence and cloned into PGFP-V-RS vector to construct a
recombinant expression vector silencing EZH2 gene. After identification, the
shRNA-expressing vector was then transfected into SW480 cells. RT-PCR and Western
blot were used to detect the inhibitory effect at both mRNA and protein levels.
MTT was used to detect cell viability due to the alteration of EZH2 gene
activity.
RESULTS: At 48 h after transfection, the expression of EZH2 mRNA in the gene
silencing group and negative control group were 0.339 ± 0.013 and 1.968 ± 0.072, 
respectively. The expression of EZH2 protein in the gene silencing group and
negative control group were 0.229 ± 0.008 and 1.168 ± 0.053, respectively. The
expression of EZH2 in the gene silencing group was significantly lower than that 
in the negative control group (P < 0.01, P < 0.05). At 48 and 72 h after
transfection, the inhibition rate of cell growth in the gene silencing group was 
30.7% and 25.9%, respectively, indicating that the cell growth was significantly 
inhibited in comparison with that in the blank control group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: A recombinant shRNA expression vector targeting EZH2 gene has been
successfully constructed in this study, with a significant inhibitory effect on
the proliferation of SW480 cells. This lays an experimental foundation for
further exploring the mechanism underlying the action of EZH2 gene on tumor
biology.

PMID: 23291064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Technol Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Jun;12(3):269-74. doi: 10.7785/tcrt.2012.500315.
Epub 2012 Dec 26.

EZH2 regulates the expression of p16 in the nasopharyngeal cancer cells.

Zhong J(1), Min L, Huang H, Li L, Li D, Li J, Ma Z, Dai L.

Author information: 
(1)No. 198, Hongqi Road, Huzhou Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Huzhou
Central Hospital, Huzhou, Zhejiang Province 313000, China.

The increasing evidence supported the role of Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) 
in the cancer development and progression. However, its precise role in the
tumorigenesis of Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma (NPC) remains to be elucidated. EZH2
was depleted by retroviral infection in the NPC cells (HK-1, CNE-2, CNE-1 and
C666-1). The degree of EZH2 knockdown was then assessed by real-time quantitative
PCR and Western Blot analysis. Cell proliferation was assessed using the soluble 
tetrazolium salt (MTS) cell proliferation assay, and cell cycle was measured by
FACS test. The methylation status of p16(INK4a) was determined by bisulphate
treatment of the DNA, followed by MSP. EZH2 was over-expressed in NPC cells, and 
the expression in undifferentiated-derived NPC cells (CNE-1, C666-1) was more
significant than differentiated-derived NPC cells (HK-1, CNE-2). EZH2 was
successfully depleted after retroviral infection in C666-1 cells, and the EZH2
depletion could inhibit the proliferation and arrested G1/S phase of NPC cells.
In addition, both mRNA and protein levels of p16(INK4a) increased significantly
in presence of EZH2 depletion. The further Methylation-Specific Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (MSP) assay suggested that over-expressed EZH2 may contribute to the
reduction of p16(INK4a) expression by hyper methylating its promoter. EZH2 is
overexpressed in NPC and reduces expression of p16(INK4a) by influencing
methylation, opening therapeutic options.

PMID: 23289480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 15;12(2):199-200. doi: 10.4161/cc.23379. Epub 2012 Jan 15.

PI3K-Akt pathway regulates polycomb group protein and stem cell maintenance.

Liu Y, Yu H, Nimer SD.

PMCID: PMC3575444
PMID: 23287474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 15;12(2):202-3. doi: 10.4161/cc.23419. Epub 2012 Jan 15.

Linking JNK-STAT3-Akt signaling axis to EZH2 phosphorylation: a novel pathway of 
carcinogenesis.

Rojanasakul Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV,
USA. yrojan@hsc.wvu.edu

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 1;12(1):112-21.

PMCID: PMC3575446
PMID: 23287465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Chin Med J (Engl). 2013 Jan;126(1):82-7.

Role of co-expression of c-Myc, EZH2 and p27 in prognosis of prostate cancer
patients after surgery.

Li K(1), Chen MK, Situ J, Huang WT, Su ZL, He D, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China.

BACKGROUND: c-Myc, EZH2 and p27 were defined to modulate the behavior of prostate
cancer with pro-tumoral or anti-tumoral effects and had ability in predicting
prostate cancer progression, but the research of their co-expression value of
prognosis is rarely. This study aimed to investigate the prognostic value of
combining tri-marker together in patients with intermediate-risk prostate cancer 
after surgery.
METHODS: Expression levels of c-Myc, EZH2 and p27 in 129 patients with
intermediate-risk prostate cancer were assessed using immunohistochemistry in a
semi-quantitative manner. The expression profiles of these three markers were
analyzed and investigated for association with biochemical recurrence.
RESULTS: In all, fifty of 129 cases experienced biochemical recurrence during a
median follow-up time of 31 months (range, 6 - 60 months). Of these relapse
patients, one case without and 10 cases with any single positive marker were
observed; 39 cases were detected with any two or all three positive markers (22
cases with any two and 17 cases with all three positive markers). Survival
analysis showed that patients with over-expression of c-Myc or EZH2, and lower
expression of p27 manifested significantly higher biochemical recurrence rates.
Subsequent multivariate analysis revealed that c-Myc, EZH2 and p27 expression
statuses showed potential in predicting relapse, respectively. Notably, combining
three markers together as a "composite index" (0 or 1, vs. 2 or 3 positive
markers) provided powerful prognostic value (HR 6.57, 95% CI 3.02 - 14.31, P <
0.001). There was a significant difference between the patient subgroups with 0
or 1 and those with 2 or 3 positive markers expression statuses, and tri-marker
composite index was an independent risk factor for predicting relapse in patients
with intermediate-risk prostate cancer after surgery.
CONCLUSION: Composite index of c-Myc, EZH2, and p27 can be valued as powerful
prognosis parameter for intermediate-risk prostate cancer patients after the
surgery, and postoperative adjuvant therapy can be adopted accordingly.

PMID: 23286483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2013 Jan;2(1):43-52. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2012-0036. Epub
2012 Dec 27.

EZH2 is required for breast and pancreatic cancer stem cell maintenance and can
be used as a functional cancer stem cell reporter.

van Vlerken LE(1), Kiefer CM, Morehouse C, Li Y, Groves C, Wilson SD, Yao Y,
Hollingsworth RE, Hurt EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Research, Medlmmune, LLC, MD, USA.

Although cancer is largely seen as a disease stemming from genetic mutations,
evidence has implicated epigenetic regulation of gene expression as a driving
force for tumorigenesis. Epigenetic regulation by histone modification,
specifically through polycomb group (PcG) proteins such as EZH2 and BMI-1, is a
major driver in stem cell biology and is found to be correlated with poor
prognosis in many tumor types. This suggests a role for PcG proteins in cancer
stem cells (CSCs). We hypothesized that epigenetic modification by EZH2,
specifically, helps maintain the CSC phenotype and that in turn this epigenetic
modifier can be used as a reporter for CSC activity in an in vitro
high-throughput screening assay. CSCs isolated from pancreatic and breast cancer 
lines had elevated EZH2 levels over non-CSCs. Moreover, EZH2 knockdown by RNA
interference significantly reduced the frequency of CSCs in all models tested,
confirming the role of EZH2 in maintenance of the CSC population. Interestingly, 
genes affected by EZH2 loss, and therefore CSC loss, were inversely correlated
with genes identified by CSC enrichment, further supporting the function of EZH2 
CSC regulation. We translated these results into a novel assay whereby elevated
EZH2 staining was used as a reporter for CSCs. Data confirmed that this assay
could effectively measure changes, both inhibition and enrichment, in the CSC
population, providing a novel approach to look at CSC activity. This assay
provides a unique, rapid way to facilitate CSC screening across several tumor
types to aid in further CSC-related research.

PMCID: PMC3659740
PMID: 23283488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e50165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050165. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Hypoxia-induced aggressiveness of pancreatic cancer cells is due to increased
expression of VEGF, IL-6 and miR-21, which can be attenuated by CDF treatment.

Bao B(1), Ali S, Ahmad A, Azmi AS, Li Y, Banerjee S, Kong D, Sethi S, Aboukameel 
A, Padhye SB, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Hypoxia is known to play critical roles in cell survival, angiogenesis, tumor
invasion, and metastasis. Hypoxia mediated over-expression of hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF) has been shown to be associated with therapeutic resistance, and
contributes to poor prognosis of cancer patients. Emerging evidence suggest that 
hypoxia and HIF pathways contributes to the acquisition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), maintenance of cancer stem cell (CSC)
functions, and also maintains the vicious cycle of inflammation-all which lead to
therapeutic resistance. However, the precise molecular mechanism(s) by which
hypoxia/HIF drives these events are not fully understood. Here, we show, for the 
first time, that hypoxia leads to increased expression of VEGF, IL-6, and CSC
signature genes Nanog, Oct4 and EZH2 consistent with increased cell
migration/invasion and angiogenesis, and the formation of pancreatospheres,
concomitant with increased expression of miR-21 and miR-210 in human pancreatic
cancer (PC) cells. The treatment of PC cells with CDF, a novel synthetic compound
inhibited the production of VEGF and IL-6, and down-regulated the expression of
Nanog, Oct4, EZH2 mRNAs, as well as miR-21 and miR-210 under hypoxia. CDF also
led to decreased cell migration/invasion, angiogenesis, and formation of
pancreatospheres under hypoxia. Moreover, CDF decreased gene expression of
miR-21, miR-210, IL-6, HIF-1a, VEGF, and CSC signatures in vivo in a mouse
orthotopic model of human PC. Collectively, these results suggest that the
anti-tumor activity of CDF is in part mediated through deregulation of tumor
hypoxic pathways, and thus CDF could become a novel, and effective anti-tumor
agent for PC therapy.

PMCID: PMC3521759
PMID: 23272057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013 Jun;60(6):1022-6. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24427. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Children's Oncology Group's 2013 blueprint for research: central nervous system
tumors.

Gajjar A(1), Packer RJ, Foreman NK, Cohen K, Haas-Kogan D, Merchant TE; COG Brain
Tumor Committee.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA. amar.gajjar@stjude.org

In the US, approximately 2,500 children are diagnosed annually with brain tumors.
Their survival ranges from >90% to <10%. For children with medulloblastoma, the
most common malignant brain tumor, 5-year survival ranges from >80%
(standard-risk) to 60% (high-risk). For those with high-grade gliomas (HGGs)
including diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas, 5-year survival remains <10%.
Sixty-five percent patients with ependymoma are cured after surgery and radiation
therapy depending on the degree of resection and histopathology of the tumor.
Phase II trials for brain tumors will investigate agents that act on cMET,
PDGFRA, or EZH2 in HGG, DIPG, or medulloblastoma, respectively. Phase III trials 
will explore risk-based therapy stratification guided by molecular and clinical
traits of children with medulloblastoma or ependymoma.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4184243
PMID: 23255213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 1;12(1):112-21. doi: 10.4161/cc.23030. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

JNK and STAT3 signaling pathways converge on Akt-mediated phosphorylation of EZH2
in bronchial epithelial cells induced by arsenic.

Chen B(1), Liu J, Chang Q, Beezhold K, Lu Y, Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI,
USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 15;12(2):202-3.

The molecular mechanisms by which arsenic (As ( 3+) ) causes human cancers remain
to be fully elucidated. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic
subunit of polycomb-repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) that promotes trimethylation of
lysine 27 of histone H3, leading to altered expression of tumor suppressors or
oncogenes. In the present study, we determined the effect of As ( 3+) on EZH2
phosphorylation and the signaling pathways important for As ( 3+) -induced EZH2
phosphorylation in human bronchial epithelial cell line BEAS-2B. The involvement 
of kinases in As ( 3+) -induced EZH2 phosphorylation was validated by siRNA-based
gene silencing. The data showed that As ( 3+) can induce phosphorylation of EZH2 
at serine 21 in human bronchial epithelial cells and that the phosphorylation of 
EZH2 requires an As ( 3+) -activated signaling cascade from JNK and STAT3 to Akt.
Transfection of the cells with siRNA specific for JNK1 revealed that JNK
silencing reduced serine727 phosphorylation of STAT3, Akt activation and EZH2
phosphorylation, suggesting that JNK is the upstream kinase involved in As ( 3+) 
-induced EZH2 phosphorylation. Because As ( 3+) is capable of inducing miRNA-21
(miR-21), a STAT3-regulated miRNA that represses protein translation of PTEN or
Spry2, we also tested the role of STAT3 and miR-21 in As ( 3+) -induced EZH2
phosphorylation. Ectopic overexpression of miR-21 promoted Akt activation and
phosphorylation of EZH2, whereas inhibiting miR-21 by transfecting the cells with
anti-miR-21 inhibited Akt activation and EZH2 phosphorylation. Taken together,
these results demonstrate a contribution of the JNK, STAT3 and Akt signaling axis
to As ( 3+) -induced EZH2 phosphorylation. Importantly, these findings may reveal
new molecular mechanisms underlying As ( 3+) -induced carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3570498
PMID: 23255093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051239. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

PRC2/EED-EZH2 complex is up-regulated in breast cancer lymph node metastasis
compared to primary tumor and correlates with tumor proliferation in situ.

Yu H(1), Simons DL, Segall I, Carcamo-Cavazos V, Schwartz EJ, Yan N, Zuckerman
NS, Dirbas FM, Johnson DL, Holmes SP, Lee PP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lymph node metastasis is a key event in the progression of breast
cancer. Therefore it is important to understand the underlying mechanisms which
facilitate regional lymph node metastatic progression.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed gene expression profiling of
purified tumor cells from human breast tumor and lymph node metastasis. By
microarray network analysis, we found an increased expression of polycomb
repression complex 2 (PRC2) core subunits EED and EZH2 in lymph node metastatic
tumor cells over primary tumor cells which were validated through real-time PCR. 
Additionally, immunohistochemical (IHC) staining and quantitative image analysis 
of whole tissue sections showed a significant increase of EZH2 expressing tumor
cells in lymph nodes over paired primary breast tumors, which strongly correlated
with tumor cell proliferation in situ. We further explored the mechanisms of PRC2
gene up-regulation in metastatic tumor cells and found up-regulation of E2F
genes, MYC targets and down-regulation of tumor suppressor gene E-cadherin
targets in lymph node metastasis through GSEA analyses. Using IHC, the expression
of potential EZH2 target, E-cadherin was examined in paired primary/lymph node
samples and was found to be significantly decreased in lymph node metastases over
paired primary tumors.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study identified an over expression of the
epigenetic silencing complex PRC2/EED-EZH2 in breast cancer lymph node metastasis
as compared to primary tumor and its positive association with tumor cell
proliferation in situ. Concurrently, PRC2 target protein E-cadherin was
significant decreased in lymph node metastases, suggesting PRC2 promotes
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in lymph node metastatic process through 
repression of E-cadherin. These results indicate that epigenetic regulation
mediated by PRC2 proteins may provide additional advantage for the outgrowth of
metastatic tumor cells in lymph nodes. This opens up epigenetic drug development 
possibilities for the treatment and prevention of lymph node metastasis in breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3519681
PMID: 23251464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan;41(2):842-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1255. Epub 2012 Dec
13.

NIPP1 maintains EZH2 phosphorylation and promoter occupancy at
proliferation-related target genes.

Minnebo N(1), Görnemann J, O'Connell N, Van Dessel N, Derua R, Vermunt MW, Page
R, Beullens M, Peti W, Van Eynde A, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling & Therapeutics, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 regulates cell proliferation and
differentiation by silencing Polycomb group target genes. NIPP1, a nuclear
regulator of serine/threonine protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), has been implicated in
the regulation of EZH2 occupancy at target loci, but the underlying mechanism is 
not understood. Here, we demonstrate that the phosphorylation of EZH2 by
cyclin-dependent kinases at Thr416 creates a docking site for the
ForkHead-associated domain of NIPP1. Recruited NIPP1 enables the net
phosphorylation of EZH2 by inhibiting its dephosphorylation by PP1. Accordingly, 
a NIPP1-binding mutant of EZH2 is hypophosphorylated, and the knockdown of NIPP1 
results in a reduced phosphorylation of endogenous EZH2. Conversely, the loss of 
PP1 is associated with a hyperphosphorylation of EZH2. A genome-wide
promoter-binding profiling in HeLa cells revealed that the NIPP1-binding mutant
shows a deficient association with about a third of the Polycomb target genes,
and these are enriched for functions in proliferation. Our data identify PP1 as
an EZH2 phosphatase and demonstrate that the phosphorylation-regulated
association of EZH2 with proliferation-related targets depends on associated
NIPP1.

PMCID: PMC3553949
PMID: 23241245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1465-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1227604.

EZH2 oncogenic activity in castration-resistant prostate cancer cells is
Polycomb-independent.

Xu K(1), Wu ZJ, Groner AC, He HH, Cai C, Lis RT, Wu X, Stack EC, Loda M, Liu T,
Xu H, Cato L, Thornton JE, Gregory RI, Morrissey C, Vessella RL, Montironi R,
Magi-Galluzzi C, Kantoff PW, Balk SP, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2012 Dec 14;338(6113):1430-1.

Epigenetic regulators represent a promising new class of therapeutic targets for 
cancer. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a subunit of Polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), silences gene expression via its histone methyltransferase
activity. We found that the oncogenic function of EZH2 in cells of
castration-resistant prostate cancer is independent of its role as a
transcriptional repressor. Instead, it involves the ability of EZH2 to act as a
coactivator for critical transcription factors including the androgen receptor.
This functional switch is dependent on phosphorylation of EZH2 and requires an
intact methyltransferase domain. Hence, targeting the non-PRC2 function of EZH2
may have therapeutic efficacy for treating metastatic, hormone-refractory
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3625962
PMID: 23239736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Blood. 2012 Nov 1;120(18):e83-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-401471. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Commonly altered genomic regions in acute myeloid leukemia are enriched for
somatic mutations involved in chromatin remodeling and splicing.

Dolnik A(1), Engelmann JC, Scharfenberger-Schmeer M, Mauch J, Kelkenberg-Schade
S, Haldemann B, Fries T, Krönke J, Kühn MW, Paschka P, Kayser S, Wolf S, Gaidzik 
VI, Schlenk RF, Rücker FG, Döhner H, Lottaz C, Döhner K, Bullinger L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by molecular heterogeneity. As
commonly altered genomic regions point to candidate genes involved in
leukemogenesis, we used microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization and
single nucleotide polymorphism profiling data of 391 AML cases to further narrow 
down genomic regions of interest. Targeted resequencing of 1000 genes located in 
the critical regions was performed in a representative cohort of 50 AML samples
comprising all major cytogenetic subgroups. We identified 120 missense/nonsense
mutations as well as 60 insertions/deletions affecting 73 different genes (~ 3.6 
tumor-specific aberrations/AML). While most of the newly identified alterations
were nonrecurrent, we observed an enrichment of mutations affecting genes
involved in epigenetic regulation including known candidates like TET2, TET1,
DNMT3A, and DNMT1, as well as mutations in the histone methyltransferases NSD1,
EZH2, and MLL3. Furthermore, we found mutations in the splicing factor SFPQ and
in the nonclassic regulators of mRNA processing CTCF and RAD21. These
splicing-related mutations affected 10% of AML patients in a mutually exclusive
manner. In conclusion, we could identify a large number of alterations in genes
involved in aberrant splicing and epigenetic regulation in genomic regions
commonly altered in AML, highlighting their important role in the molecular
pathogenesis of AML.

PMID: 22976956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncol Rep. 2012 Dec;28(6):2101-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2027. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Let-7a inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis by targeting EZH2 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Cai K(1), Wan Y, Sun G, Shi L, Bao X, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Taizhou People's
Hospital, Taizhou 225300, Jiangsu, PR China. entcaikemin7173@126.com

Let-7a is frequently downregulated in various types of human cancer including
nasopharyngeal carcinoma. However, the underlying mechanism of let-7a action in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma remains elusive. In this study, we show that the
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a direct target of let-7a in human
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. The inhibition of EZH2 in vitro by let-7a, EZH2
siRNA, attenuated nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell growth, inhibited cell
proliferation and induced cell apoptosis. In addition, for each biological
process we identified ontology-associated transcripts that significantly
correlate with EZH2 expression. Finally, the expression of EZH2 significantly
abrogated let-7a-mediated cell proliferation and apoptosis in the nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma cells. Taken together, our results suggest that let-7a and EZH2 may be 
potential therapeutic targets for nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

PMID: 22972404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cancer Discov. 2012 Sep;2(9):769-71. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0346.

A genetic snapshot of small cell lung cancer.

Rosell R(1), Wannesson L.

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona, Spain. rrosell@iconcologia.net

Comment on
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Sep;2(9):798-811.

Overexpression of PARP1 and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been
identified in an integrated analysis of multiple proteins involved in
intracellular signaling pathways in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines. The
knockdown of PARP1 and EZH2 abrogated SCLC growth. These findings provide the
basis for novel predictive markers and new treatment strategies in SCLC, for
which there is now a paucity of available therapies.

PMID: 22969115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Hypertension. 2012 Nov;60(5):1176-83. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.112.191098.
Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Epigenetic regulation of cell adhesion and communication by enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 in human endothelial cells.

Dreger H(1), Ludwig A, Weller A, Stangl V, Baumann G, Meiners S, Stangl K.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik für Kardiologie und Angiologie, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, D-10117 Berlin, Germany.
henryk.dreger@charite.de

The histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2) mediates
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone 3, which acts as a repressive epigenetic
mark. Ezh2 is essential for maintaining pluripotency of stem cells, but
information on its role in differentiated cells is sparse. Whole-genome mRNA
expression arrays identified 964 genes that were regulated by >2-fold 72 hours
after small interfering RNA-mediated silencing of Ezh2 in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Among them, genes associated with the gene ontology terms cell
communication and cell adhesion were significantly overrepresented, suggesting a 
functional role for Ezh2 in the regulation of angiogenesis. Indeed, adhesion,
migration, and tube formation assays revealed significantly altered angiogenic
properties of human umbilical vein endothelial cells after silencing of Ezh2. To 
identify direct target genes of Ezh2, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiments followed by whole-genome promoter arrays (chromatin
immunoprecipitation-on-chip) and identified 5585 genes associated with
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone 3. Comparative analysis with our mRNA
expression data identified 276 genes that met our criteria for putative Ezh2
target genes, upregulation by >2-fold after Ezh2 silencing and association with
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone 3. Notably, we observed a striking
overrepresentation of genes involved in wingless-type mouse mammary tumor virus
integration site (WNT) signaling pathways. Epigenetic regulation of several of
these genes by Ezh2 was specifically confirmed by polymerase chain reaction
analysis of DNA enrichment after chromatin immunoprecipitation using an antibody 
specific for trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone 3. Combining mRNA expression 
arrays and chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip analysis, we identified 276 Ezh2
target genes in endothelial cells. Ezh2-dependent repression of genes involved in
cell adhesion and communication contributes to the regulation of angiogenesis.

PMID: 22966008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Nov;10(11):1462-72. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0335. Epub
2012 Sep 10.

SUZ12 promotes human epithelial ovarian cancer by suppressing apoptosis via
silencing HRK.

Li H(1), Cai Q, Wu H, Vathipadiekal V, Dobbin ZC, Li T, Hua X, Landen CN, Birrer 
MJ, Sánchez-Beato M, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression and Regulation Program, The Wistar Institute, 3601 Spruce
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) ranks first as the cause of death for
gynecological cancers in the United States. SUZ12 is a component of the polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and is essential for PRC2-mediated gene silencing by 
generating trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3). The role
of SUZ12 in EOC has never been investigated. Here, we show that SUZ12 is
expressed at significantly higher levels in human EOC (n = 117) compared with
either normal human ovarian surface epithelium (n = 35, P < 0.001) or fallopian
tube epithelium (n = 15, P < 0.001). There is a positive correlation between
expression of SUZ12 and EZH2 in human EOC (P < 0.001). In addition, expression of
SUZ12 positively correlates with Ki67, a marker of cell proliferation (P <
0.001), and predicts shorter overall survival (P = 0.0078). Notably, knockdown of
SUZ12 suppresses the growth of human EOC cells in vitro and in vivo in both
orthotopic and subcutaneous xenograft EOC models. In addition, SUZ12 knockdown
decreases the levels of H3K27Me3 and triggers apoptosis of human EOC cells.
Mechanistically, we identified Harakiri (HRK), a proapoptotic gene, as a novel
SUZ12 target gene, and showed that HRK upregulation mediates apoptosis induced by
SUZ12 knockdown in human EOC cells. In summary, we show that SUZ12 promotes the
proliferation of human EOC cells by inhibiting apoptosis and HRK is a novel SUZ12
target gene whose upregulation contributes to apoptosis induced by SUZ12
knockdown.

PMCID: PMC3501543
PMID: 22964433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44206. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044206. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

MiR-214 targets ß-catenin pathway to suppress invasion, stem-like traits and
recurrence of human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xia H(1), Ooi LL, Hui KM.

Author information: 
(1)Bek Chai Heah Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Division of Cellular and
Molecular Research, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer Research, National Cancer
Centre, Singapore, Singapore.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(9). doi:10.1371/annotation/1be2a62e-45a1-4c13-9a8d-f265005a21e0.

The down-regulation of miR-214 has previously been observed in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we demonstrated the down-regulation of
miR-214 is associated with cell invasion, stem-like traits and early recurrence
of HCC. Firstly, we validated the suppression of miR-214 in human HCC by
real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) in 20 paired tumor and non-tumor liver
tissues of HCC patients and 10 histologically normal liver tissues from
colorectal cancer patients with liver metastases. Further qRT-PCR analysis of 50 
HCC tissues from an independent cohort of HCC patients of whom 29 with early
recurrent disease (<2 years) and 21 with late recurrent disease demonstrated that
the suppression of miR-214 was significantly more suppressed in samples from HCC 
patients with early recurrent disease compared those from patients with no
recurrence. Re-expression of miR-214 significantly suppressed the growth of HCC
cells in vitro and reduced their tumorigenicity in vivo. The enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 (EZH2) and ß-catenin (CTNNB1) was identified as two potential direct 
downstream targets of miR-214 through bioinformatics analysis and experimentally 
validated the miRNA-target interactions with a dual-firefly luciferase reporter
assay. In corroborate with this, both EZH2 and CTNNB1 are found to be
significantly overexpressed in human HCC biopsies. Since EZH2 can regulate
CTNNB1, CTNNB1 can also be an indirect target of miR-214 through EZH2. Silencing 
EZH2 or CTNNB1 expression suppressed the growth and invasion of HCC cells and
induced E-cadherin (CDH1), known to inhibit cell invasion and metastasis.
Furthermore, the silencing of miR-214 or overexpression of EZH2 increased
EpCAM(+) stem-like cells through the activation of CTNNB1. Interestingly, the
up-regulation of EZH2, CTNNB1 and the down-regulation of CDH1 in HCC patients
correlated with early recurrent disease and can be an independent predictor of
poor survival. Therefore, miR-214 can directly or indirectly target CTNNB1 to
modulate the ß-catenin signaling pathway in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3433464
PMID: 22962603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Discov. 2012 Sep;2(9):798-811. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0112. Epub
2012 Sep 6.

Proteomic profiling identifies dysregulated pathways in small cell lung cancer
and novel therapeutic targets including PARP1.

Byers LA(1), Wang J, Nilsson MB, Fujimoto J, Saintigny P, Yordy J, Giri U, Peyton
M, Fan YH, Diao L, Masrorpour F, Shen L, Liu W, Duchemann B, Tumula P, Bhardwaj
V, Welsh J, Weber S, Glisson BS, Kalhor N, Wistuba II, Girard L, Lippman SM,
Mills GB, Coombes KR, Weinstein JN, Minna JD, Heymach JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. lbyers@mdanderson.org

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Sep;2(9):769-71.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is an aggressive malignancy distinct from non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) in its metastatic potential and treatment response.
Using an integrative proteomic and transcriptomic analysis, we investigated
molecular differences contributing to the distinct clinical behavior of SCLCs and
NSCLCs. SCLCs showed lower levels of several receptor tyrosine kinases and
decreased activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and
Ras/mitogen-activated protein (MAP)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
kinase (MEK) pathways but significantly increased levels of E2F1-regulated
factors including enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), thymidylate synthase,
apoptosis mediators, and DNA repair proteins. In addition, PARP1, a DNA repair
protein and E2F1 co-activator, was highly expressed at the mRNA and protein
levels in SCLCs. SCLC growth was inhibited by PARP1 and EZH2 knockdown.
Furthermore, SCLC was significantly more sensitive to PARP inhibitors than were
NSCLCs, and PARP inhibition downregulated key components of the DNA repair
machinery and enhanced the efficacy of chemotherapy.SIGNIFICANCE: SCLC is a
highly lethal cancer with a 5-year survival rate of less than 10%. To date, no
molecularly targeted agents have prolonged survival in patients with SCLCs. As a 
step toward identifying new targets, we systematically profiled SCLCs with a
focus on therapeutically relevant signaling pathways. Our data reveal fundamental
differences in the patterns of pathway activation in SCLCs and NSCLCs and
identify several potential therapeutic targets for SCLCs, including PARP1 and
EZH2. On the basis of these results, clinical studies evaluating PARP and EZH2
inhibition, together with chemotherapy or other agents, warrant further
investigation.

PMCID: PMC3567922
PMID: 22961666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e42661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042661. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Differential glioma-associated tumor antigen expression profiles of human glioma 
cells grown in hypoxia.

Ge L(1), Cornforth AN, Hoa NT, Delgado C, Chiou SK, Zhou YH, Jadus MR.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic and Molecular Health Care Group, Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Long Beach, California, United States of America.

Human U251 and D54 glioma cells were tested for expression of 25
glioma-associated tumor antigen precursor proteins (TAPP) under hypoxic (1% O(2))
or normoxic (21% O(2)) conditions. Hypoxic glioma cell lines increased their mRNA
expression for nine TAPP (Aim2, Art-4, EphA2, EZH2, Fosl1, PTH-rP, Sox 11, Whsc2 
and YKL-40), as assessed by quantitative reverse transcriptase
real-time/polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Increased differences with three
hypoxic-induced TAPP: EZH2, Whsc2 and YKL-40 were shown at the protein levels by 
fluorescent antibody staining and quantitative electrophoretic analysis. Two TAPP
(MRP3 and Trp1) were down-regulated by hypoxia in glioma cell lines. Growing the 
glioma cells under hypoxia for 13 days, followed by returning them back to
normoxic conditions for 7 days, and restored the original normoxic TAPP profile. 
Thus, hypoxia was an environmental factor that stimulated the transient
expression of these antigens. Intracranial xenografts grown in nude mice derived 
from U251 cells that had been cultured under neurosphere stem cell conditions
showed increased expression of Whsc2 or YKL-40, demonstrating that these in vitro
properties of glioma also occur in vivo. Whsc2-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes
killed the hypoxic U251 glioma cells better than normoxic glioma cells. The
antigens expressed by hypoxic tumor cells may be a better source of starting
tumor material for loading dendritic cells for novel immunotherapy of glioma
using tumor-associated antigens.

PMCID: PMC3434178
PMID: 22957023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2012 Sep;237(9):1110-6. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is overexpressed and contributes to epigenetic
inactivation of p21 and phosphatase and tensin homolog in B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Chen J(1), Li J, Han Q, Sun Z, Wang J, Wang S, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences & School of Basic Medicine, Center of
Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, China.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is crucially involved in epigenetic silencing 
by acting as a histone methyltransferase. Although EZH2 is overexpressed in many 
solid cancers, the role of EZH2 in B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL)
remains largely unexplored. In a microarray experiment, we found that EZH2 was
significantly upregulated in Nalm-6 cells and this was associated with the
silencing of tumor suppressor genes p21, p53 and phosphatase and tensin homolog
(PTEN). The abnormal expression of these genes was further confirmed by
quantitative realtime polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis on
Nalm-6 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that EZH2 and H3K27me3
were both enriched in the promoter region of PTEN and p21 in Nalm-6 cells but not
in normal B cells. Functional analysis showed that siRNA-mediated EZH2 knockdown 
led to decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of Nalm-6 cells,
accompanied by the reactivation of PTEN and p21 expression. Furthermore, we found
that EZH2 inhibitor deazaneplanocin A promoted vincristine sulfate-induced
apoptosis of Nalm-6 cells. Taken together, our data suggest that EZH2 is
overexpressed in B-ALL and promotes the progression of B-ALL by directly
mediating the inactivation of tumor suppressor genes p21 and PTEN, and could
serve as a potential epigenetic target for B-ALL therapy.

PMID: 22956625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043726. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Hypoxia induced aggressiveness of prostate cancer cells is linked with
deregulated expression of VEGF, IL-6 and miRNAs that are attenuated by CDF.

Bao B(1), Ahmad A, Kong D, Ali S, Azmi AS, Li Y, Banerjee S, Padhye S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Tumor hypoxia with deregulated expression of hypoxia inducing factor (HIF) and
its biological consequence leads to poor prognosis of patients diagnosed with
solid tumors, resulting in higher mortality, suggesting that understanding of the
molecular relationship of hypoxia with other cellular features of tumor
aggressiveness would be invaluable for developing newer targeted therapy for
solid tumors. Emerging evidence also suggest that hypoxia and HIF signaling
pathways contributes to the acquisition of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), maintenance of cancer stem cell (CSC) functions, and also maintains the
vicious cycle of inflammation, all of which contribute to radiation therapy and
chemotherapy resistance. However, the detailed mechanisms by which hypoxia/HIF
drive these events are not fully understood. Here, we have shown that hypoxia
leads to increased expression of VEGF, IL-6, and CSC marker genes such as Nanog, 
Oct4 and EZH2, and also increased the expression of miR-21, an oncogenic miRNA,
in prostate cancer (PCa) cells (PC-3 and LNCaP). The treatment of PCa cells with 
CDF, a novel Curcumin-derived synthetic analogue previously showed anti-tumor
activity in vivo, inhibited the productions of VEGF and IL-6, and down-regulated 
the expression of Nanog, Oct4, EZH2 mRNAs, as well as miR-21 under hypoxic
condition. Moreover, CDF treatment of PCa cells led to decreased cell migration
under hypoxic condition. Taken together, these results suggest that the
anti-tumor effect of CDF is in part mediated through deregulation of tumor
hypoxic pathways, and thus CDF could become useful for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3428287
PMID: 22952749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(8):10143-53. doi: 10.3390/ijms130810143. Epub 2012 Aug 15.

Epigenetic effects of environmental chemicals bisphenol A and phthalates.

Singh S(1), Li SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Science, National Taiwan Normal
University, Taipei 116, Taiwan; E-Mail: sher@ntnu.edu.tw.

The epigenetic effects on DNA methylation, histone modification, and expression
of non-coding RNAs (including microRNAs) of environmental chemicals such as
bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates have expanded our understanding of the etiology 
of human complex diseases such as cancers and diabetes. Multiple lines of
evidence from in vitro and in vivo models have established that epigenetic
modifications caused by in utero exposure to environmental toxicants can induce
alterations in gene expression that may persist throughout life. Epigenetics is
an important mechanism in the ability of environmental chemicals to influence
health and disease, and BPA and phthalates are epigenetically toxic. The
epigenetic effect of BPA was clearly demonstrated in viable yellow mice by
decreasing CpG methylation upstream of the Agouti gene, and the hypomethylating
effect of BPA was prevented by maternal dietary supplementation with a methyl
donor like folic acid or the phytoestrogen genistein. Histone H3 was found to be 
trimethylated at lysine 27 by BPA effect on EZH2 in a human breast cancer cell
line and mice. BPA exposure of human placental cell lines has been shown to alter
microRNA expression levels, and specifically, miR-146a was strongly induced by
BPA treatment. In human breast cancer MCF7 cells, treatment with the phthalate
BBP led to demethylation of estrogen receptor (ESR1) promoter-associated CpG
islands, indicating that altered ESR1 mRNA expression by BBP is due to aberrant
DNA methylation. Maternal exposure to phthalate DEHP was also shown to increase
DNA methylation and expression levels of DNA methyltransferases in mouse testis. 
Further, some epigenetic effects of BPA and phthalates in female rats were found 
to be transgenerational. Finally, the available new technologies for global
analysis of epigenetic alterations will provide insight into the extent and
patterns of alterations between human normal and diseased tissues. In vitro
models such as human embryonic stem cells may be extremely useful in bettering
the understanding of epigenetic effects on human development, health and disease,
because the formation of embryoid bodies in vitro is very similar to the early
stage of embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3431850
PMID: 22949852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Oncotarget. 2012 Sep;3(9):1011-25.

Genetic and epigenetic loss of microRNA-31 leads to feed-forward expression of
EZH2 in melanoma.

Asangani IA(1), Harms PW, Dodson L, Pandhi M, Kunju LP, Maher CA, Fullen DR,
Johnson TM, Giordano TJ, Palanisamy N, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology.

MicroRNAs (miRs) play a key role in cancer etiology by coordinately repressing
numerous target genes involved in cell proliferation, migration and invasion. The
genomic region in chromosome 9p21 that encompasses miR-31 is frequently deleted
in solid cancers including melanoma; however the expression and functional role
of miR-31 has not been previously studied in melanoma. Here, we queried the
expression status and performed functional characterization of miR-31 in melanoma
tissues and cell lines. We found that down-regulation of miR-31 was a common
event in melanoma tumors and cell lines and was associated with genomic loss in a
subset of samples. Down-regulation of miR-31 gene expression was also a result of
epigenetic silencing by DNA methylation, and via EZH2-mediated histone
methylation. Ectopic overexpression of miR-31 in various melanoma cell lines
inhibited cell migration and invasion. miR-31 targets include oncogenic kinases
such as SRC, MET, NIK (MAP3K14) and the melanoma specific oncogene RAB27a.
Furthermore, miR-31 overexpression resulted in down-regulation of EZH2 and a
de-repression of its target gene rap1GAP; increased expression of EZH2 was
associated with melanoma progression and overall patient survival. Taken
together, our study supports a tumor suppressor role for miR-31 in melanoma and
identifies novel therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3663613
PMID: 22948084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Urol Oncol. 2013 Nov;31(8):1770-9. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 
Sep 1.

Changes in histone deacetylase (HDAC) expression patterns and activity of HDAC
inhibitors in urothelial cancers.

Niegisch G(1), Knievel J, Koch A, Hader C, Fischer U, Albers P, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Medical Faculty, Düsseldorf,
Germany. Electronic address: guenter.niegisch@med.uni-duesseldorf.de.

OBJECTIVE: To determine histone deacetylase (HDAC) isoenzyme expression patterns 
in urothelial cancer tissues and cell lines and investigate their potential to
predict the efficacy of the HDAC inhibitor vorinostat.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HDAC mRNAs was determined by quantitative
RT-PCR in 18 urothelial cancer cell lines (UCC), normal uroepithelial controls
(NUC), 24 urothelial cancer tissues, and 12 benign controls. Results were
compared with published microarray data. Effects of pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat
and on UCCs were determined by viability and apoptosis assays, cell cycle
analysis, and measurements of p21(CIP1), thymidylate synthase (TS), and EZH2. In 
addition, protein expression levels of HDACs were investigated in UCCs.
RESULTS: Prominent changes in UCCs were HDAC2 and/or HDAC8 up-regulation in 11 of
18 cell lines and decreased expression of HDAC4, HDAC5, and/or HDAC7 mRNA in 15
of 18 cell lines. In cancer tissues, HDAC8 was likewise significantly
up-regulated (P = 0.002), whereas HDAC2 up-regulation was detected only in a
subset of tumors (9/24, P = 0.085). Overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC8 mRNA did
not correspond with the protein level. Vorinostat induced G2/M arrest, an
increase in the sub-G1 fraction, up-regulation of p21, and down-regulation of TS 
in all UCC. Effects on EZH2 and PARP cleavage as well as activation of caspase
3/7 differed between cell lines. Associations between the overall sensitivity to 
the pan-HDACi vorinostat and overexpression of HDAC2 and HDAC8 mRNA were not
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: In urothelial cancer, up-regulation of HDAC2 and HDAC8 and
down-regulation of HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7 mRNA are common findings. The
treatment effect of the pan-HDAC inhibitor vorinostat was variable in UCCs and
up-regulation of HDAC2 and HDAC8 was not predictive for treatment response.
Whether selective targeting of HDAC2, HDAC8, or other HDACs deregulated in
urothelial cancer (e.g., HDAC4, HDAC5, and HDAC7) result in a more consistent
treatment response needs further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22944197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Surgery. 2012 Oct;152(4):704-11; discussion 711-3. doi:
10.1016/j.surg.2012.07.020. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Restoration of E-cadherin expression in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma treated 
with microRNA-101.

Qazi AM(1), Gruzdyn O, Semaan A, Seward S, Chamala S, Dhulipala V, Sethi S,
Ali-Fehmi R, Philip PA, Bouwman DL, Weaver DW, Gruber SA, Batchu RB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical Oncology & Developmental Therapeutics, Department of
Surgery, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate the possibility of inhibiting the progression of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) by facilitating the expression of
E-cadherin through the enforced expression of microRNA-101 (miR-101).
METHODS: In situ hybridization was conducted with archival tissue using a double 
digoxigenin-labeled probe. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was
conducted with EZ-Magna ChIPTM A. Gene profile analysis, Western blot, and
immunoprecipitation assays were performed using standard protocols.
RESULTS: We found that decreased miR-101 expression observed in archival patient 
tissues was significantly associated with poor prognosis indicated by
low-intensity staining in high-grade tumors. ChIP assays using anti-enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) antibodies indicated not only the interaction of EZH2 to
the CDH1 (E-cadherin) promoter, but also that this interaction was significantly 
diminished in cells transfected with pre-miR-101. We observed a global
downregulation of trimethylated lysine 27 of H3 histone (H3K27me3) along with
upregulation of the enzymes histone deacetylase -1 and -2 with the re-expression 
of miR-101. Further, we observed lesser levels of transcriptional factors that
inhibit the CDH1 promoter with pre-miR-101 treatment. Western blot analysis
confirmed the enhanced E-cadherin expression. PANC-1 cells transduced with
pre-miR-101 displayed markedly attenuated growth in SCID mice.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the potential therapeutic use of
miR-101-enforced expression for inhibition of PDAC.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 22943841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Gut. 2013 Nov;62(11):1536-46. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301625. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

CagA mediates epigenetic regulation to attenuate let-7 expression in Helicobacter
pylori-related carcinogenesis.

Hayashi Y(1), Tsujii M, Wang J, Kondo J, Akasaka T, Jin Y, Li W, Nakamura T,
Nishida T, Iijima H, Tsuji S, Kawano S, Hayashi N, Takehara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University Graduate
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) act as tumour suppressor genes or oncogenes in the 
regulation of multiple carcinogenic processes. Aberrant miRNA expression is
reported in Helicobacter pylori (H pylori)-related gastritis and gastric cancer. 
The cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA) of H pylori has a pathophysiologically
important role in gastric carcinogenesis. A study was undertaken to evaluate the 
effect of CagA on miRNA expression and its regulatory mechanism.
METHODS: The effect of CagA on miRNA expression was assessed by comprehensive
miRNA microarray. The mechanisms of the in vitro and in vivo effects of CagA on
histone modification and DNA methylation and the involvement of CagA-dysregulated
signal transduction on let-7, an important representative miRNA in gastric
carcinogenesis, were investigated.
RESULTS: In in vitro experiments, CagA significantly attenuated let-7 expression 
leading to Ras pathway activation. CagA enhanced c-myc, DNA methyltransferase 3B 
(DNMT3B) and Enhancer of Zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) expression and attenuated
miR-26a and miR-101 expression, which resulted in the attenuation of let-7
expression by histone and DNA methylation. Experiments performed in CagA
transgenic mice revealed that c-myc, EZH2 and DNMT3B expression were enhanced and
let-7 expression was attenuated to induce Ras oncoprotein expression in the
stomach, with no associated inflammation.
CONCLUSIONS: H pylori CagA induces aberrant epigenetic silencing of let-7
expression, leading to Ras upregulation.

PMID: 22936674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36179-89. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.359281. Epub
2012 Aug 29.

A proteasome inhibitor-stimulated Nrf1 protein-dependent compensatory increase in
proteasome subunit gene expression reduces polycomb group protein level.

Balasubramanian S(1), Kanade S, Han B, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) proteins, Bmi-1 and Ezh2, are important epigenetic
regulators that enhance skin cancer cell survival. We recently showed that Bmi-1 
and Ezh2 protein level is reduced by treatment with the dietary chemopreventive
agents, sulforaphane and green tea polyphenol, and that this reduction involves
ubiquitination of Bmi-1 and Ezh2, suggesting a key role of the proteasome. In the
present study, we observe a surprising outcome that Bmi-1 and Ezh2 levels are
reduced by treatment with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. We show that this is
associated with a compensatory increase in the level of mRNA encoding proteasome 
protein subunits in response to MG132 treatment and an increase in proteasome
activity. The increase in proteasome subunit level is associated with increased
Nrf1 and Nrf2 level. Moreover, knockdown of Nrf1 attenuates the MG132-dependent
increase in proteasome subunit expression and restores Bmi-1 and Ezh2 expression.
The MG132-dependent loss of Bmi-1 and Ezh2 is associated with reduced cell
proliferation, accumulation of cells in G(2), and increased apoptosis. These
effects are attenuated by forced expression of Bmi-1, suggesting that PcG
proteins, consistent with a prosurvival action, may antagonize the action of
MG132. These studies describe a compensatory Nrf1-dependent, and to a lesser
extent Nrf2-dependent, increase in proteasome subunit level in proteasome
inhibitor-treated cells and confirm that PcG protein levels are regulated by
proteasome activity.

PMCID: PMC3476285
PMID: 22932898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;18(22):6227-38. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0873. 
Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Superior efficacy of a combined epigenetic therapy against human mantle cell
lymphoma cells.

Fiskus W(1), Rao R, Balusu R, Ganguly S, Tao J, Sotomayor E, Mudunuru U, Smith
JE, Hembruff SL, Atadja P, Marquez VE, Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

PURPOSE: A deregulated epigenome contributes to the transformed phenotype of
mantle cell lymphoma (MCL). This involves activity of the polycomb repressive
complex (PRC) 2, containing three core proteins, EZH2, SUZ12, and EED, in which
the SET domain of EZH2 mediates the histone methyltransferase activity. We
determined the effects of 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an S-adenosylhomocysteine 
hydrolase inhibitor, and/or pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat (PS)
on cultured and primary MCL cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Following treatment with DZNep and/or PS, apoptosis and the 
levels and activity of EZH2 and PRC2 proteins in cultured and primary MCL cells
were determined.
RESULTS: Treatment with DZNep depleted EZH2, SUZ12, and 3MeK27H3 in the cultured 
human MCL cells. DZNep also increased expression of p21, p27, and FBXO32, whereas
it depleted Cyclin D1 and Cyclin E1 levels in MCL cells. In addition, DZNep
treatment induced cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in cultured and primary MCL
cells. Furthermore, as compared with treatment with each agent alone, cotreatment
with DZNep and PS caused greater depletion of EZH2, SUZ12, 3MeK27H3, and Cyclin
D1 levels, whereas it induced greater expression of FBXO32, p16, p21, and p27.
Combined treatment with DZNep and PS synergistically induced apoptosis of
cultured and primary MCL cells while relatively sparing normal CD34 + cells.
Cotreatment with DZNep and PS also caused significantly greater inhibition of
tumor growth of JeKo-1 xenografts in NOD/SCID mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These preclinical in vitro and in vivo findings show that
cotreatment with DZNep and PS is an active combined epigenetic therapy worthy of 
further in vivo testing against MCL.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4113119
PMID: 22932665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;20(4):1020-4.

[Recent advances of molecular mechanisms influencing prognosis of myelodysplastic
syndrome - review].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo J(1), Chang CK, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is clonal disorder of hematopoiesis characterized 
by inefficient hematopoiesis, peripheral blood cytopenias, aberrant
differentiation, and risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia. Although
specific karyotypic abnormalities have been found to link to MDS for decades,
more recent findings have demonstrated the importance of mutations within
individual genes. The recent molecular abnormalities found in MDS include
following gene mutation such as TET2, TP53, RUNX1, ASXL1, IDH1/IDH2, EZH2 and
RAS. In this review, the recent advances of prognostic molecular markers of MDS
and their biological and clinical significance are summarized.

PMID: 22931676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cancer Discov. 2012 Nov;2(11):1024-35. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-12-0041. Epub
2012 Aug 28.

Genome-wide DNA methylation events in TMPRSS2-ERG fusion-negative prostate
cancers implicate an EZH2-dependent mechanism with miR-26a hypermethylation.

Börno ST(1), Fischer A, Kerick M, Fälth M, Laible M, Brase JC, Kuner R, Dahl A,
Grimm C, Sayanjali B, Isau M, Röhr C, Wunderlich A, Timmermann B, Claus R, Plass 
C, Graefen M, Simon R, Demichelis F, Rubin MA, Sauter G, Schlomm T, Sültmann H,
Lehrach H, Schweiger MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2012 Nov;2(11):979-81.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer among men worldwide. Alterations
in the DNA methylation pattern can be one of the leading causes for prostate
cancer formation. This study is the first high-throughput sequencing study
investigating genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in a large cohort of 51 tumor 
and 53 benign prostate samples using methylated DNA immunoprecipitation
sequencing. Comparative analyses identified more than 147,000 cancer-associated
epigenetic alterations. In addition, global methylation patterns show significant
differences based on the TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangement status. We propose the
hypermethylation of miR-26a as an alternative pathway of ERG
rearrangement-independent EZH2 activation. The observed increase in differential 
methylation events in fusion-negative tumors can explain the tumorigenic process 
in the absence of genomic rearrangements.SIGNIFICANCE: In contrast to TMPRSS2-ERG
-rearranged tumors, the pathomechanism for gene fusion-negative tumors is
completely unclear. Using a sequencing-based approach, our work uncovers
significant global epigenetic alterations in TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion-negative
tumors and provides a mechanistic explanation for the tumor formation process.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22930729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Lung Cancer. 2012 Nov;78(2):138-43. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.08.003. Epub 2012
Aug 25.

Epigenetic therapy with 3-deazaneplanocin A, an inhibitor of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2, inhibits growth of non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Kikuchi J(1), Takashina T, Kinoshita I, Kikuchi E, Shimizu Y, Sakakibara-Konishi 
J, Oizumi S, Marquez VE, Nishimura M, Dosaka-Akita H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) is the catalytic subunit of PRC2 (polycomb
repressive complex 2), which mediates histone methyltransferase activity and
functions as transcriptional repressor involved in gene silencing. EZH2 is
involved in malignant transformation and biological aggressiveness of several
human malignancies. We previously demonstrated that non-small cell lung cancers
(NSCLCs) also overexpress EZH2 and that high expression of EZH2 correlates with
poor prognosis. Growing evidence indicates that EZH2 may be an appropriate
therapeutic target in malignancies, including NSCLCs. Recently, an
S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine hydrolase inhibitor, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), has
been shown to deplete and inhibit EZH2. The aim of this study was to determine
the effect of DZNep in NSCLC cells. Knockdown of EZH2 by small-interfering RNA
(siRNA) resulted in decreased growth of four NSCLC cell lines. MTT assays
demonstrated that DZNep treatment resulted in dose-dependent inhibition of
proliferation in the NSCLC cell lines with a half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) ranging from 0.08 to 0.24 µM. Immortalized but non-cancerous
bronchial epithelial and fibroblast cell lines were less sensitive to DZNep than 
the NSCLC cell lines. Soft agarose assays demonstrated that anchorage-independent
growth was also reduced in all three NSCLC cell lines that were evaluated using
this assay. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that DZNep induced apoptosis and
G1 cell cycle arrest in NSCLC cells, which was partially associated with cyclin A
decrease and p27(Kip1) accumulation. DZNep depleted cellular levels of EZH2 and
inhibited the associated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation. These results
indicated that an epigenetic therapy that pharmacologically targets EZH2 via
DZNep may constitute a novel approach to treatment of NSCLCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3472089
PMID: 22925699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Blood. 2012 Oct 11;120(15):3080-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-404863. Epub 2012
Aug 23.

SRSF2 mutations in 275 cases with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML).

Meggendorfer M(1), Roller A, Haferlach T, Eder C, Dicker F, Grossmann V, Kohlmann
A, Alpermann T, Yoshida K, Ogawa S, Koeffler HP, Kern W, Haferlach C, Schnittger 
S.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany.

We analyzed the mutational hotspot region of SRSF2 (Pro95) in 275 cases with
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). In addition, ASXL1, CBL, EZH2, JAK2V617F,
KRAS, NRAS, RUNX1, and TET2 mutations were investigated in subcohorts. Mutations 
in SRSF2 (SRSF2mut) were detected in 47% (129 of 275) of all cases. In detail,
120 cases had a missense mutation at Pro95, leading to a change to Pro95His,
Pro95Leu, Pro95Arg, Pro95Ala, or Pro95Thr. In 9 cases, 3 new in/del mutations
were observed: 7 cases with a 24-bp deletion, 1 case with a 3-bp duplication, and
1 case with a 24-bp duplication. In silico analyses predicted a damaging
character for the protein structure of SRSF2 for all mutations. SRSF2mut was
correlated with higher age, less pronounced anemia, and normal karyotype.
SRSF2mut and EZH2mut were mutually exclusive, but SRSF2mut was associated with
TET2mut. In the total cohort, no effect of SRSF2mut on survival was observed.
However, in the RUNX1mut subcohort, SRSF2 Pro95His had a favorable effect on
overall survival. This comprehensive mutation analysis found that 93% of all
patients with CMML carried at least 1 somatic mutation in 9 recurrently mutated
genes. In conclusion, these data show the importance of SRSF2mut as new
diagnostic marker in CMML.

PMCID: PMC3580040
PMID: 22919025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Aug 23;3:e380. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.119.

Notch1 intracellular domain increases cytoplasmic EZH2 levels during early
megakaryopoiesis.

Roy A(1), Basak NP, Banerjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata, West
Bengal, India.

Notch pathway is a well-known factor in the development of lymphoid lineage.
However, its role in the myeloid lineage has remained ambiguous. We looked into
the effect of Notch1 on the megakaryocytic lineage commitment and found an
increase in megakaryocyte-specific lineage markers upon transfection with Notch1 
intracellular domain (NICD). This effect was mediated by Akt whereby constitutive
activation of Akt increased the megakaryocyte markers, whereas inhibition of Akt 
signalling reduced these marker levels. Along with the change in differentiation 
status, NICD-induced initiation of early megakaryopoiesis was accompanied by an
increased cytoplasmic enhancer of zeste homolog-2 (EZH2) expression. This process
was found to be Akt-dependent, and inhibition or overexpression of Akt lead to
concurrent changes in EZH2 levels. To elucidate the function of EZH2 in the
cytoplasm, novel cytoplasmic interactors of EZH2 were identified by
co-immunoprecipitation followed by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
MS/MS-based protein identification, and thus, PDIA1 and LIM domain kinase-1
(LIMK1) were identified. Interaction of EZH2 with LIMK1 changed the activity of
cofilin (a downstream target of LIMK1) towards actin filaments, thereby leading
to lower filamentous actin content within these cells. Thus, Notch1 not only
induces early megakaryopoiesis but also prepares these cells for subsequent
morphological changes.

PMCID: PMC3434659
PMID: 22914328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 18;32(29):3432-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.360. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

A novel miR-193a-5p-YY1-APC regulatory axis in human endometrioid endometrial
adenocarcinoma.

Yang Y(1), Zhou L, Lu L, Wang L, Li X, Jiang P, Chan LK, Zhang T, Yu J, Kwong J, 
Cheung TH, Chung T, Mak K, Sun H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong SAR, China.

Aberrant expression and altered function of transcription factors (TFs) have
vital roles in many aspects of tumor development and progression. In this study, 
we investigated the functional significance of a TF, Yin Yang1 (YY1) in
tumorigenesis of endometrioid endometrial carcinoma (EEC). We demonstrated that
YY1 is upregulated in EEC cell lines and primary tumors; and its expression is
associated with tumor stages. Depletion of YY1 inhibits EEC cell proliferation
and migration both in vitro and in vivo, whereas overexpression of YY1 promotes
EEC cell growth. These results suggest that YY1 functions as an oncogenic factor 
in EEC. Transcriptome analysis revealed a significant effect of YY1 on critical
aspects of EEC tumorigenesis through inhibition of APC expression. Further
mechanistic investigation uncovered a new epigenetic silencing mode of APC by YY1
through recruitment of EZH2 and trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 on its
promoter region. Moreover, YY1 overexpression was found to be a consequence of
miR-193a-5p downregulation through direct miR-193a-5p-YY1 interplay. Our results 
therefore establish a novel miR-193a-5p-YY1-APC axis, which contributes to EEC
development, and may serve as future intervention target.

PMID: 22907428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043090. Epub 2012 Aug 15.

Single nucleotide polymorphism array lesions, TET2, DNMT3A, ASXL1 and CBL
mutations are present in systemic mastocytosis.

Traina F(1), Visconte V, Jankowska AM, Makishima H, O'Keefe CL, Elson P, Han Y,
Hsieh FH, Sekeres MA, Mali RS, Kalaycio M, Lichtin AE, Advani AS, Duong HK,
Copelan E, Kapur R, Olalla Saad ST, Maciejewski JP, Tiu RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

We hypothesized that analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism arrays (SNP-A)
and new molecular defects may provide new insight in the pathogenesis of systemic
mastocytosis (SM). SNP-A karyotyping was applied to identify recurrent areas of
loss of heterozygosity and bidirectional sequencing was performed to evaluate the
mutational status of TET2, DNMT3A, ASXL1, EZH2, IDH1/IDH2 and the CBL gene
family. Overall survival (OS) was analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method. We
studied a total of 26 patients with SM. In 67% of SM patients, SNP-A karyotyping 
showed new chromosomal abnormalities including uniparental disomy of 4q and 2p
spanning TET2/KIT and DNMT3A. Mutations in TET2, DNMT3A, ASXL1 and CBL were found
in 23%, 12%, 12%, and 4% of SM patients, respectively. No mutations were observed
in EZH2 and IDH1/IDH2. Significant differences in OS were observed for SM mutated
patients grouped based on the presence of combined TET2/DNMT3A/ASXL1 mutations
independent of KIT (P = 0.04) and sole TET2 mutations (P<0.001). In conclusion,
TET2, DNMT3A and ASXL1 mutations are also present in mastocytosis and these
mutations may affect prognosis, as demonstrated by worse OS in mutated patients.

PMCID: PMC3419680
PMID: 22905207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biomol Screen. 2012 Dec;17(10):1279-92. doi: 10.1177/1087057112453765. Epub
2012 Aug 17.

Development and validation of reagents and assays for EZH2 peptide and nucleosome
high-throughput screens.

Diaz E(1), Machutta CA, Chen S, Jiang Y, Nixon C, Hofmann G, Key D, Sweitzer S,
Patel M, Wu Z, Creasy CL, Kruger RG, LaFrance L, Verma SK, Pappalardi MB, Le B,
Van Aller GS, McCabe MT, Tummino PJ, Pope AJ, Thrall SH, Schwartz B, Brandt M.

Author information: 
(1)Platform Technology and Science, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.

Histone methyltransferases (HMT) catalyze the methylation of histone tail
lysines, resulting in changes in gene transcription. Misregulation of these
enzymes has been associated with various forms of cancer, making this target
class a potential new area for the development of novel chemotherapeutics. EZH2
is the catalytic component of the polycomb group repressive complex (PRC2), which
selectively methylates histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27). EZH2 is overexpressed in
prostate, breast, bladder, brain, and other tumor types and is recognized as a
molecular marker for cancer progression and aggressiveness. Several new reagents 
and assays were developed to aid in the identification of EZH2 inhibitors, and
these were used to execute two high-throughput screening campaigns. Activity
assays using either an H3K27 peptide or nucleosomes as substrates for methylation
are described. The strategy to screen EZH2 with either a surrogate peptide or a
natural substrate led to the identification of the same tractable series.
Compounds from this series are reversible, are [(3)H]-S-adenosyl-L-methionine
competitive, and display biochemical inhibition of H3K27 methylation.

PMID: 22904200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Sep;12(9):599-612. doi: 10.1038/nrc3343. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

The role of mutations in epigenetic regulators in myeloid malignancies.

Shih AH(1), Abdel-Wahab O, Patel JP, Levine RL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York,
USA.

Recent genomic studies have identified novel recurrent somatic mutations in
patients with myeloid malignancies, including myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). In some
cases these mutations occur in genes with known roles in regulating chromatin
and/or methylation states in haematopoietic progenitors, and in other cases
genetic and functional studies have elucidated a role for specific mutations in
altering epigenetic patterning in myeloid malignancies. In this Review we discuss
recent genetic and functional data implicating mutations in epigenetic modifiers,
including tet methylcytosine dioxygenase 2 (TET2), isocitrate dehydrogenase 1
(IDH1), IDH2, additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 
(EZH2) and DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A), in the pathogenesis of MPN, MDS and
AML, and discuss how this knowledge is leading to novel clinical, biological and 
therapeutic insights.

PMID: 22898539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Cell. 2012 Aug 14;22(2):180-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.06.032.

ASXL1 mutations promote myeloid transformation through loss of PRC2-mediated gene
repression.

Abdel-Wahab O(1), Adli M, LaFave LM, Gao J, Hricik T, Shih AH, Pandey S, Patel
JP, Chung YR, Koche R, Perna F, Zhao X, Taylor JE, Park CY, Carroll M, Melnick A,
Nimer SD, Jaffe JD, Aifantis I, Bernstein BE, Levine RL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Recurrent somatic ASXL1 mutations occur in patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome, myeloproliferative neoplasms, and acute myeloid leukemia, and are
associated with adverse outcome. Despite the genetic and clinical data
implicating ASXL1 mutations in myeloid malignancies, the mechanisms of
transformation by ASXL1 mutations are not understood. Here, we identify that
ASXL1 mutations result in loss of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-mediated
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) tri-methylation. Through integration of microarray
data with genome-wide histone modification ChIP-Seq data, we identify targets of 
ASXL1 repression, including the posterior HOXA cluster that is known to
contribute to myeloid transformation. We demonstrate that ASXL1 associates with
the PRC2, and that loss of ASXL1 in vivo collaborates with NRASG12D to promote
myeloid leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3422511
PMID: 22897849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34372-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.325332. Epub 2012
Aug 15.

Polycomb antagonizes p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor to silence FOXP3
in a Kruppel-like factor-dependent manner.

Xiong Y(1), Khanna S, Grzenda AL, Sarmento OF, Svingen PA, Lomberk GA, Urrutia
RA, Faubion WA Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin Dynamics and Epigenetics Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Inducible gene expression underlies the epigenetically inherited differentiation 
program of most immune cells. We report that the promoter of the FOXP3 gene
possesses two distinct functional states: an "off state" mediated by the polycomb
histone methyltransferase complex and a histone acetyltransferase-dependent "on
state." Regulating these states is the presence of a Kruppel-like factor
(KLF)-containing Polycomb response element. In the KLF10(-/-) mouse, the FOXP3
promoter is epigenetically silenced by EZH2 (Enhancer of Zeste 2)-mediated
trimethylation of Histone 3 K27; thus, impaired FOXP3 induction and inappropriate
adaptive T regulatory cell differentiation results in vitro and in vivo. The
epigenetic transmittance of adaptive T regulatory cell deficiency is demonstrated
throughout more than 40 generations of mice. These results provide insight into
chromatin remodeling events key to phenotypic features of distinct T cell
populations.

PMCID: PMC3464543
PMID: 22896699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 28;109(35):14110-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116597109. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

AS1DHRS4, a head-to-head natural antisense transcript, silences the DHRS4 gene
cluster in cis and trans.

Li Q(1), Su Z, Xu X, Liu G, Song X, Wang R, Sui X, Liu T, Chang X, Huang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou
515041, China.

The human genome, like other mammalian genomes, encodes numerous natural
antisense transcripts (NATs) that have been classified into head-to-head,
tail-to-tail, or fully overlapped categories in reference to their sense
transcripts. Evidence for NAT-mediated epigenetic silencing of sense
transcription remains scanty. The DHRS4 gene encodes a metabolic enzyme and forms
a gene cluster with its two immediately downstream homologous genes, DHRS4L2 and 
DHRS4L1, generated by gene duplication. We identified a head-to-head NAT of
DHRS4, designated AS1DHRS4, which markedly regulates the expression of these
three genes in the DHRS4 gene cluster. By pairing with ongoing sense transcripts,
AS1DHRS4 not only mediates deacetylation of histone H3 and demethylation of H3K4 
in cis for the DHRS4 gene, but also interacts physically in trans with the
epigenetic modifiers H3K9- and H3K27-specific histone methyltransferases G9a and 
EZH2, targeting the promoters of the downstream DHRS4L2 and DHRS4L1 genes to
induce local repressive H3K9me2 and H3K27me3 histone modifications. Furthermore, 
AS1DHRS4 induces DNA methylation in the promoter regions of DHRS4L2 by recruiting
DNA methyltransferases. This study demonstrates that AS1DHRS4, as a long
noncoding RNA, simultaneously controls the chromatin state of each gene within
the DHRS4 gene cluster in a discriminative manner. This finding provides an
example of transcriptional control over the multiple and highly homologous genes 
in a tight gene cluster, and may help explain the role of antisense RNAs in the
regulation of duplicated genes as the result of genomic evolution.

PMCID: PMC3435198
PMID: 22891334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):256-67. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0172. Epub 2012
Nov 7.

H3K9me-enhanced DNA hypermethylation of the p16INK4a gene: an epigenetic
signature for spontaneous transformation of rat mesenchymal stem cells.

Zheng Y(1), He L, Wan Y, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Center for Medical Research, Wuhan
University School of Medicine, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

To explore the mechanisms underlying spontaneous transformation of mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs), changes in senescence-associated molecules, particularly the
epigenetic modification of the p16(INK4a) gene, including histone H3 lysine 27/9 
methylation (H3K27/9me) and DNA methylation, were investigated in cultured adult 
rat bone marrow MSCs at different stages during the transformation process. It
was shown that the MSCs underwent replicative senescence after 24 to 25
population doublings, characterized by positive staining for
senescence-associated ß-galactosidase, increased expression of p16(INK4a) and
p21, and downregulated phosphorylation of Rb. The upregulation of p16(INK4a) was 
associated with decreased expression of enhancer of the zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2),
and reduced levels of H3K27me and DNA methylation in the p16(INK4a) gene. At week
4 of senescence, reproliferating cells emerged among the senescent MSCs. These
senescence-escaped MSCs lost their senescence-related markers (including
p16(INK4a)) and became highly proliferative. In addition to H3K27me, another H3
modification pattern, H3K9me, appeared in the p16(INK4a) gene, accompanied by an 
enhanced DNA methylation. With continued culture, the senescence-escaped MSCs did
not show any sign of growth arrest and gained the capacity for
anchorage-independent growth. These immortalized (transformed) MSCs showed
further enhanced DNA methylation of the p16(INK4a) gene by increased H3K9me. Ezh2
knockdown with shRNA eliminated H3K27me-mediated DNA methylation of the
p16(INK4a) gene in presenescent MSCs, but had no effect on H3K9me-enhanced DNA
hypermethylation in the cells after senescence escape. These findings identify an
Ezh2- and H3K27me-independent, but H3K9me-enhanced, DNA hypermethylation of the
p16(INK4a) gene, which might be an epigenetic signature for MSC spontaneous
transformation.

PMID: 22873822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Epigenomics. 2012 Jun;4(3):252.

Does the proliferation of human lymphoma cells depend on the mutation of EZH2 and
consequential epigenetic modification of H3K27?

Jazirehi AR(1), Arle D, Wenn PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, & Jonsson Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, University of California 
at Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. ajazirehi@mednet.ucla.edu

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2989-94.

PMID: 22872916  [PubMed]


212. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 Feb;128(2):344-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.07.128. Epub 2012
Aug 4.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and focal adhesion kinase
(FAK) in high grade endometrial carcinoma.

Zhou J(1), Roh JW, Bandyopadhyay S, Chen Z, Munkarah AR, Hussein Y, Alosh B,
Jazaerly T, Hayek K, Semaan A, Sood AK, Ali-Fehmi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Center, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The deregulation of E-cadherin is associated with Src/FAK signaling
axis and histone deacetylase (HDAC)/EZH2 activity. However, the association
between EZH2 and FAK and its clinical significance in endometrial carcinoma has
not been reported.
METHODS: 202 archived cases of endometrial carcinoma (1996-2000) were reviewed
and divided into two subtypes. TMAs were developed as per established procedures.
EZH2, FAK, and pFAK immunohistochemical stains were performed and the expression 
was scored as negative (0), low (1) and high (2). Proper statistical analysis was
used to assess the correlation between the expression profiles and the
clinicopathological parameters and clinical outcome.
RESULTS: A total of 141 (69.8%) type-1 tumors and 61 (30.2%) type-2 tumors were
identified. EZH2 overexpression was identified in 7.6% of type-1 tumors vs. 63%
of type-2 tumors (p<0.001). FAK and pFAK overexpression was only seen in 24.8%
and 1.7% of Type-1 tumors as compared to 72% and 58.8% of type-2 tumors,
respectively (p<0.001). A positive correlation between the expression of EZH2,
FAK, pFAK and PTEN (p<0.0001) was found. The overexpression of EZH2, FAK, and
pFAK were significantly associated with high histologic grade, angiolymphatic
invasion, lymph node metastasis, myometrial invasion and cervical involvement
(p<0.01). Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrates that the overexpression of EZH2
(p=0.0024), FAK and pFAK (p=0.0001) was significantly associated with decreased
overall survival.
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of EZH2, FAK and pFAK correlates with well
established pathologic risk factors and may predict a more aggressive biologic
behavior in endometrial carcinoma, transforming these proteins into potential
therapeutic targets for treatment of endometrial cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22871469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Anim Reprod Sci. 2012 Aug;133(3-4):198-204. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2012.07.006. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

The polycomb group protein EED varies in its ability to access the nucleus in
porcine oocytes and cleavage stage embryos.

Foust KB(1), Li Y, Park K, Wang X, Liu S, Cabot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907,
United States.

Chromatin-modifying complexes serve essential functions during mammalian
embryonic development. Polycomb group proteins EED, SUZ12, and EZH2 have been
shown to mediate methylation of the lysine 27 residue of histone protein H3
(H3K27), an epigenetic mark that is linked with transcriptional repression. H3K27
trimethylation has been shown to be present on chromatin in mature porcine
oocytes, pronuclear and 2-cell stage embryos, with H3K27 trimethylation
decreasing at the 4-cell stage and not detectable in blastocyst stage embryos.
The goals of this study were to determine the intracellular localization of the
polycomb group protein EED in porcine oocytes and cleavage stage porcine embryos 
produced by in vitro fertilization and to determine the binding abilities of
karyopherin a subtypes toward EED. Our results revealed that EED had a strong
nuclear localization in 4-cell and blastocyst stage embryos and a strong
perinuclear staining in GV-stage oocytes; EED was not detectable in the nuclei of
pronuclear or 2-cell stage embryos. An in vitro binding assay was performed to
assess the ability of EED to interact with a series of karyopherin a subtypes;
results from this experiment revealed that EED can interact with several
karyopherin a subtypes, but with varying degrees of affinity. Together these data
indicate that EED displays a dynamic change in intracellular localization in
progression from immature oocyte to cleavage stage embryo and that EED possess
differing in vitro binding affinities toward individual karyopherin a subtypes,
which may in part regulate the nuclear access of EED during this window of
development.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22871331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Clin Oncol. 2012 Sep 20;30(27):3376-82. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.40.7379. Epub
2012 Aug 6.

Validation of a prognostic model and the impact of mutations in patients with
lower-risk myelodysplastic syndromes.

Bejar R(1), Stevenson KE, Caughey BA, Abdel-Wahab O, Steensma DP, Galili N, Raza 
A, Kantarjian H, Levine RL, Neuberg D, Garcia-Manero G, Ebert BL.

Author information: 
(1)Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

PURPOSE: A subset of patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) who are
predicted to have lower-risk disease as defined by the International Prognostic
Scoring System (IPSS) demonstrate more aggressive disease and shorter overall
survival than expected. The identification of patients with
greater-than-predicted prognostic risk could influence the selection of therapy
and improve the care of patients with lower-risk MDS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed an independent validation of the MD Anderson
Lower-Risk Prognostic Scoring System (LR-PSS) in a cohort of 288 patients with
low- or intermediate-1 IPSS risk MDS and examined bone marrow samples from these 
patients for mutations in 22 genes, including SF3B1, SRSF2, U2AF1, and DNMT3A.
RESULTS: The LR-PSS successfully stratified patients with lower-risk MDS into
three risk categories with significant differences in overall survival (20% in
category 1 with median of 5.19 years [95% CI, 3.01 to 10.34 years], 56% in
category 2 with median of 2.65 years [95% CI, 2.18 to 3.30 years], and 25% in
category 3 with median of 1.11 years [95% CI, 0.82 to 1.51 years]), thus
validating this prognostic model. Mutations were identified in 71% of all
samples, and mutations associated with a poor prognosis were enriched in the
highest-risk LR-PSS category. Mutations of EZH2, RUNX1, TP53, and ASXL1 were
associated with shorter overall survival independent of the LR-PSS. Only EZH2
mutations retained prognostic significance in a multivariable model that included
LR-PSS and other mutations (hazard ratio, 2.90; 95% CI, 1.85 to 4.52).
CONCLUSION: Combining the LR-PSS and EZH2 mutation status identifies 29% of
patients with lower-risk MDS with a worse-than-expected prognosis. These patients
may benefit from earlier initiation of disease-modifying therapy.

PMCID: PMC3438234
PMID: 22869879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Cancer. 2012 Aug 6;11:51. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-51.

MicroRNA-98 and microRNA-214 post-transcriptionally regulate enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 and inhibit migration and invasion in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Huang SD(1), Yuan Y, Zhuang CW, Li BL, Gong DJ, Wang SG, Zeng ZY, Cheng HZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changhai Hospital, 168, Changhai Rd,
Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) was found to be overexpressed 
and associated with tumor metastasis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC). On the other hand, it was reported that miR-26a, miR-98, miR-101,
miR-124, miR-138 and miR-214 could inhibit the expression of EZH2 in some tumors.
However, the role of miRNAs in the regulation of EZH2 expression in human ESCC
has not been documented. The aim of this study was to determine the role of these
miRNAs in the regulation of tumor metastasis via EZH2 overexpression in human
ESCC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The expression of these miRNAs and EZH2 mRNA were examined
by qPCR and the expression of EZH2 protein was detected by western blot. The role
of these miRNAs in migration and invasion was studied in ESCC cell line (Eca109) 
transfected with miRNA mimics or cotransfected with miRNA mimics and pcDNA-EZH2
plasmid (without the 3'-UTR of EZH2). Through clinical investigation, we found
that miR-98 and miR-214 expression was significantly lower in ESCC tissues than
in matched normal tissues, and the expression level of miR-98 and miR-214 was
inversely correlated to EZH2 protein expression and the clinical features such as
pathological grade, tumor stage and lymph node metastasis in ESCC. In Eca109
cells, overexpression of miR-98 and miR-214 significantly inhibited the migration
and invasion of ESCC cells, which was reversed by transfection of EZH2.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that decreased expression of miR-98 and
miR-214 might promote metastasis of human ESCC by inducing accumulation of EZH2
protein.

PMCID: PMC3496689
PMID: 22867052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 Feb;15(2):132-8. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0897-9. Epub
2012 Jul 24.

Quantitative analysis of EZH2 expression and its correlations with lung cancer
patients' clinical pathological characteristics.

Wan L(1), Li X, Shen H, Bai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 1838
Guangzhou North Road, Guangzhou, 510515, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: Elevated Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2) expression is
involved in many human malignancies through epigenetically silencing related
genes. However, the study of the EZH2 protein expression in lung cancer remains
at the qualitative or semi-quantitative level. The present study is to elucidate 
the roles of EZH2 in the progression and metastasis of different subtypes of lung
cancer at quantitative level.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Lung carcinoma tissue microarray was constructed
containing 32 normal adult lung tissues, 113 lung carcinomas and 57 lymph-node
metastases. EZH2 protein expression was detected by immunohistochemistry and
assessed quantitatively with Leica Q500MC image analysis system. Positive unit
(PU) value was used to evaluate the protein expression intensity of positive
cells from systematically selected fields under the microscope.
RESULTS: Elevated Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 PU in lung carcinomas was
significantly greater than that in normal lung tissues (p = 0.001). Increased
EZH2 expression was correlated with histological subtypes, differentiation, TNM
stage, and lymph-node metastases (p < 0.05). EZH2 PU of primary lung carcinomas
was smaller than that of lymph-node metastasis (p = 0.002). EZH2 PU was not
associated with patients' gender, age, smoking status, tumor location, and tumor 
size (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 PU is increased with the
development of lung cancer. EZH2 may play an important role in the progression
and metastasis of lung cancer.

PMID: 22855181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. FEBS Lett. 2012 Sep 21;586(19):3448-51. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.07.066. Epub 
2012 Jul 28.

A687V EZH2 is a gain-of-function mutation found in lymphoma patients.

Majer CR(1), Jin L, Scott MP, Knutson SK, Kuntz KW, Keilhack H, Smith JJ, Moyer
MP, Richon VM, Copeland RA, Wigle TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc., 325 Vassar St., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Heterozygous point mutations at Y641 and A677 in the EZH2 SET domain are
prevalent in about 10-24% of Non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL). Previous studies
indicate that these are gain-of-function mutations leading to the
hypertrimethylation of H3K27. These EZH2 mutations may drive the proliferation of
lymphoma and make EZH2 a molecular target for patients harboring these mutations.
Here, another EZH2 SET domain point mutation, A687V, occurring in about 1-2% of
lymphoma patients, is also shown to be a gain-of-function mutation that greatly
enhances its ability to perform dimethylation relative to wild-type EZH2 and is
equally proficient at catalyzing trimethylation. We propose that A687V EZH2 also 
leads to hypertrimethylation of H3K27 and may thus be a driver mutation in NHL.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22850114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Dec;1(12):e48. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.33. Epub 2011 Dec 9.

Imatinib causes epigenetic alterations of PTEN gene via upregulation of DNA
methyltransferases and polycomb group proteins.

Nishioka C, Ikezoe T, Yang J, Udaka K, Yokoyama A.

We have recently reported the possible imatinib-resistant mechanism; long-term
exposure of leukemia cells to imatinib downregulated levels of phosphatase and
tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) via hypermethylation of its
promoter region (Leukemia 2010; 24: 1631). The present study explored the
molecular mechanisms by which imatinib caused methylation on the promoter region 
of this tumor suppressor gene in leukemia cells. Real-time reverse transcription 
PCR found that long-term exposure of chronic eosinophilic leukemia EOL-1 cells
expressing FIP1L1/platelet-derived growth factor receptor-a to imatinib induced
expression of DNA methyltransferase 3A (DNMT3A) and histone-methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a family of polycomb group, thereby
increasing methylation of the gene. Immunoprecipitation assay found the increased
complex formation of DNMT3A and EZH2 proteins in these cells. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay showed that amounts of both DNMT3A and EZH2 proteins
bound around the promoter region of PTEN gene were increased in EOL-1 cells after
exposure to imatinib. Furthermore, we found that levels of DNMT3A and EZH2 were
strikingly increased in leukemia cells isolated from individuals with chronic
myelogenous leukemia (n=1) and Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (n=2), who relapsed after treatment with imatinib compared
with those isolated at their initial presentation. Taken together, imatinib could
cause drug-resistance via recruitment of polycomb gene complex to the promoter
region of the PTEN and downregulation of this gene's transcripts in leukemia
patients.

PMCID: PMC3255508
PMID: 22829096  [PubMed]


219. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jul 23;12:304. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-304.

Myeloid malignancies: mutations, models and management.

Murati A(1), Brecqueville M, Devillier R, Mozziconacci MJ, Gelsi-Boyer V,
Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Laboratoire d'Oncologie
Moléculaire; UMR1068 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, 27 Bd, Leï Roure, BP
30059, Marseille, 13273, France.

Myeloid malignant diseases comprise chronic (including myelodysplastic syndromes,
myeloproliferative neoplasms and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) and acute
(acute myeloid leukemia) stages. They are clonal diseases arising in
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells. Mutations responsible for these diseases 
occur in several genes whose encoded proteins belong principally to five classes:
signaling pathways proteins (e.g. CBL, FLT3, JAK2, RAS), transcription factors
(e.g. CEBPA, ETV6, RUNX1), epigenetic regulators (e.g. ASXL1, DNMT3A, EZH2, IDH1,
IDH2, SUZ12, TET2, UTX), tumor suppressors (e.g. TP53), and components of the
spliceosome (e.g. SF3B1, SRSF2). Large-scale sequencing efforts will soon lead to
the establishment of a comprehensive repertoire of these mutations, allowing for 
a better definition and classification of myeloid malignancies, the
identification of new prognostic markers and therapeutic targets, and the
development of novel therapies. Given the importance of epigenetic deregulation
in myeloid diseases, the use of drugs targeting epigenetic regulators appears as 
a most promising therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3418560
PMID: 22823977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Glia. 2012 Nov;60(11):1696-708. doi: 10.1002/glia.22388. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 regulates Schwann cell
differentiation.

Heinen A(1), Tzekova N, Graffmann N, Torres KJ, Uhrberg M, Hartung HP, Küry P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Epigenetic control is crucial for the differentiation of a variety of cells
including oligodendrocytes, the myelinating glial cells of the central nervous
system. However, studies about the implication of epigenetic factors in
peripheral nervous system maturation are just emerging. Here, we demonstrate for 
the first time the impact of a histone methyltransferase, encoded by the enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene, on Schwann cell differentiation. In sciatic
nerves, EZH2 expression was found in Schwann cells and to peak perinatally.
Suppression of EZH2 expression in cultured primary rat Schwann cells reduced the 
length of cell processes. These morphological changes were accompanied by
widespread alterations in the gene expression pattern, including downregulation
of myelin genes and induction of p57kip2, which we have recently identified as an
intrinsic inhibitory regulator of Schwann cell maturation. In addition, we show
that EZH2 suppression in dorsal root ganglion cocultures interferes with in vitro
myelination. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed binding of EZH2 at
the p57kip2 promoter and reduction of histone H3K27 trimethylation upon gene
suppression. EZH2 suppression-dependent effects on morphology and myelin genes
could be reversed by concomitant suppression of p57kip2, indicating that p57kip2 
is a downstream effector of EZH2. Furthermore, we describe Hes5 as
transcriptional repressor of myelin genes in Schwann cells, which was induced
upon EZH2 suppression and downregulated in p57kip2-suppressed Schwann cells.
Therefore, we have identified a molecular link between histone methylation and
control of Schwann cell differentiation and demonstrate that this epigenetic
mechanism is crucial for glial differentiation to proceed.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22821416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Diagn Pathol. 2012 Jul 18;7:86. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-7-86.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is a reliable immunohistochemical marker to 
differentiate malignant and benign hepatic tumors.

Hajósi-Kalcakosz S(1), Dezso K, Bugyik E, Bödör C, Paku S, Pávai Z, Halász J,
Schlachter K, Schaff Z, Nagy P.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology and Experimental Cancer Research, Semmelweis
University, Üllõi út 26, Budapest, H-1085, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: The immunohistochemical demonstration of Enhancer of zeste homologue 
2 (EZH2) proved to be a useful marker in several tumor types. It has been
described to distinguish reliably hepatocellular carcinomas from liver adenomas
and other benign hepatocellular lesions. However, no other types of malignant
liver tumors were studied so far.
METHODS: To evaluate the diagnostic value of this protein in hepatic tumors we
have investigated the presence of EZH2 by immunohistochemistry in hepatocellular 
carcinomas and other common hepatic tumors.EZH2 expression was examined in 44
hepatocellular carcinomas, 23 cholangiocarcinomas, 31 hepatoblastomas, 16 other
childhood tumor types (rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, Wilms' tumor and rhabdoid
tumor), 17 metastatic liver tumors 24 hepatocellular adenomas, 15 high grade
dysplastic nodules, 3 biliary cystadenomas, 3 biliary hamartomas and 3 Caroli's
diseases.
RESULTS: Most of the malignant liver tumors were positive for EZH2, but neither
of the adenomas, cirrhotic/dysplastic nodules, reactive and hamartomatous biliary
ductules stained positively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our immunostainings confirm that EZH2 is a sensitive marker of
hepatocellular carcinoma, but its specificity is very low, since almost all the
investigated malignant liver tumors were positive regardless of their
histogenesis. Based on these results EZH2 is a sensitive marker of malignancy in 
hepatic tumors. In routine surgical pathology EZH2 could be most helpful to
diagnose cholangiocarcinomas, because as far as we know this is the first marker 
to distinguish transformed and reactive biliary structures. Although
hepatoblastomas also express EZH2, the diagnostic significance of this
observation seems to be quite limited whereas, the structurally similar, other
blastic childhood tumors are also positive.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1173195902735693.

PMCID: PMC3436720
PMID: 22809481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040943. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

ATRA inhibits the proliferation of DU145 prostate cancer cells through reducing
the methylation level of HOXB13 gene.

Liu Z(1), Ren G, Shangguan C, Guo L, Dong Z, Li Y, Zhang W, Zhao L, Hou P, Zhang 
Y, Wang X, Lu J, Huang B.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University,
Changchun, China.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) has been widely investigated for treatments of
many cancers including prostate cancer. HOXB13, silenced in androgen
receptor-negative (AR(-)) prostate cancer cells, plays a role in AR(-) prostate
cancer cell growth arrest. In this study we intended to elucidate the mechanisms 
that are involved in the proliferation inhibition of AR(-) prostate cancer cells 
triggered by ATRA. We discovered that ATRA was able to induce the growth arrest
and to increase HOXB13 expression in AR(-) prostate cancer cells. Both EZH2 and
DNMT3b participated in the repression of HOXB13 expression through an epigenetic 
mechanism involving DNA and histone methylation modifications. Specifically, EZH2
recruited DNMT3b to HOXB13 promoter to form a repression complex. Moreover, ATRA 
could upregulate HOXB13 through decreasing EZH2 and DNMT3b expressions and
reducing their interactions with the HOXB13 promoter. Concurrently, the
methylation level of the HOXB13 promoter was reduced upon the treatment of ATRA. 
Results from this study implicated a novel effect of ATRA in inhibition of the
growth of AR(-) resistant human prostate cancer cells through alteration of
HOXB13 expression as a result of epigenetic modifications.

PMCID: PMC3396626
PMID: 22808286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40399. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040399. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Dynamic changes in Ezh2 gene occupancy underlie its involvement in neural stem
cell self-renewal and differentiation towards oligodendrocytes.

Sher F(1), Boddeke E, Olah M, Copray S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The polycomb group protein Ezh2 is an epigenetic repressor of
transcription originally found to prevent untimely differentiation of pluripotent
embryonic stem cells. We previously demonstrated that Ezh2 is also expressed in
multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs). We showed that Ezh2 expression is
downregulated during NSC differentiation into astrocytes or neurons. However,
high levels of Ezh2 remained present in differentiating oligodendrocytes until
myelinating. This study aimed to elucidate the target genes of Ezh2 in NSCs and
in premyelinating oligodendrocytes (pOLs).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing to detect the target genes of Ezh2 in NSCs
and pOLs. We found 1532 target genes of Ezh2 in NSCs. During NSC differentiation,
the occupancy of these genes by Ezh2 was alleviated. However, when the NSCs
differentiated into oligodendrocytes, 393 of these genes remained targets of
Ezh2. Analysis of the target genes indicated that the repressive activity of Ezh2
in NSCs concerns genes involved in stem cell maintenance, in cell cycle control
and in preventing neural differentiation. Among the genes in pOLs that were still
repressed by Ezh2 were most prominently those associated with neuronal and
astrocytic committed cell lineages. Suppression of Ezh2 activity in NSCs caused
loss of stem cell characteristics, blocked their proliferation and ultimately
induced apoptosis. Suppression of Ezh2 activity in pOLs resulted in derangement
of the oligodendrocytic phenotype, due to re-expression of neuronal and
astrocytic genes, and ultimately in apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data indicate that the epigenetic repressor Ezh2 in
NSCs is crucial for proliferative activity and maintenance of neural stemness.
During differentiation towards oligodendrocytes, Ezh2 repression continues
particularly to suppress other neural fate choices. Ezh2 is completely
downregulated during differentiation towards neurons and astrocytes allowing
transcription of these differentiation programs. The specific fate choice towards
astrocytes or neurons is apparently controlled by epigenetic regulators other
than Ezh2.

PMCID: PMC3395718
PMID: 22808153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncol Lett. 2012 Jul;4(1):135-140. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

EZH2 silencing with RNAi enhances irradiation-induced inhibition of human lung
cancer growth in vitro and in vivo.

Xia H(1), Yu CH, Zhang Y, Yu J, Li J, Zhang W, Zhang B, Li Y, Guo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of PLA General
Hospital, Beijing 100048, P.R. China.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a high mortality rate and poor prognosis. 
The aim of the present study was to silence EZH2 and explore the antitumor effect
of small interfering RNA (siRNA)-EZH2 in combination with radiotherapy, which is 
a main treatment for NSCLC. The results showed that irradiation in the presence
of siRNA-EZH2 arrested A549 cells in the G(0) and G(1) phases, delayed cell cycle
progression and effectively inhibited cell proliferation, compared with cells
that received radiotherapy alone. The combined therapy enhanced the percentage of
apoptotic A549 cells in vitro and reduced the tumor size, in addition to
increasing the survival rate in tumor xenograft experiments. This study
demonstrates the antitumor activity of ionizing radiation therapy in combination 
with siRNA-EZH2 in NSCLC, both in vitro and in vivo, as well as providing a
scientific rationale for targeting EZH2 to enhance the sensitivity of cancer to
radiotherapy in NSCLC patients.

PMCID: PMC3398361
PMID: 22807976  [PubMed]


225. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Mar;228(3):556-62. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24162.

Activated K-Ras and INK4a/Arf deficiency promote aggressiveness of pancreatic
cancer by induction of EMT consistent with cancer stem cell phenotype.

Wang Z(1), Ali S, Banerjee S, Bao B, Li Y, Azmi AS, Korc M, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    J Cell Physiol. 2014 Aug;229(8):1118.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most frequently diagnosed
cancers and the fourth leading cause of cancer-related death in the United
States, suggesting that there is an urgent need to design novel strategies for
achieving better treatment outcome of patients diagnosed with PDAC. Our previous 
study has shown that activation of Notch and NF-<U+03BA>B play a critical role in the
development of PDAC in the compound K-Ras(G12D) and Ink4a/Arf deficient
transgenic mice. However, the exact molecular mechanism by which mutated K-Ras
and Ink4a/Arf deficiency contribute to progression of PDAC remains largely
elusive. In the present study, we used multiple methods, such as real-time
RT-PCR, Western blotting assay, and immunohistochemistry to gain further
mechanistic insight. We found that the deletion of Ink4a/Arf in K-Ras(G12D)
expressing mice led to high expression of PDGF-D signaling pathway in the tumor
and tumor-derived cell line (RInk-1 cells). Furthermore, PDGF-D knock-down in
RInk-1 cells resulted in the inhibition of pancreatosphere formation and
down-regulation of EZH2, CD44, EpCAM, and vimentin. Moreover, we demonstrated
that epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was induced in the compound mice,
which is linked with aggressiveness of PDAC. In addition, we demonstrated that
tumors from compound transgenic mice have higher expression of cancer stem cell
(CSC) markers. These results suggest that the acquisition of EMT phenotype and
induction of CSC characteristics could be linked with the aggressiveness of PDAC 
mediated in part through the activation of PDGF-D, signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3777743
PMID: 22806240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 15;72(18):4672-81. Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Collaboration of Kras and androgen receptor signaling stimulates EZH2 expression 
and tumor-propagating cells in prostate cancer.

Cai H(1), Memarzadeh S, Stoyanova T, Beharry Z, Kraft AS, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
South Carolina 29425, USA. cai@musc.edu

Elevation of the chromatin repression factor enhancer of zeste homolog (EZH2) is 
associated with progression and poor prognosis in several human cancers including
prostate cancer. However, the mechanisms driving EZH2 expression are not fully
understood. In this study, we investigated the functional synergy in prostate
cancers in mice resulting from activation of the androgen receptor, Kras, and
Akt, which drives three of the most frequently activated oncogenic signaling
pathways in prostate cancer. Although, any two of these three events were
sufficient to promote the formation and progression of prostate cancer, only the 
synergy of androgen receptor and Kras signaling could elevate EZH2 expression and
expand prostate cancer progenitor cells in vivo. Our findings have revealed a
genetic mechanism resulting in enhanced EZH2 expression during the progression of
aggressive prostate cancer, with important implications for understanding how to 
target advanced disease where cancer progenitor cells may be critical.

PMCID: PMC3445707
PMID: 22805308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Blood. 2012 Aug 23;120(8):e17-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397844. Epub 2012
Jul 16.

Posttranslational regulation of self-renewal capacity: insights from proteome and
phosphoproteome analyses of stem cell leukemia.

Trost M(1), Sauvageau M, Hérault O, Deleris P, Pomiès C, Chagraoui J, Mayotte N, 
Meloche S, Sauvageau G, Thibault P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

We recently generated 2 phenotypically similar Hoxa9+Meis1 overexpressing acute
myeloid leukemias that differ by their in vivo biologic behavior. The first
leukemia, named FLA2, shows a high frequency of leukemia stem cells (LSCs; 1 in
1.4 cells), whereas the second, FLB1, is more typical with a frequency of LSCs in
the range of 1 per several hundred cells. To gain insights into possible
mechanisms that determine LSC self-renewal, we profiled and compared the
abundance of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins and phosphoproteins from these
leukemias using quantitative proteomics. These analyses revealed differences in
proteins associated with stem cell fate, including a hyperactive p38 MAP kinase
in FLB1 and a differentially localized Polycomb group protein Ezh2, which is
mostly nuclear in FLA2 and predominantly cytoplasmic in FLB1. Together, these
newly documented proteomes and phosphoproteomes represent a unique resource with 
more than 440 differentially expressed proteins and 11 543 unique
phosphopeptides, of which 80% are novel and 7% preferentially phosphorylated in
the stem cell-enriched leukemia.

PMID: 22802335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;47(4):298-304.

[Effects of enhancer of zeste homolog (EZH2) downregulation on the proliferation 
and invasion of nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell and the possible mechanisms].

[Article in Chinese]

LIANG BJ(1), LI XP, LU J, LIN SX, LIU X, LI G, ZHANG B, WANG L, LUO HN, WAN RQ,
TIAN WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
gene on cell growth and invasion of the nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: Recombinant lentivirus vector for shRNA delivery of EZH2 was constructed
and transfected into 293FT cells. After collecting the viral particles, the NPC
cell line 5-8F cells were transfected. The effects of EZH2 silence on cell
proliferation and cell cycle were detected using MTT assay, plate colony
formation assay and flow cytometry. The migration and invasion of 5-8F cells were
determined by wound healing assay and matrigel invasion assay, respectively. The 
expressions of EZH2 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related markers
at mRNA and protein levels were examined by real-time PCR and Western blot
respectively.
RESULTS: The expressions of EZH2 mRNA and protein in the transfected 5-8F cells
were obviously reduced. MTT assay showed that EZH2 downregulation significantly
inhibited the growth of 5-8F/shEZH2 cells (P < 0.001). Colony formation rate
(84.44%) of 5-8F/shEZH2 cells was lower than control (31.56%, P = 0.001). Cell
cycle analysis showed that most 5-8F/shEZH2 cells were arrested in G0/G1 phase,
with a very low ratio of cells in S phase. Wound healing assay indicated that the
migration ability of cells silencing EZH2 decreased significantly, and the
48-hour relative migration distance of 5-8F/ShEZH2 cells and control cells was
0.58 ± 0.05, and 0.81 ± 0.02, respectively (P < 0.000). Matrigel invasion assay, 
showed the invasive capacity of cells silencing EZH2 was significantly inhibited,
with less penetrating cells (72.23 ± 4.08) compared to control (150.95 ± 16.27), 
P < 0.000. The mRNA expressions of epithelial markers E-cadherin and Keratin 18
in the cells silencing EZH2 increased by 177% and 158% respectively, and the mRNA
expressions of mesenchymal markers ß-catenin and N-cadherin decreased by 18.04%
and 41.18% respectively. Similar results also were obtained with Western blot
analysis.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 significantly enhanced the proliferation and invasion of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells in vitro, which might be mediated by inducing EMT.

PMID: 22800347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nat Biotechnol. 2012 Jul 10;30(7):622-3. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2300.

New lysine methyltransferase drug targets in cancer.

Wagner T, Jung M.

PMID: 22781684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Zhonghua Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Mar;33(3):232-5.

[A preliminary study on the relationship between EZH2 and microRNA-101 and the
prognostic role of EZH2 in acute myeloid leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu SH, Zheng CP, Xu J.

PMID: 22781616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Expert Rev Hematol. 2012 Jun;5(3):313-24. doi: 10.1586/ehm.12.17.

Emerging targeted therapies in myelofibrosis.

Barosi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Clinical Epidemiology and Center for the Study of Myelofibrosis, IRCCS
Policlinico S. Matteo Foundation, Viale Golgi 19, 27100 Pavia, Italy.
barosig@smatteo.pv.it

Conventional drugs for myelofibrosis are driven by clinical needs, primarily
anemia and splenomegaly. With these therapies, stem cell transplantation remains 
the only potentially curative approach. The discovery that mutations affecting
JAK2 or MPL lead to activation of the intracellular JAK-STAT signaling pathway,
and that other mutations (TET2, EZH2, ASXL1, IDH1 and IDH2) interfere with the
normal machinery of epigenetics, has prompted to the development of therapies
targeted at controling the major disease mechanisms. JAK2 ATP competitive
inhibitors (ruxolitinib, lestaurtinib, SAR302503, SB1518 and CYT387) or drugs
that indirectly inhibit the JAK-STAT pathway (everolimus) have documented major
effects on splenomegaly and its constitutional symptoms. Epigenetic drugs
(demethylating agents and histone deacetylase inhibitors) have displayed only
minor effects on the disease symptoms. Relenting disease progression remains an
unmet clinical need.

PMID: 22780211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. APMIS. 2012 Aug;120(8):635-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02878.x. Epub 2012
Mar 24.

Mutational analysis of PIK3CA, JAK2, BRAF, FOXL2, IDH1, AKT1 and EZH2 oncogenes
in sarcomas.

Je EM(1), An CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Recent studies have revealed several recurrent mutations in oncogenes that could 
not only be underlying mechanisms of tumorigenesis, but also be potential targets
for cancer therapies. Compared to carcinomas, genetic alterations of sarcomas are
relatively unknown. To see whether recurrent oncogenes discovered in
non-sarcomatous malignancies are present in sarcomas as well, we analyzed
oncogenes with known mutations in various types of sarcomas. We performed
mutational analysis of recurrent mutation sites of PIK3CA (exons 9 and 20), JAK2 
(exon 14), BRAF (exon 15), FOXL2 (exon 1), IDH1 (exon 4), AKT1 (exon 3), and EZH2
(exon 16) genes in 108 sarcomas by single- strand conformation polymorphism and
DNA sequencing. The sarcomas consisted of malignant fibrous histiocytomas,
rhabdomyosarcomas, osteosarcomas, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors,
leiomyosarcomas, synovial sarcomas, liposarcomas, angiosarcomas, chondrosarcomas,
and Ewing sarcomas. Overall, we detected the two PIK3CA mutations and one JAK2
mutation (total: 3/108: 2.8%). Two rhabdomyosarcomas (16.7%) and one angiosarcoma
(16.7%) harbored the mutations, whereas other sarcomas harbored none. The PIK3CA 
mutations were novel missense mutations that had not been detected in other
cancers. The JAK2 mutation was an intron mutation. This study demonstrated that
the somatic mutations of PIK3CA and JAK2 occurred in a small fraction of the
sarcomas and that these mutations may not play a principal role in the
development of sarcomas.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 22779686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(18):3624-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00163-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
9.

GATA-1 utilizes Ikaros and polycomb repressive complex 2 to suppress Hes1 and to 
promote erythropoiesis.

Ross J(1), Mavoungou L, Bresnick EH, Milot E.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The transcription factor Hairy Enhancer of Split 1 (HES1), a downstream effector 
of the Notch signaling pathway, is an important regulator of hematopoiesis. Here,
we demonstrate that in primary erythroid cells, Hes1 gene expression is
transiently repressed around proerythroblast stage of differentiation. Using
mouse erythroleukemia cells, we found that the RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
depletion of HES1 enhances erythroid cell differentiation, suggesting that this
protein opposes terminal erythroid differentiation. This is also supported by the
decreased primary erythroid cell differentiation upon HES1 upregulation in
Ikaros-deficient mice. A comprehensive analysis led us to determine that Ikaros
favors Hes1 repression in erythroid cells by facilitating recruitment of the
master regulator of erythropoiesis GATA-1 alongside FOG-1, which mediates Hes1
repression. GATA-1 is then necessary for the chromatin binding of the NuRD
remodeling complex ATPase MI-2, the transcription factor GFI1B, and the histone
H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2 along with Polycomb repressive complex 2. We show
that EZH2 is required for the transient repression of Hes1 in erythroid cells. In
aggregate, our results describe a mechanism whereby GATA-1 utilizes Ikaros and
Polycomb repressive complex 2 to promote Hes1 repression as an important step in 
erythroid cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3430200
PMID: 22778136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Haematologica. 2013 Jan;98(1):107-13. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.064048. Epub
2012 Jul 6.

Spliceosomal gene mutations are frequent events in the diverse mutational
spectrum of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia but largely absent in juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia.

Kar SA(1), Jankowska A, Makishima H, Visconte V, Jerez A, Sugimoto Y, Muramatsu
H, Traina F, Afable M, Guinta K, Tiu RV, Przychodzen B, Sakaguchi H, Kojima S,
Sekeres MA, List AF, McDevitt MA, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia is a heterogeneous disease with multifactorial
molecular pathogenesis. Various recurrent somatic mutations have been detected
alone or in combination in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Recently, recurrent
mutations in spliceosomal genes have been discovered. We investigated the
contribution of U2AF1, SRSF2 and SF3B1 mutations in the pathogenesis of chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia and closely related diseases. We genotyped a cohort of
patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, secondary acute myeloid leukemia
derived from chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
for somatic mutations in U2AF1, SRSF2, SF3B1 and in the other 12 most frequently 
affected genes in these conditions. Chromosomal abnormalities were assessed by
nucleotide polymorphism array-based karyotyping. The presence of molecular
lesions was correlated with clinical endpoints. Mutations in SRSF2, U2AF1 and
SF3B1 were found in 32%, 13% and 6% of cases of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, 
secondary acute myeloid leukemia derived from chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, respectively. Spliceosomal genes were affected 
in various combinations with other mutations, including TET2, ASXL1, CBL, EZH2,
RAS, IDH1/2, DNMT3A, TP53, UTX and RUNX1. Worse overall survival was associated
with mutations in U2AF1 (P=0.047) and DNMT3A (P=0.015). RAS mutations had an
impact on overall survival in secondary acute myeloid leukemia (P=0.0456). By
comparison, our screening of juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia cases showed
mutations in ASXL1 (4%), CBL (10%), and RAS (6%) but not in IDH1/2, TET2, EZH2,
DNMT3A or the three spliceosomal genes. SRSF2 and U2AF1 along with TET2 (48%) and
ASXL1 (38%) are frequently affected by somatic mutations in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia, quite distinctly from the profile seen in juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia. Our data also suggest that spliceosomal mutations are of
ancestral origin.

PMCID: PMC3533671
PMID: 22773603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):914-29. doi: 10.4161/epi.21113. Epub 2012 Jul 9.

Hepatic ontogeny and tissue distribution of mRNAs of epigenetic modifiers in mice
using RNA-sequencing.

Lu H(1), Cui JY, Gunewardena S, Yoo B, Zhong XB, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY,
USA. luh@upstate.edu

Developmental regulation of gene expression is controlled by distinct epigenetic 
signatures catalyzed by various epigenetic modifiers. Little is known about the
ontogeny and tissue distribution of these epigenetic modifiers. In the present
study, we used a novel approach of RNA-sequencing to elucidate hepatic ontogeny
and tissue distribution of mRNA expression of 142 epigenetic modifiers, including
enzymes involved in DNA methylation/demethylation, histone
acetylation/deacetylation, histone methylation/demethylation, histone
phosphorylation and chromosome remodeling factors in male C57BL/6 mice. Livers
from male C57BL/6 mice were collected at 12 ages from prenatal to adulthood. Many
of these epigenetic modifiers were expressed at much higher levels in perinatal
livers than adult livers, such as Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Apobec3, Kat1, Ncoa4,
Setd8, Ash2l, Dot1l, Cbx1, Cbx3, Cbx5, Cbx6, Ezh2, Suz12, Eed, Suv39h1, Suv420h2,
Dek, Hdac1, Hdac2, Hdac7, Kdm2b, Kdm5c, Kdm7, Prmt1-5, Prmt7, Smarca4, Smarcb1,
Chd4 and Ino80e. In contrast, hepatic mRNA expression of a few epigenetic
modifiers increased during postnatal liver development, such as Smarca2, Kdm1b,
Cbx7 and Chd3. In adult mice (60 d of age), most epigenetic modifiers were
expressed at moderately (1-3-fold) higher levels in kidney and/or small intestine
than liver. In conclusion, this study, for the first time, unveils developmental 
changes in mRNA abundance of all major known epigenetic modifiers in mouse liver.
These data suggest that ontogenic changes in mRNA expression of epigenetic
modifiers may play important roles in determining the addition and/or removal of 
corresponding epigenetic signatures during liver development.

PMCID: PMC3427287
PMID: 22772165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Pathol Res Pract. 2012 Aug 15;208(8):462-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2012.05.012. Epub 
2012 Jul 4.

Co-expression of Bmi1 and EZH2 as an independent poor prognostic factor in
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Ha SY(1), Kim SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Gangnam-Gu, Seoul, South Korea.

Bmi1 polycomb ring finger oncogene (Bmi1) and the enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) are members of polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 1 and PRC2, respectively.
PRC1 represses tumor suppressor genes such as p16INK4a and p14ARF in a
PRC2-dependent manner. There have been few studies on Bmi1 or EZH2 expression in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We investigated Bmi1 and EZH2
expression in 164 cases of ESCCs using immunohistochemistry, and evaluated the
correlation with clinicopathologic features and their prognostic significance.
Bmi1 and EZH2 were more highly expressed in tumor than in adjacent normal tissue 
(p<0.001). High expression of Bmi1 or EZH2 alone was not correlated with any
clinicopathologic parameter and did not influence the prognosis. However, the
group with high expression of both Bmi1 and EZH2 showed the poorest prognosis in 
overall survival (p=0.027) and disease-free survival (p=0.007). Also, it was an
independent prognostic factor in overall survival (p=0.047). High expression of
both Bmi1 and EZH2, not each alone, is an independent poor prognostic factor in
ESCCs, supporting the repression of tumor suppressor gene by Bmi1 in an
EZH2-dependent manner. This result suggests that both Bmi1 and EZH2, not each
alone, could be potent candidates of new target therapy in ESCCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22766604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Mol Oncol. 2012 Oct;6(5):494-506. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2012.06.002. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Global H3K27 trimethylation and EZH2 abundance in breast tumor subtypes.

Holm K(1), Grabau D, Lövgren K, Aradottir S, Gruvberger-Saal S, Howlin J, Saal
LH, Ethier SP, Bendahl PO, Stål O, Malmström P, Fernö M, Rydén L, Hegardt C, Borg
Å, Ringnér M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Skåne University
Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden. karolina.holm@med.lu.se

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and its core member enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) mediate the epigenetic gene silencing mark: trimethylation of
lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27me3). H3K27me3 is characteristic of the chromatin at
genes involved in developmental regulation in undifferentiated cells.
Overexpression of EZH2 has been found in several cancer types such as breast,
prostate, melanoma and bladder cancer. Moreover, overexpression is associated
with highly proliferative and aggressive types of breast and prostate tumors. We 
have analyzed the abundance of EZH2 and H3K27me3 using immunohistochemistry in
two large and well-characterized breast tumor data sets encompassing more than
400 tumors. The results have been analyzed in relation to the molecular subtypes 
of breast tumors (basal-like, luminal A, luminal B, HER2-enriched and
normal-like), as well as in subtypes defined by clinical markers (triple
negative, ER+/HER2-/Ki67low, ER+/HER2-/Ki67high and HER2+), and were validated in
representative breast cancer cell lines by western blot. We found significantly
different expression of both EZH2 and H3K27me3 across all subtypes with high
abundance of EZH2 in basal-like, triple negative and HER2-enriched tumors, and
high H3K27me3 in luminal A, HER2-enriched and normal-like tumors. Intriguingly,
the two markers show an inverse correlation, particularly for the basal-like and 
triple negative tumors. Consequently, high expression of EZH2 was associated with
poor distant disease-free survival whereas high expression of H3K27me3 was
associated with better survival. Additionally, none of 182 breast tumors was
found to carry a previously described EZH2 mutation affecting Tyr641. Our
observation that increased expression of EZH2 does not necessarily correlate with
increased abundance of H3K27me3 supports the idea that EZH2 can have effects
beyond epigenetic silencing of target genes in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22766277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2012 Aug;36(4):323-4. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2012.05.010. Epub 2012 Jul 4.

EZH2 links pancreatitis to tissue regeneration and pancreatic cancer.

Lasfargues C(1), Pyronnet S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR 1037, Université de Toulouse III, Centre de Recherche en
Cancérologie de Toulouse, CHU de Rangueil, BP 84225, 31432 Toulouse, France.

PMID: 22766150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jun;205(6):295-303. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.03.006.

Identification of a HMGA2-EFCAB6 gene rearrangement following next-generation
sequencing in a patient with a t(12;22)(q14.3;q13.2) and JAK2V617F-positive
myeloproliferative neoplasm.

Martin SE(1), Sausen M, Joseph A, Kingham BF, Martin ES.

Author information: 
(1)Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Newark, DE, USA. semartin@cbg.org

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) result from genetically altered hematopoietic
stem cells that retain the capacity for multilineage differentiation. The study
of genomic mutations identified so far suggests that they occur after a common
ancestral event or that different mutations result in similar MPN phenotypes. We 
report analysis of a chromosomal translocation, t(12;22)(q14.3;q13.2), in a
patient with a BCR-ABL1-negative, JAK2V617F-positive MPN. Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) array and targeted sequencing detected no mutation in nine
genes reported to influence the JAK2V617F-driven MPNs (MPL, LNK, CBL, TET2, EZH2,
IKZF1, IDH1, IDH2, ASXL1). Next-generation sequencing revealed a balanced
HMGA2-EFCAB6 genomic rearrangement. The HMGA2 breakpoint leads to the loss of
seven 3'UTR binding sites for the microRNA (miRNA) let-7 tumor suppressor. The
breakpoint in the EFCAB6 gene abrogates transcription of EFCAB6. Measurement of
expression showed retention of HMGA2 transcription and no detectable EFCAB6
transcript. Allele burden comparison in a sample containing the translocation,
showed 90% HMGA2-EFCAB6 versus 50% JAK2V617F allele dose, suggesting HMGA2-EFCAB6
rearrangement plays a more ancestral role, pre-JAK2V617F, in the neoplastic
process. The pathogenicity of the translocation may rest on collaborations among 
JAK2V617F-induced constitutive activation of JAK2, the oncogenic property of
HMGA2, and disrupted pathways, such as alteration in DJ-1 expression, resulting
from the impact of EFCAB6 abrogation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Sep;97(9):E1774-81. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1743. Epub
2012 Jun 27.

Identification of somatic mutations in parathyroid tumors using whole-exome
sequencing.

Cromer MK(1), Starker LF, Choi M, Udelsman R, Nelson-Williams C, Lifton RP,
Carling T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale Cancer Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

CONTEXT: The underlying molecular alterations causing sporadic parathyroid
adenomas that drive primary hyperparathyroidism have not been thoroughly defined.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate the occurrence of somatic
mutations driving tumor formation and progression in sporadic parathyroid adenoma
using whole-exome sequencing.
DESIGN: Eight matched tumor-constitutional DNA pairs from patients with sporadic 
parathyroid adenomas underwent whole-exome capture and high-throughput
sequencing. Selected genes were analyzed for mutations in an additional 185
parathyroid adenomas.
RESULTS: Four of eight tumors displayed a frame shift deletion or nonsense
mutation in MEN1, which was accompanied by loss of heterozygosity of the
remaining wild-type allele. No other mutated genes were shared among the eight
tumors. One tumor harbored a Y641N mutation of the histone methyltransferase EZH2
gene, previously linked to myeloid and lymphoid malignancy formation. Targeted
sequencing in the additional 185 parathyroid adenomas revealed a high rate of
MEN1 mutations (35%). Furthermore, this targeted sequencing identified an
additional parathyroid adenoma that contained the identical, somatic EZH2
mutation that was found by exome sequencing.
CONCLUSION: This study confirms the frequent role of the loss of heterozygosity
of chromosome 11 and MEN1 gene alterations in sporadic parathyroid adenomas and
implicates a previously unassociated methyltransferase gene, EZH2, in endocrine
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 22740705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Oncol. 2012 Sep;41(3):979-84. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1531. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Transcriptomic study of dormant gastrointestinal cancer stem cells.

Nishikawa S(1), Dewi DL, Ishii H, Konno M, Haraguchi N, Kano Y, Fukusumi T, Ohta 
K, Noguchi Y, Ozaki M, Sakai D, Satoh T, Doki Y, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Frontier Science for Cancer and Chemotherapy, Osaka University, 
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We previously discovered the coexistence of dormant and proliferating cancer stem
cells (CSCs) in gastrointestinal cancer, which leads to chemoradiation
resistance. CD13-/CD90+ proliferating liver CSCs are sensitive to chemotherapy,
and CD13+/CD90- dormant CSCs have a limited proliferation ability, survive in
hypoxic areas with reduced oxidative stress, and relapse and metastasize to other
organs. In such CD13+ dormant cells, non-homologous end-joining, an error-prone
repair mechanism, is dominant after DNA damage, whereas high-fidelity homologous 
recombination is apparent in CD13- proliferating cells, suggesting the
significance of dormancy as an essential protective mechanism of therapy
resistance. However, this mechanism may also play a role in the generation and
accumulation of heterogeneity during cancer progression, although the exact
mechanism remains to be understood. Through transcriptomic study, we elucidated
the underlying epigenetic mechanism for malignant behavior of dormant CSCs, i.e.,
simultaneous activation of several pathways including EZH2- and TP53-related
proteins in response to microRNA101, suggesting that a pharmacogenomic approach
would open an era to novel molecular targeting cancer therapy.

PMID: 22735680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Leukemia. 2012 Dec;26(12):2557-60. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.146. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

EED mutants impair polycomb repressive complex 2 in myelodysplastic syndrome and 
related neoplasms.

Ueda T, Sanada M, Matsui H, Yamasaki N, Honda ZI, Shih LY, Mori H, Inaba T, Ogawa
S, Honda H.

PMID: 22733077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Jun 24;14(7):753-63. doi: 10.1038/ncb2520.

Diverse epigenetic strategies interact to control epidermal differentiation.

Mulder KW(1), Wang X, Escriu C, Ito Y, Schwarz RF, Gillis J, Sirokmány G, Donati 
G, Uribe-Lewis S, Pavlidis P, Murrell A, Markowetz F, Watt FM.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Cell Biology Group, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research
Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. klaas.mulder@cancer.org.uk

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2012 Jul;14(7):652-3.

It is becoming clear that interconnected functional gene networks, rather than
individual genes, govern stem cell self-renewal and differentiation. To identify 
epigenetic factors that impact on human epidermal stem cells we performed
siRNA-based genetic screens for 332 chromatin modifiers. We developed a Bayesian 
mixture model to predict putative functional interactions between epigenetic
modifiers that regulate differentiation. We discovered a network of genetic
interactions involving EZH2, UHRF1 (both known to regulate epidermal
self-renewal), ING5 (a MORF complex component), BPTF and SMARCA5 (NURF complex
components). Genome-wide localization and global mRNA expression analysis
revealed that these factors impact two distinct but functionally related gene
sets, including integrin extracellular matrix receptors that mediate anchorage of
epidermal stem cells to their niche. Using a competitive epidermal reconstitution
assay we confirmed that ING5, BPTF, SMARCA5, EZH2 and UHRF1 control
differentiation under physiological conditions. Thus, regulation of distinct gene
expression programs through the interplay between diverse epigenetic strategies
protects epidermal stem cells from differentiation.

PMID: 22729083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Pathol. 2012 Aug;181(2):560-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.04.021. Epub 2012 
Jun 17.

Global levels of H3K27me3 track with differentiation in vivo and are deregulated 
by MYC in prostate cancer.

Pellakuru LG(1), Iwata T, Gurel B, Schultz D, Hicks J, Bethel C, Yegnasubramanian
S, De Marzo AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Cancer cells and stem cells share a number of biological characteristics
including abundant amounts of decondensed chromatin. However, the molecular
correlates and the factors involved in altering chromatin structure in cancer
cells are not well known. Here, we report that less differentiated stem-like
cells in the basal compartment of human and mouse prostate contain lower levels
of the polycomb heterochromatin marker H3K27me3 than more differentiated luminal 
cells. This link to differentiated normal cells is also found in a number of
other human and rodent tissues characterized by hierarchical differentiation. In 
addition to MYC's traditional role as a gene-specific transcription factor,
recent studies indicate that MYC also affects global chromatin structure where it
is required to maintain "open" or active chromatin. We now demonstrate that in
both MYC-driven prostate cancers in mice and human prostate cancers, global
levels of H3K27me3 are reduced in prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and
invasive adenocarcinoma lesions. Moreover, decreased levels of H3K27me3 correlate
with increased markers of disease aggressiveness (eg, Gleason score and
pathological stage). In vitro, experimentally forced reductions in MYC levels
result in increased global levels of H3K27me3. These findings suggest that
increased levels of decondensed chromatin in both normal progenitor cells and
cancer cells are associated with global loss of H3K27me3, which is linked to MYC 
overexpression.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3409442
PMID: 22713676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012 Dec;31(3-4):753-61. doi: 10.1007/s10555-012-9387-3.

EZH2 inhibition: targeting the crossroad of tumor invasion and angiogenesis.

Crea F(1), Fornaro L, Bocci G, Sun L, Farrar WL, Falcone A, Danesi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pisa,
via Roma 55, 56126 Pisa, Italy.

Tumor angiogenesis and metastatic spreading are two highly interconnected
phenomena, which contribute to cancer-associated deaths. Thus, the identification
of novel strategies to target angiogenesis and metastatic spreading is crucial.
Polycomb genes are a set of epigenetic effectors, structured in multimeric
repressive complexes. EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2), which methylates histone H3 lysine 27, thereby silencing
several tumor-suppressor genes. EZH2 is essential for cancer stem cell
self-renewal. Interestingly, cancer stem cells are thought to be the seeds of
metastatic spreading and are able to differentiate into tumor-associated
endothelial cells. Pre-clinical studies showed that EZH2 is able to silence
several anti-metastatic genes (e.g., E-cadherin and tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinases), thereby favoring cell invasion and anchorage-independent
growth. In addition, EZH2 seems to play a crucial role in the regulation of tumor
angiogenesis. High EZH2 expression predicts poor prognosis, high grade, and high 
stage in several cancer types. Recently, a small molecule inhibitor of PRC2
(DZNeP) demonstrated promising anti-tumor activity, both in vitro and in vivo.
Interestingly, DZNeP was able to inhibit cancer cell invasion and tumor
angiogenesis in prostate and brain cancers, respectively. At tumor-inhibiting
doses, DZNeP is not harmful for non-transformed cells. In the present manuscript,
we review current evidence supporting a role of EZH2 in metastatic spreading and 
tumor angiogenesis. Using Oncomine datasets, we show that DZNeP targets are
specifically silenced in some metastatic cancers, and some of them may inhibit
angiogenesis. Based on this evidence, we propose the development of EZH2
inhibitors as anti-angiogenic and anti-metastatic therapy.

PMID: 22711031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochimie. 2012 Nov;94(11):2308-13. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.06.003. Epub 2012 
Jun 16.

Identification of PR-SET7 and EZH2 selective inhibitors inducing cell death in
human leukemia U937 cells.

Valente S(1), Lepore I, Dell'Aversana C, Tardugno M, Castellano S, Sbardella G,
Tomassi S, Di Maro S, Novellino E, Di Santo R, Costi R, Altucci L, Mai A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur - Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Chimica e
Tecnologie del Farmaco, Sapienza Università di Roma, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Roma, 
Italy.

Chemical manipulations undertaken on some bis(bromo- and dibromo-phenol)
compounds previously reported by us as wide-spectrum epigenetic inhibitors let us
to identify bis (bromo- and dibromo-methoxyphenyl) derivatives highly selective
for PR-SET7 and EZH2 (compounds 4, 5, 9, and 10). Western blot analyses were
carried out in U937 cells to determine the effects of such compounds on the
methyl marks related to the tested enzymes (H3K4me1, H3K9me2, H4H20me1, and
H3K27me3). The 1,5-bis(3-bromo-4-methoxyphenyl)penta-1,4-dien-3-one 4 (EC(50) vs 
EZH2 = 74.9 µM), tested in U937 cells at 50 µM, induced massive cell death and
28% of granulocytic differentiation, highlighting the potential use of EZH2
inhibitors in cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22709867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Epigenetics. 2012 Aug;7(8):858-67. doi: 10.4161/epi.20837. Epub 2012 Jun 18.

DNA methylation analyses of urothelial carcinoma reveal distinct epigenetic
subtypes and an association between gene copy number and methylation status.

Lauss M(1), Aine M, Sjödahl G, Veerla S, Patschan O, Gudjonsson S, Chebil G,
Lövgren K, Fernö M, Månsson W, Liedberg F, Ringnér M, Lindgren D, Höglund M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Skåne University Hospital, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.

We assessed DNA methylation and copy number status of 27,000 CpGs in 149
urothelial carcinomas and integrated the findings with gene expression and
mutation data. Methylation was associated with gene expression for 1,332 CpGs, of
which 26% showed positive correlation with expression, i.e., high methylation and
high gene expression levels. These positively correlated CpGs were part of
specific transcription factor binding sites, such as sites for MYC and CREBP1, or
located in gene bodies. Furthermore, we found genes with copy number gains, low
expression and high methylation levels, revealing an association between
methylation and copy number levels. This phenomenon was typically observed for
developmental genes, such as HOX genes, and tumor suppressor genes. In contrast, 
we also identified genes with copy number gains, high expression and low
methylation levels. This was for instance observed for some keratin genes. Tumor 
cases could be grouped into four subgroups, termed epitypes, by their DNA
methylation profiles. One epitype was influenced by the presence of infiltrating 
immune cells, two epitypes were mainly composed of non-muscle invasive tumors,
and the remaining epitype of muscle invasive tumors. The polycomb complex protein
EZH2 that blocks differentiation in embryonic stem cells showed increased
expression both at the mRNA and protein levels in the muscle invasive epitype,
together with methylation of polycomb target genes and HOX genes. Our data
highlights HOX gene silencing and EZH2 expression as mechanisms to promote a more
undifferentiated and aggressive state in UC.

PMCID: PMC3427281
PMID: 22705924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Hum Pathol. 2012 Dec;43(12):2177-86. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.03.007. Epub
2012 Jun 15.

Immunohistochemical characteristics and malignant progression of hepatic cystic
neoplasms in comparison with pancreatic counterparts.

Matsubara T(1), Sato Y, Sasaki M, Harada K, Nomoto K, Tsuneyama K, Nakamura K,
Gabata T, Matsui O, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

The recent World Health Organization classification for tumors of the digestive
system defined grossly and histologically hepatic mucinous cystic neoplasms and
intraductal papillary neoplasms of the bile duct separately. In this study, the
immunohistochemical features of intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct
(19 cases) and hepatic mucinous cystic neoplasm (5 cases) were characterized and 
compared with those of similar pancreatic lesions, intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasm of the pancreas (12 cases), and pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm (6
cases) and with those of other biliary cystic lesions, peribiliary cysts (10
cases). Intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct and intraductal papillary
mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas frequently expressed cytokeratin 7; mucin core 
proteins 1, 2, 5AC, and 6; trypsin; and amylase. Hepatic and pancreatic mucinous 
cystic neoplasms frequently expressed cytokeratin 7, mucin core proteins 1 and
5AC, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, trypsin, and amylase. Estrogen and
progesterone receptors were expressed in the subepithelial stromal cells. The
groups with intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct and intraductal
papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas were different from the groups with
hepatic and pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm with respect to several
phenotypes reflecting gastric and intestinal metaplasia and also the lack of
expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors. The Ki-67 and p53 labeling
indexes increased significantly with the malignant progression of intraductal
papillary neoplasm of the bile duct and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
of the pancreas. The p16 labeling index decreased and EZH2 labeling index
increased significantly with the malignant progression of intraductal papillary
neoplasm of the bile duct and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the
pancreas. In conclusion, intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct and
hepatic mucinous cystic neoplasm might be regarded as biliary counterparts of
intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas and pancreatic mucinous
cystic neoplasm, respectively, and the mucinous cystic neoplasm and intraductal
papillary neoplasm groups differed from each other. Labeling indexes of Ki-67,
p53, p16, and EZH2 were comparable in intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile 
duct and intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas along with their
malignant progression, suggesting a common carcinogenic process of the tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22705005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Clin Epigenetics. 2011 Aug;2(2):197-212. doi: 10.1007/s13148-011-0050-6. Epub
2011 Jul 9.

Epigenetic abnormalities in myeloproliferative neoplasms: a target for novel
therapeutic strategies.

Mascarenhas J, Roper N, Chaurasia P, Hoffman R.

The myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are a group of clonal hematological
malignancies characterized by a hypercellular bone marrow and a tendency to
develop thrombotic complications and to evolve to myelofibrosis and acute
leukemia. Unlike chronic myelogenous leukemia, where a single disease-initiating 
genetic event has been identified, a more complicated series of genetic mutations
appear to be responsible for the BCR-ABL1-negative MPNs which include
polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primary myelofibrosis. Recent
studies have revealed a number of epigenetic alterations that also likely
contribute to disease pathogenesis and determine clinical outcome. Increasing
evidence indicates that alterations in DNA methylation, histone modification, and
microRNA expression patterns can collectively influence gene expression and
potentially contribute to MPN pathogenesis. Examples include mutations in genes
encoding proteins that modify chromatin structure (EZH2, ASXL1, IDH1/2,
JAK2V617F, and IKZF1) as well as epigenetic modification of genes critical for
cell proliferation and survival (suppressors of cytokine signaling, polycythemia 
rubra vera-1, CXC chemokine receptor 4, and histone deacetylase (HDAC)). These
epigenetic lesions serve as novel targets for experimental therapeutic
interventions. Clinical trials are currently underway evaluating HDAC inhibitors 
and DNA methyltransferase inhibitors for the treatment of patients with MPNs.

PMCID: PMC3365400
PMID: 22704337  [PubMed]


250. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;18(15):4048-58. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

EZH2-regulated DAB2IP is a medulloblastoma tumor suppressor and a positive marker
for survival.

Smits M(1), van Rijn S, Hulleman E, Biesmans D, van Vuurden DG, Kool M, Haberler 
C, Aronica E, Vandertop WP, Noske DP, Würdinger T.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-oncology Research Group, Department of Neurosurgery, Cancer Center
Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Medulloblastoma is the most common malignant brain tumor in children.
Despite recent improvements, the molecular mechanisms driving medulloblastoma are
not fully understood and further elucidation could provide cues to improve
outcome prediction and therapeutic approaches.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Here, we conducted a meta-analysis of mouse and human
medulloblastoma gene expression data sets, to identify potential medulloblastoma 
tumor suppressor genes.
RESULTS: We identified DAB2IP, a member of the RAS-GTPase-activating protein
family (RAS GAP), and showed that DAB2IP expression is repressed in
medulloblastoma by EZH2-induced trimethylation. Moreover, we observed that
reduced DAB2IP expression correlates significantly with a poor overall survival
of patients with medulloblastoma, independent of metastatic stage. Finally, we
showed that ectopic DAB2IP expression enhances stress-induced apoptosis in
medulloblastoma cells and that reduced expression of DAB2IP in medulloblastoma
cells conveys resistance to irradiation-induced cell death.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that repression of DAB2IP may at least partly
protect medulloblastoma cells from apoptotic cell death. Moreover, DAB2IP may
represent a molecular marker to distinguish patients with medulloblastoma at high
risk from those with a longer survival prognosis.

PMID: 22696229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Small GTPases. 2012 Jul-Sep;3(3):192-7. doi: 10.4161/sgtp.20413. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

Rap1 and its regulatory proteins: the tumor suppressor, oncogene, tumor
suppressor gene axis in head and neck cancer.

Banerjee R(1), Russo N, Liu M, Van Tubergen E, D'Silva NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (SCCHN) is the sixth most common
cancer, globally. Previously, we showed that Rap1GAP is a tumor suppressor gene
that inhibits tumor growth, but promotes invasion in SCCHN. In this work, we
discuss the role of Rap1 and Rap1GAP in SCCHN progression in the context of a
microRNA-oncogene-tumor suppressor gene axis, and investigate the role of Rap1GAP
in EZH2-mediated invasion. Loss of expression of microRNA-101 in SCCHN leads to
upregulation of EZH2, a histone methyltransferase. Overexpression of EZH2
silences Rap1GAP via methylation, thereby promoting activation of its target,
Rap1. This microRNA-controlled activation of Rap1, via EZH2-mediated silencing of
Rap1GAP, is a novel mechanism of Rap1 regulation. In two independent SCCHN cell
lines, downregulation of EZH2 inhibits proliferation and invasion. In both cell
lines, stable knockdown of EZH2 (shEZH2) recovers Rap1GAP expression and inhibits
proliferation. However, siRNA-mediated knockdown of Rap1GAP in these cells
rescues proliferation but not invasion. Thus, EZH2 promotes proliferation and
invasion via Rap1GAP-dependent and -independent mechanisms, respectively.
Although the studies presented here are in the context of SCCHN, our results may 
have broader implications, given that Rap1GAP acts as a tumor suppressor in
pancreatic cancer, thyroid cancer, and melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3442808
PMID: 22684501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Blood. 2012 Aug 2;120(5):1107-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-11-394932. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

Ezh2 augments leukemogenicity by reinforcing differentiation blockage in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Tanaka S(1), Miyagi S, Sashida G, Chiba T, Yuan J, Mochizuki-Kashio M, Suzuki Y, 
Sugano S, Nakaseko C, Yokote K, Koseki H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

EZH2, a catalytic component of the polycomb repressive complex 2, trimethylates
histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27) to repress the transcription of target genes.
Although EZH2 is overexpressed in various cancers, including some hematologic
malignancies, the role of EZH2 in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has yet to be
examined in vivo. In the present study, we transformed granulocyte macrophage
progenitors from Cre-ERT;Ezh2(flox/flox) mice with the MLL-AF9 leukemic fusion
gene to analyze the function of Ezh2 in AML. Deletion of Ezh2 in transformed
granulocyte macrophage progenitors compromised growth severely in vitro and
attenuated the progression of AML significantly in vivo. Ezh2-deficient leukemic 
cells developed into a chronic myelomonocytic leukemia-like disease with a lower 
frequency of leukemia-initiating cells compared with the control. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing revealed a significant reduction in
the levels of trimethylation at H3K27 in Ezh2-deficient leukemic cells, not only 
at Cdkn2a, a known major target of Ezh2, but also at a cohort of genes relevant
to the developmental and differentiation processes. Overexpression of Egr1, one
of the derepressed genes in Ezh2-deficient leukemic cells, promoted the
differentiation of AML cells profoundly. Our findings suggest that Ezh2 inhibits 
differentiation programs in leukemic stem cells, thereby augmenting their
leukemogenic activity.

PMID: 22677129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 1;18(15):4201-12. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0036.
Epub 2012 Jun 6.

TP53 genomic status regulates sensitivity of gastric cancer cells to the histone 
methylation inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep).

Cheng LL(1), Itahana Y, Lei ZD, Chia NY, Wu Y, Yu Y, Zhang SL, Thike AA, Pandey
A, Rozen S, Voorhoeve PM, Yu Q, Tan PH, Bay BH, Itahana K, Tan P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore.

PURPOSE: DZNep (3-deazaneplanocin A) depletes EZH2, a critical component of
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is frequently deregulated in cancer. 
Despite exhibiting promising anticancer activity, the specific genetic
determinants underlying DZNep responsiveness in cancer cells remain largely
unknown. We sought to determine molecular factors influencing DZNep response in
gastric cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Phenotypic effects of DZNep were evaluated in a panel of
gastric cancer cell lines. Sensitive lines were molecularly interrogated to
identify potential predictors of DZNep responsiveness. The functional importance 
of candidate predictors was evaluated using short hairpin RNA (shRNA) and siRNA
technologies.
RESULTS: DZNep depleted PRC2 pathway components in almost all gastric cancer
lines, however, only a subset of lines exhibited growth inhibition upon
treatment. TP53 genomic status was significantly associated with DZNep cellular
responsiveness, with TP53 wild-type (WT) lines being more sensitive (P < 0.001). 
In TP53-WT lines, DZNep stabilized p53 by reducing ubiquitin conjugation through 
USP10 upregulation, resulting in activation of canonical p53 target genes. TP53
knockdown in TP53-WT lines attenuated DZNep sensitivity and p53 target
activation, showing the functional importance of an intact p53 pathway in
regulating DZNep cellular sensitivity. In primary human gastric cancers, EZH2
expression was negatively correlated with p53 pathway activation, suggesting that
higher levels of EZH2 may repress p53 activity.
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight an important role for TP53 genomic status in
influencing DZNep response in gastric cancer. Clinical trials evaluating
EZH2-targeting agents such as DZNep should consider stratifying patients with
gastric cancer by their TP53 genomic status.

PMID: 22675170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037712. Epub 2012 May 25.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 induces pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell
proliferation.

Aljubran SA(1), Cox R Jr, Tamarapu Parthasarathy P, Kollongod Ramanathan G,
Rajanbabu V, Bao H, Mohapatra SS, Lockey R, Kolliputi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Internal Medicine, Morsani College of
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(8). doi:
10.1371/annotation/8580b50a-1556-4c86-aeb6-a88af839297a. Mohapatra, Shyam M
[corrected to Mohapatra, Shyam S].

INTRODUCTION: Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH) is a progressively
devastating disease characterized by excessive proliferation of the Pulmonary
Arterial Smooth Muscle Cells (PASMCs). Studies suggest that PAH and cancers share
an apoptosis-resistant state featuring excessive cell proliferation. The
proliferation of cancer cells is mediated by increased expression of Enhancer of 
Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), a mammalian histone methyltransferase that contributes to
the epigenetic silencing of target genes. However, the role of EZH2 in PAH has
not been studied. In this study, it is hypothesized that EZH2 could play a role
in the proliferation of PASMCs.
METHODS: In the present study, the expression patterns of EZH2 were investigated 
in normal and hypertensive mouse PASMCs. The effects of EZH2 overexpression on
the proliferation of human PASMCs were tested. PASMCs were transfected with EZH2 
or GFP using nucleofector system. After transfection, the cells were incubated
for 48 hours at 37°C. Proliferation and cell cycle analysis were performed using 
flow cytometry. Apoptosis of PASMCs was determined using annexin V staining and
cell migration was tested by wound healing assay.
RESULTS: EZH2 protein expression in mouse PASMCs were correlated with an increase
in right ventricular systolic pressure and Right Ventricular Hypertrophy (RVH).
The overexpression of EZH2 in human PASMCs enhances proliferation, migration, and
decrease in the rate of apoptosis when compared to GFP-transfected cells. In the 
G2/M phase of the EZH2 transfected cells, there was a 3.5 fold increase in
proliferation, while there was a significant decrease in the rate of apoptosis of
PASMCs, when compared to control.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that EZH2 plays a role in the migration and
proliferation of PASMCs, which is a major hallmark in PAH. It also suggests that 
EZH2 could play a role in the development of PAH and can serve as a potential
target for new therapies for PAH.

PMCID: PMC3360676
PMID: 22662197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 20;287(30):25255-65. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.357053. Epub
2012 May 31.

A novel target of microRNA-29, Ring1 and YY1-binding protein (Rybp), negatively
regulates skeletal myogenesis.

Zhou L(1), Wang L, Lu L, Jiang P, Sun H, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, the Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China.

Skeletal muscle cell differentiation (myogenesis) is a process orchestrated by a 
complex network involving transcription factors, epigenetic regulators, and
microRNAs. Previous studies identified miR-29 as a pro-myogenic factor that
interacts with components of Polycomb repressive complex, YY1 and Ezh2. In a
genome-wide survey of miR-29-mediated transcriptome changes in C2C12 myoblasts,
many epigenetic factors were found to be down-regulated by miR-29. Among them,
Rybp was shown to be a direct target of miR-29 through binding to its 3' UTR.
Functional studies demonstrated that Rybp is down-regulated during myogenesis and
acts as a negative regulator of skeletal myogenesis both in vitro during C2C12
differentiation and in vivo in injury-induced muscle regeneration. Furthermore,
we found that Rybp and YY1 co-occupy several myogenic loci, including miR-29
itself, to silence their expression, thus forming a Rybp-miR-29 feedback loop.
Rybp overexpression was found to enhance the enrichment of Ezh2 and
trimethylation of H3K27 at target loci, suggesting it may facilitate the
recruitment or stabilization of the Polycomb repressive complex. Collectively,
our results identify Rybp as a novel regulator of myogenesis that co-acts with
YY1 to silence miR-29 and other myogenic loci.

PMCID: PMC3408151
PMID: 22661705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Jun 3;19(7):664-70. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2315.

Intronic RNAs mediate EZH2 regulation of epigenetic targets.

Guil S(1), Soler M, Portela A, Carrère J, Fonalleras E, Gómez A, Villanueva A,
Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute, L'Hospitalet, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. sguil@idibell.cat

Epigenetic deregulation at a number of genomic loci is one of the hallmarks of
cancer. A role for some RNA molecules in guiding repressive polycomb complex PRC2
to specific chromatin regions has been proposed. Here we use an in vivo
cross-linking method to detect and identify direct PRC2-RNA interactions in human
cancer cells, revealing a number of intronic RNA sequences capable of binding to 
the core component EZH2 and regulating the transcriptional output of its genomic 
counterpart. Overexpression of EZH2-bound intronic RNA for the H3K4
methyltransferase gene SMYD3 is concomitant with an increase in EZH2 occupancy
throughout the corresponding genomic fragment and is sufficient to reduce levels 
of the endogenous transcript and protein, resulting in reduced growth capability 
in cell culture and animal models. These findings reveal the role of intronic
RNAs in fine-tuning gene expression regulation at the level of transcriptional
control.

PMID: 22659877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Cancer Discov. 2012 Jun;2(6):524-39. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-11-0320. Epub 2012
Apr 23.

Forced mitotic entry of S-phase cells as a therapeutic strategy induced by
inhibition of WEE1.

Aarts M(1), Sharpe R, Garcia-Murillas I, Gevensleben H, Hurd MS, Shumway SD,
Toniatti C, Ashworth A, Turner NC.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research; 
Breast Unit, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jun;12(6):378-9.

Inhibition of the protein kinase WEE1 synergizes with chemotherapy in preclinical
models and WEE1 inhibitors are being explored as potential cancer therapies.
Here, we investigate the mechanism that underlies this synergy. We show that WEE1
inhibition forces S-phase-arrested cells directly into mitosis without completing
DNA synthesis, resulting in highly abnormal mitoses characterized by dispersed
chromosomes and disorganized bipolar spindles, ultimately resulting in mitotic
exit with gross micronuclei formation and apoptosis. This mechanism of cell death
is shared by CHK1 inhibitors, and combined WEE1 and CHK1 inhibition forces
mitotic entry from S-phase in the absence of chemotherapy. We show that p53/p21
inactivation combined with high expression of mitotic cyclins and EZH2 predispose
to mitotic entry during S-phase with cells reliant on WEE1 to prevent premature
cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)1 activation. These features are characteristic of
aggressive breast, and other, cancers for which WEE1 inhibitor combinations
represent a promising targeted therapy.

PMID: 22628408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cancer Ther. 2012 Aug;11(8):1735-46. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0037. Epub
2012 May 23.

Molecular mechanisms involved in the synergistic interaction of the EZH2
inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A with gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer cells.

Avan A(1), Crea F, Paolicchi E, Funel N, Galvani E, Marquez VE, Honeywell RJ,
Danesi R, Peters GJ, Giovannetti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is characterized by overexpression of
enhancer of Zeste homolog-2 (EZH2), which plays a pivotal role in cancer stem
cell (CSC) self-renewal through methylation of histone H3 lysine-27 (H3K27me3).
Against this background, EZH2 was identified as an attractive target, and we
investigated the interaction of the EZH2 inhibitor DZNeP with gemcitabine. EZH2
expression was detected by quantitative PCR in 15 PDAC cells, including seven
primary cell cultures, showing that expression values correlated with their
originator tumors (Spearman R(2) = 0.89, P = 0.01). EZH2 expression in cancer
cells was significantly higher than in normal ductal pancreatic cells and
fibroblasts. The 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNeP; 5 µmol/L, 72-hour exposure)
modulated EZH2 and H3K27me3 protein expression and synergistically enhanced the
antiproliferative activity of gemcitabine, with combination index values of 0.2
(PANC-1), 0.3 (MIA-PaCa-2), and 0.7 (LPC006). The drug combination reduced the
percentages of cells in G(2)-M phase (e.g., from 27% to 19% in PANC-1, P < 0.05) 
and significantly increased apoptosis compared with gemcitabine alone. Moreover, 
DZNeP enhanced the mRNA and protein expression of the nucleoside transporters
hENT1/hCNT1, possibly because of the significant reduction of deoxynucleotide
content (e.g., 25% reduction of deoxycytidine nucleotides in PANC-1), as detected
by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. DZNeP decreased cell
migration, which was additionally reduced by DZNeP/gemcitabine combination (-20% 
in LPC006, after 8-hour exposure, P < 0.05) and associated with increased
E-cadherin mRNA and protein expression. Furthermore, DZNeP and DZNeP/gemcitabine 
combination significantly reduced the volume of PDAC spheroids growing in
CSC-selective medium and decreased the proportion of CD133+ cells. All these
molecular mechanisms underlying the synergism of DZNeP/gemcitabine combination
support further studies on this novel therapeutic approach for treatment of
PDACs.

PMCID: PMC3416916
PMID: 22622284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 28;32(13):1616-25. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.193. Epub 2012 May
21.

HOTAIR is a negative prognostic factor and exhibits pro-oncogenic activity in
pancreatic cancer.

Kim K(1), Jutooru I, Chadalapaka G, Johnson G, Frank J, Burghardt R, Kim S, Safe 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

HOTAIR is a long intervening non-coding RNA (lincRNA) that associates with the
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and overexpression is correlated with poor
survival for breast, colon and liver cancer patients. In this study, we show that
HOTAIR expression is increased in pancreatic tumors compared with non-tumor
tissue and is associated with more aggressive tumors. Knockdown of HOTAIR
(siHOTAIR) by RNA interference shows that HOTAIR has an important role in
pancreatic cancer cell invasion, as reported in other cancer cell lines. In
contrast, HOTAIR knockdown in Panc1 and L3.6pL pancreatic cancer cells that
overexpress this lincRNA decreased cell proliferation, altered cell cycle
progression and induced apoptosis, demonstrating an expanded function of HOTAIR
in pancreatic cancer cells compared with other cancer cell lines. Results of gene
array studies showed that there was minimal overlap between HOTAIR-regulated
genes in pancreatic cells and breast cancer cells, and HOTAIR uniquely suppressed
several interferon-related genes and gene sets related to cell cycle progression 
in pancreatic cancer cells and tumors. Analysis of selected genes suppressed by
HOTAIR in Panc1 and L3.6pL cells showed by knockdown of EZH2 and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays that HOTAIR-mediated gene repression was both
PRC2-dependent and -independent. HOTAIR knockdown in L3.6pL cells inhibited tumor
growth in mouse xenograft model, further demonstrating the pro-oncogenic function
of HOTAIR in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3484248
PMID: 22614017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 15;422(4):607-14. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.035. Epub 2012 May 15.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a potential therapeutic target, is
regulated by miR-101 in renal cancer cells.

Sakurai T(1), Bilim VN, Ugolkov AV, Yuuki K, Tsukigi M, Motoyama T, Tomita Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Urology, Yamagata University
School of Medicine, Iida-nishi 2-2-2, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan.

We investigated a prognostic significance and the mechanism of aberrant nuclear
expression of EZH2, a histone methyltransferase, in human renal cell carcinoma
(RCC). We found nuclear EZH2 in 48 of 100 RCCs and it was significantly
correlated with worse survival in RCC patients. We detected a decreased
expression of miR-101 in 15 of 54 RCCs. We found that re-expression of miR-101
resulted in EZH2 depletion and decreased renal cancer cell proliferation. Our
results show nuclear EZH2 as a prognostic marker of worse survival in human RCC, 
and identify miR-101 as a negative regulator of EZH2 expression and renal cancer 
cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 15;72(14):3582-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2876. Epub 
2012 May 16.

Cancer angiogenesis induced by Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is mediated 
by EZH2.

He M(1), Zhang W, Bakken T, Schutten M, Toth Z, Jung JU, Gill P, Cannon M, Gao
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA. meilan.he@gmail.com

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;73(17):5603-5.

EZH2 is a component of the epigenetic regulator PRC2 that suppresses gene
expression. Elevated expression of EZH2 is common in human cancers and is
associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis. In this study, we show that
EZH2 elevation is associated with epigenetic modifications of Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), an oncogenic virus that promotes the
development of Kaposi sarcoma and other malignancies that occur in patients with 
chronic HIV infections. KSHV induction of EZH2 expression was essential for
KSHV-induced angiogenesis. High expression of EZH2 was observed in Kaposi sarcoma
tumors. In cell culture, latent KSHV infection upregulated the expression of EZH2
in human endothelial cells through the expression of vFLIP and LANA, two
KSHV-latent genes that activate the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. KSHV-mediated upregulation of 
EZH2 was required for the induction of Ephrin-B2, an essential proangiogenic
factor that drives endothelial cell tubule formation. Taken together, our
findings indicate that KSHV regulates the host epigenetic modifier EZH2 to
promote angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4034471
PMID: 22593192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Ann Saudi Med. 2012 May-Jun;32(3):262-8. doi: 10.5144/0256-4947.2012.262.

The effect of prostate tissue inflammation in benign prostatic hyperplasia on
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 ribonucleic acid expression.

Al-Maghrebi M(1), Kehinde EO, Al-Mulla F, Anim JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait.
malmaghrebi@hsc.edu.kw

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been recently
found to regulate several genes involved in immunoresponse and autocrine
inflammation network. The aim of the study was to quantitate EZH2 messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression, evaluate its relation to conditions of
prostatitis associated with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and correlate it 
with the levels of the inflammatory marker interlukin 6 (IL-6).
DESIGN AND SETTING: Cross-sectional study in Middle Eastern men with BPH and
prostatitis or BPH only.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsies were
collected from 106 patients suspected of having prostate cancer; however, the
histology revealed BPH. Upon further pathological examination, 56 of these cases 
were identified as BPH with prostatitis and classified as: acute prostatitis
(n=13); active chronic prostatitis (n=32); and, chronic inactive prostatitis
(n=12). Serum IL-6 levels and EZH2 mRNA expression were measured and compared
between patient groups.
RESULTS: EZH2 mRNA was overexpressed in BPH with prostatitis patients compared to
BPH only patients (P<.0001). BPH with active chronic prostatitis had higher EZH2 
expression than BPH with acute or chronic inactive prostatitis compared to BPH
only (P=.05 and .73, respectively). EZH2 mRNA expression showed a negative
correlation with IL-6 concentrations in BPH with prostatitis patients (rs=-0.31, 
P=.02). EZH2 overexpression was associated with an increased risk of having BPH
with prostatitis (crude odds ratio 0.20, 95% CI 0.06-0.65, P=.0076).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 mRNA expression correlates positively with prostatitis
conditions associated with BPH and negatively with serum IL-6 levels. This
supports the possible involvement of EZH2 mRNA overexpression in the development 
of prostate inflammation, and its new regulatory role in suppressing the
expression of some inflammatory network genes.

PMID: 22588437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Haematologica. 2012 Nov;97(11):1708-12. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.064485. Epub
2012 May 11.

Clinical, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and molecular genetic features in 117
adult patients with mixed-phenotype acute leukemia defined by WHO-2008
classification.

Yan L(1), Ping N, Zhu M, Sun A, Xue Y, Ruan C, Drexler HG, Macleod RA, Wu D, Chen
S.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Institute of Hematology, Key Laboratory of Thrombosis and Hemostasis
of Ministry of Health, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, PR China. yanmiz@vip.sohu.net

Among 4,780 consecutive adult acute lymphoblastic/myeloblastic leukemia patients,
we identified 117 (2.4%) patients with mixed-phenotype acute leukemia fulfilling 
WHO 2008 criteria; these were classified as: Blymphoid+ myeloid (n=64),
T-lymphoid+myeloid (n=38), B+T-lymphoid (n=14) and trilineage (n=1). Of 92
patients karyotyped, 59 were abnormal and were classified as: complex (22 of 92),
t(9;22)(q34;q11) (14 of 92), monosomy 7 (7 of 92), polysomy 21 (7 of 92),
t(v;11q23) (4 of 92), t(10;11)(p15;q21) (3 of 92), while STIL-TAL1 fusion was
detected in one (T+My) patient. After investigating common acute leukemia-related
mutations in 17 genes, 12 of 31 (39%) patients were found to have at least one
mutation, classified with: IKZF1 deletion (4 of 31), and EZH2 (3 of 31), ASXL1 (3
of 31), ETV6 (2 of 31), NOTCH1 (1 of 31), and TET2 (1 of 31) mutations. Array-CGH
revealed genomic deletions of CDKN2A (4 of 12), IKZF1 (3 of 12), MEF2C (2 of 12),
BTG1 (2 of 12), together with BCOR, EBF1, K-RAS, LEF1, MBNL1, PBX3, and RUNX1
(one of 12 each). Our results indicate that mixed-phenotype acute leukemia is a
complex entity with heterogeneous clinical, immunophenotypic, cytogenetic, and
molecular genetic features.

PMCID: PMC3487445
PMID: 22581002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036013. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Dysregulated recruitment of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 to the class II
transactivator (CIITA) promoter IV in breast cancer cells.

Truax AD(1), Thakkar M, Greer SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Physiology, Department of
Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.

One mechanism frequently utilized by tumor cells to escape immune system
recognition and elimination is suppression of cell surface expression of Major
Histocompatibility Class II (MHC II) molecules. Expression of MHC II is regulated
primarily at the level of transcription by the Class II Transactivator, CIITA,
and decreased CIITA expression is observed in multiple tumor types. We
investigate here contributions of epigenetic modifications to transcriptional
silencing of CIITA in variants of the human breast cancer cell line MDA MB 435.
Significant increases in histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation upon IFN-<U+03B3>
stimulation correlate with reductions in transcription factor recruitment to the 
interferon-<U+03B3> inducible CIITA promoter, CIITApIV, and with significantly increased
CIITApIV occupancy by the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2). Most compelling is evidence that decreased expression of EZH2 in MDA MB
435 variants results in significant increases in CIITA and HLA-DRA mRNA
expression, even in the absence of interferon-<U+03B3> stimulation, as well as increased
cell surface expression of MHC II. Together, these data add mechanistic insight
to prior observations of increased EZH2 expression and decreased CIITA expression
in multiple tumor types.

PMCID: PMC3338556
PMID: 22563434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Aug;57(8):2055-62. doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2152-1. Epub 2012
May 6.

Correlation of epigenetic aberrance with STAT3 signaling pathway in gastric
carcinogenesis.

Gao F(1), Lv Y, Zhu Y, Chen M, Shen S, Cao J, Zou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Drum Tower Hospital Affiliated to Medical 
School of Nanjing University, No. 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing 210008, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that STAT3 signaling plays important roles in
regulating epigenetic aberrance during tumorigenesis, especially in the
expression of certain key epigenetic enzymes such as DNMTs, HDACs, and HMTs.
However, there has been no report on the relationship of STAT3 signaling and
epigenetic aberrance in gastrocarcinogenesis.
AIM: The purpose of this study was to explore the interrelationship of STAT3
signaling pathway and epigenetic aberrance in gastrocarcinogenesis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was utilized to examine the protein expressions of 
pSTAT3, DNMT1, HDAC1, and EZH2 in 153 tissue specimens, including 20 of normal
gastric epithelium tissue, 21 of intestinal metaplasia (IM), 24 of dysplasia
(DYS), 23 of early gastric cancer (EGC) and 65 of advanced gastric cancer (AGC), 
and then analyze their possible relationship with clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: We found that the four protein expressions were obviously enhanced
following the malignant process of gastric carcinogenesis. Pearson correlation
analysis of all the pathological groups showed that expression of pSTAT3 was
highly associated with DNMT1, but not with HADC1 and EZH2. However, significant
correlations were detected among the expression of DNMT1, HDAC1, and EZH2.
Further analysis of each pathological group demonstrated that pSTAT3's expression
was dramatically related with DNTM1 in the IM (P = 0.021) and EGC groups (P =
0.013) and correlated with EZH2 in the DYS group (P = 0.020). Furthermore,
pSTAT3's expression was associated with T staging (P = 0.015) in the AGC group,
whereas DNMT1 was associated with gender (P = 0.021), HDAC1 with Lauren
classification (P = 0.007), and EZH2 with T staging (P = 0.003) and lymphatic
staging (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: The STAT3 signaling pathway may correlate with epigenetic aberrance 
during gastrocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 22562532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int J Dev Biol. 2012;56(4):295-300. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.113360ak.

Comparative expression analysis of the H3K27 demethylases, JMJD3 and UTX, with
the H3K27 methylase, EZH2, in Xenopus.

Kawaguchi A(1), Ochi H, Sudou N, Ogino H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and
Technology (NAIST), Ikoma, Nara, Japan.

The regulated removal of the gene-silencing epigenetic mark, trimethylation of
lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3), has been shown to be critical for
tissue-specific activation of developmental genes; however, the extent of
embryonic expression of its demethylases, JMJD3 and UTX, has remained unclear. In
this study, we investigated the expression of jmjd3 and utx genes in Xenopus
embryos in parallel with that of the H3K27 methylase gene, ezh2. At the blastula 
stage, jmjd3, utx and ezh2 showed similar expression patterns in the animal cap
and marginal zone that give rise to the ectoderm and mesoderm, respectively. The 
three genes maintained similar expression patterns in the neural plate,
preplacodal ectoderm and axial mesoderm during the gastrula and neurula stages.
Later, expression was maintained in the developing brain and cranial sensory
tissues, such as the eye and ear, of tailbud embryos. These findings suggest that
the H3K27 demethylases and methylase may function continuously for progressive
switching of genetic programs during neural development, a model involving the
simultaneous action of both of the demethylases for the de-repression of silent
genes and the methylase for the silencing of active genes.

PMID: 22562205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. BMC Cancer. 2012 May 6;12:169. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-169.

Lipocalin 2 expression is associated with aggressive features of endometrial
cancer.

Mannelqvist M(1), Stefansson IM, Wik E, Kusonmano K, Raeder MB, Øyan AM, Kalland 
KH, Moses MA, Salvesen HB, Akslen LA.

Author information: 
(1)The Gade Institute, Section for Pathology, University of Bergen, Bergen,
Norway.

BACKGROUND: Increased expression of lipocalin 2 (LCN2) has been observed in
several cancers. The aim of the present study was to investigate LCN2 in
endometrial cancer in relation to clinico-pathologic phenotype, angiogenesis,
markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and patient survival.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was performed using a human LCN2 antibody
on a population-based series of endometrial cancer patients collected in
Hordaland County (Norway) during 1981-1990 (n = 256). Patients were followed from
the time of primary surgery until death or last follow-up in 2007. The median
follow-up time for survivors was 17 years. Gene expression data from a
prospectively collected endometrial cancer series (n = 76) and a publicly
available endometrial cancer series (n = 111) was used for gene correlation
studies.
RESULTS: Expression of LCN2 protein, found in 49% of the cases, was associated
with non-endometrioid histologic type (p = 0.001), nuclear grade 3 (p = 0.001),
>50% solid tumor growth (p = 0.001), ER and PR negativity (p = 0.028 and 0.006), 
and positive EZH2 expression (p < 0.001). LCN2 expression was significantly
associated with expression of VEGF-A (p = 0.021), although not with other
angiogenesis markers examined (vascular proliferation index, glomeruloid
microvascular proliferation, VEGF-C, VEGF-D or bFGF2 expression). Further, LCN2
was not associated with several EMT-related markers (E-cadherin, N-cadherin,
P-cadherin, ß-catenin), nor with vascular invasion (tumor cells invading
lymphatic or blood vessels). Notably, LCN2 was significantly associated with
distant tumor recurrences, as well as with the S100A family of metastasis related
genes. Patients with tumors showing no LCN2 expression had the best outcome with 
81% 5-year survival, compared to 73% for intermediate and 38% for the small
subgroup with strong LCN2 staining (p = 0.007). In multivariate analysis, LCN2
expression was an independent prognostic factor in addition to histologic grade
and FIGO stage.
CONCLUSION: Increased LCN2 expression is associated with aggressive features and 
poor prognosis in endometrial cancer.

PMCID: PMC3493289
PMID: 22559235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Blood. 2012 Jun 21;119(25):6109-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397620. Epub 2012 
May 2.

Loss of heterozygosity in 7q myeloid disorders: clinical associations and genomic
pathogenesis.

Jerez A(1), Sugimoto Y, Makishima H, Verma A, Jankowska AM, Przychodzen B,
Visconte V, Tiu RV, O'Keefe CL, Mohamedali AM, Kulasekararaj AG, Pellagatti A,
McGraw K, Muramatsu H, Moliterno AR, Sekeres MA, McDevitt MA, Kojima S, List A,
Boultwood J, Mufti GJ, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Loss of heterozygosity affecting chromosome 7q is common in acute myeloid
leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes, pointing toward the essential role of
this region in disease phenotype and clonal evolution. The higher resolution
offered by recently developed genomic platforms may be used to establish more
precise clinical correlations and identify specific target genes. We analyzed a
series of patients with myeloid disorders using recent genomic technologies (1458
by single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays [SNP-A], 226 by next-generation
sequencing, and 183 by expression microarrays). Using SNP-A, we identified
chromosome 7q loss of heterozygosity segments in 161 of 1458 patients (11%); 26% 
of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia patients harbored 7q uniparental disomy, of
which 41% had a homozygous EZH2 mutation. In addition, we describe an
SNP-A-isolated deletion 7 hypocellular myelodysplastic syndrome subset, with a
high rate of progression. Using direct and parallel sequencing, we found no
recurrent mutations in typically large deletion 7q and monosomy 7 patients. In
contrast, we detected a markedly decreased expression of genes included in our
SNP-A defined minimally deleted regions. Although a 2-hit model is present in
most patients with 7q uniparental disomy and a myeloproliferative phenotype,
haplodeficient expression of defined regions of 7q may underlie pathogenesis in
patients with deletions and predominant dysplastic features.

PMCID: PMC3383019
PMID: 22553315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jul;28(1):147-54. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1787. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

The expression and significance of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in lung
adenocarcinoma.

Lv Y(1), Yuan C, Xiao X, Wang X, Ji X, Yu H, Wu Z, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Qilu Hospital, Shandong
University, Jinan 250012, PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma, with increased incidence in the world, exhibits poor
prognosis and is usually resistant to conventional chemotherapy due to drug
resistance. The enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a histone
methyltransferase, plays a key role in tumorigenesis and cancer development
through chromatin remodeling in various types of cancer. However, its potential
role in lung adenocarcinoma has not been well defined. In this study, the
expression of EZH2 was examined in lung adenocarcinoma tissues and cell lines.
Most interestingly, EZH2 overexpression was detected in tumor tissue and
significantly correlated with histological differentiation, pathological
tumor-node-metastasis stage and smoking history, but not with gender or age.
Furthermore, EZH2 overexpression was also detected in cisplatin-resistant cancer 
cells rather than cisplatin-sensitive cells. Short hairpin RNA targeted against
EZH2 inhibited cell proliferation and migration, and led to G(2)/M cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in both cisplatin-resistant and cisplatin-sensitive cell
lines. Moreover, EZH2 knockdown enhanced cisplatin sensitivity of
cisplatin-resistant cells and reduced the expression levels of multidrug
resistance-related protein 1. Our study suggests that EZH2 contributes to the
progression of lung adenocarcinoma, and the deletion of EZH2 inhibits cancer and 
resensitizes cells to cisplatin in lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 22552406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jul;97(7):E1307-15. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3136. Epub
2012 Apr 27.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1), a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically
deregulated in hyperparathyroid tumors by histone H3 lysine modification.

Svedlund J(1), Koskinen Edblom S, Marquez VE, Åkerström G, Björklund P, Westin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, Entrance 70, third floor, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

CONTEXT: Primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) resulting from parathyroid tumors is 
a common endocrine disorder with incompletely understood etiology. In renal
failure, secondary hyperparathyroidism (sHPT) occurs with multiple tumor
development as a result of calcium and vitamin D regulatory disturbance.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to investigate whether HIC1 may act as a
tumor suppressor in the parathyroid glands and whether deregulated expression
involves epigenetic mechanisms.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Parathyroid tumors from patients with pHPT included single 
adenomas, multiple tumors from the same patient, and cancer. Hyperplastic
parathyroid glands from patients with sHPT and hypercalcemia and normal
parathyroid tissue specimens were included in the study. Quantitative RT-PCR,
bisulfite pyrosequencing, colony formation assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, 
and RNA interference was used.
RESULTS: HIC1 was generally underexpressed regardless of the hyperparathyroid
disease state including multiple parathyroid tumors from the same patient, and
overexpression of HIC1 led to a decrease in clonogenic survival of parathyroid
tumor cells. Only the carcinomas showed a high methylation level and reduced HIC1
expression. Cell culture experiments, including use of primary parathyroid tumor 
cells prepared directly after operation, the general histone methyltransferase
inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and RNA
interference of DNA methyltransferases and EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2),
supported a role of repressive histone H3 modifications (H3K27me2/3) rather than 
DNA methylation in repression of HIC1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results strongly support a growth-regulatory role of HIC1 in the
parathyroid glands and suggest that perturbed expression of HIC1 may represent an
early event during tumor development. Repressive histone modification H3K27me2/3 
is involved in repression of HIC1 expression in hyperparathyroid tumors.

PMID: 22544915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Pathology. 2012 Jun;44(4):303-12. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e3283534bcb.

Prognostic impact of the cancer stem cell related markers ALDH1 and EZH2 in
triple negative and basal-like breast cancers.

De Brot M(1), Rocha RM, Soares FA, Gobbi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Breast Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidade Federal de
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. debrot@gmail.com

AIMS: We assessed the expression of ALDH1 and EZH2, cancer stem cell (CSC)
related markers, in triple negative and basal-like breast cancers, investigating 
their association with clinicopathological features and outcome.
METHODS: Clinicopathological data were obtained from 140 cases of triple negative
breast cancer. A tissue microarray was constructed and immunohistochemistry for
ER, PR, HER2, ALDH1, EZH2, CK5, CK14, EGFR, p63, caveolin, and p53 was performed.
Tumour cell and stromal expression of ALDH1 were evaluated. Multivariate analysis
was conducted, including all significant variables.
RESULTS: The majority of triple negative breast cancers were invasive ductal
carcinomas of no special type (NST) (116/140). Tumour cells exhibited cytoplasmic
expression of ALDH1 in 26 of 140 cases, while stromal expression was detected in 
117 of 140 cases. Tumour cell expression did not correlate with any of the
parameters. Conversely, stromal expression was associated with better overall
survival (p=0.044). Assessment by Cox Regression Model showed a HR of
2.80<U+200A>(HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1/0.357<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.80; 95%CI 0.178-0.714; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004) for breast cancer death 
when ALDH1 was not found in the stromal compartment of tumours, independent of
age, histological type/grade, nodal status, stage, relapse, and expression of
basal markers. High EZH2 expression was noted in 120 of 140 triple negative
breast cancers and was not associated with other variables. Basal-like cancers
comprised 75% (105/140) of triple negative breast cancers. Interestingly, we
found association between EZH2 and CK14 expression (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041).
CONCLUSIONS: ALDH1 expression is frequent in tumour-associated stromal cells of
triple negative breast cancer and is associated with better outcome. Tumour
microenvironment should be considered when studying prognostic impact of CSCs in 
breast cancer.

PMID: 22544210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. EMBO J. 2012 Jun 13;31(12):2810-23. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.112. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

A transcriptional repressor co-regulatory network governing androgen response in 
prostate cancers.

Chng KR(1), Chang CW, Tan SK, Yang C, Hong SZ, Sng NY, Cheung E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR,
Singapore.

Transcriptional corepressors are frequently aberrantly over-expressed in prostate
cancers. However, their crosstalk with the Androgen receptor (AR), a key player
in prostate cancer development, is unclear. Using ChIP-Seq, we generated
extensive global binding maps of AR, ERG, and commonly over-expressed
transcriptional corepressors including HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC3, and EZH2 in prostate 
cancer cells. Surprisingly, our results revealed that ERG, HDACs, and EZH2 are
directly involved in androgen-regulated transcription and wired into an AR
centric transcriptional network via a spectrum of distal enhancers and/or
proximal promoters. Moreover, we showed that similar to ERG, these corepressors
function to mediate repression of AR-induced transcription including cytoskeletal
genes that promote epithelial differentiation and inhibit metastasis.
Specifically, we demonstrated that the direct suppression of Vinculin expression 
by ERG, EZH2, and HDACs leads to enhanced invasiveness of prostate cancer cells. 
Taken together, our results highlight a novel mechanism by which, ERG working
together with oncogenic corepressors including HDACs and the polycomb protein,
EZH2, could impede epithelial differentiation and contribute to prostate cancer
progression, through directly modulating the transcriptional output of AR.

PMCID: PMC3380210
PMID: 22531786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Aug;135(1):59-66. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2055-z.
Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Invasive breast carcinomas in Ghana: high frequency of high grade, basal-like
histology and high EZH2 expression.

Pang J(1), Toy KA, Griffith KA, Awuah B, Quayson S, Newman LA, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 4217
Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1500 E. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Breast cancer in African-American women has a worse outcome than in Caucasian
women. The ancestors of most African-American women come from West Africa,
including Ghana. The Polycomb group protein EZH2 is a marker of poor outcome in
breast cancers from Caucasian women. The histopathological features and biomarker
expression of African breast cancers remain obscure. Here, we investigated a
cohort of Ghanaian breast cancers to better define the prevalent tumor types and 
to test if EZH2 protein may identify aggressive tumors. A group of 169 breast
tissues (100 invasive carcinomas and 69 benign) from women treated at Komfo
Anoyke Teaching Hospital between 2006 and 2011 were histologically classified and
investigated for EZH2 expression. EZH2 nuclear expression we defined as high or
low following previously published criteria. Of the 100 invasive carcinomas, 89 %
were ductal, 2 % were lobular, and 9 % were metaplastic. Basal-like pathological 
features were present in 30 % of the tumors. Of the invasive carcinomas, 7 % were
grade 1, 41 % grade 2, and 52 % grade 3. EZH2 protein was overexpressed in
invasive carcinomas compared to benign breast (p < 0.0001). In invasive
carcinomas nuclear EZH2 overexpression was significantly associated with
basal-like subtype (p = 0.03) and high histologic grade (p < 0.05). Cytoplasmic
EZH2, which has not been previously reported, was present in 16 % of invasive
carcinomas and it was associated with triple negative status (p = 0.02). Our
results provide the first comprehensive histopathological study of this patient
population and uncover the association of EZH2 with high grade and basal-like
tumors. We provide the basis for further detailed investigations on this cohort
to advance diagnosis and treatment of African and African-American women.

PMCID: PMC3906643
PMID: 22527102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1704-10. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.12.019. Epub
2012 Apr 18.

Immunohistochemical analysis of polycomb group protein expression in advanced
gastric cancer.

Lee H(1), Yoon SO, Jeong WY, Kim HK, Kim A, Kim BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gangwon National University Hospital, Chuncheon
200-722, Korea.

The polycomb group proteins have recently captured the attention of cancer
biologists. enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion 
region 1 homolog (BMI-1) are the best-characterized polycomb group proteins;
their deregulation contributes to the development of many malignancies including 
gastric cancers. H3 trimethylation at lysine 27 and DNA methylase DNA
methyltransferase 3B proteins are associated with the recruitment of polycomb
group proteins. Overexpression of polycomb group proteins is associated with poor
prognoses in some types of cancers but with favorable prognoses in others. In the
present study, we investigated the expression of the polycomb group proteins EZH2
and BMI-1 and the associated proteins H3 trimethylation at lysine 27 and DNA
methyltransferase 3B in advanced gastric cancers. Based on immunohistochemical
detection, we evaluated the clinical relevance of these proteins in 178 cases of 
advanced gastric cancers that were managed with radical surgery and adjuvant
systemic chemotherapy. BMI-1, enhancer of zeste homologue 2, H3 trimethylation at
lysine 27, and DNA methyltransferase 3B proteins were overexpressed in the nuclei
of gastric carcinoma compared with adjacent nonneoplastic gastric parenchyma. The
high-level expression of BMI-1, enhancer of zeste homologue 2, H3 trimethylation 
at lysine 27, and DNA methyltransferase 3B proteins were frequently noted in
advanced gastric cancer tissues (70.8%, 92.1%, 58.4%, and 64.6% of cases,
respectively) and well intercorrelated in expression (P < .05). The expression
level of BMI-1, enhancer of zeste homologue 2, and DNA methyltransferase 3B
showed correlation with sex, gross type, and histologic type of the tumor among
clinicopathologic variables. In terms of patient survival, low-level expression
of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 was associated with cancer-related death (P =
.018) and shorter overall survival (P = .005). Low-level expression of enhancer
of zeste homologue 2 may represent a negative prognostic marker (P = .005) and
indicate high risk in patients with advanced gastric cancer after surgery and
adjuvant chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22520951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035128. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Breast cancer cells induce stromal fibroblasts to secrete ADAMTS1 for cancer
invasion through an epigenetic change.

Tyan SW(1), Hsu CH, Peng KL, Chen CC, Kuo WH, Lee EY, Shew JY, Chang KJ, Juan LJ,
Lee WH.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Microenvironment plays an important role in cancer development. We have reported 
that the cancer-associated stromal cells exhibit phenotypic and functional
changes compared to stromal cells neighboring to normal tissues. However, the
molecular mechanisms as well as the maintenance of these changes remain elusive. 
Here we showed that through co-culture with breast cancer cells for at least
three to four passages, breast normal tissue-associated fibroblasts (NAFs) gained
persistent activity for promoting cancer cell invasion, partly via up-regulating 
ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif, 1 (ADAMTS1). Furthermore,
we demonstrated that the DNA methylation pattern in the ADAMTS1 promoter has no
alteration. Instead, the loss of EZH2 binding to the ADAMTS1 promoter and the
resulting decrease of promoter-associated histone H3K27 methylation may account
for the up-regulation of ADAMTS1. Importantly, the lack of EZH2 binding and the
H3K27 methylation on the ADAMTS1 promoter were sustained in cancer
cell-precocultured NAFs after removal of cancer cells. These results suggest that
cancer cells are capable of inducing stromal fibroblasts to secrete ADAMTS1
persistently for their invasion and the effect is epigenetically inheritable.

PMCID: PMC3325931
PMID: 22514714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Sep;167(3):523-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11007.x.
Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Aberrant epigenetic modifications in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with pemphigus vulgaris.

Zhao M(1), Huang W, Zhang Q, Gao F, Wang L, Zhang G, Su Y, Xiao R, Zhang J, Tang 
M, Cheng W, Tan Y, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Department of Dermatology, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Road, Changsha,
Hunan 410011, China.

BACKGROUND: Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is an autoimmune blistering disorder with a
complex aetiology involving genetic and environmental factors, most of which
remain unknown. It has become increasingly evident that aberrant epigenetic
modifications are associated with the occurrence and development of autoimmune
skin disorders. However, it is not known whether epigenetic modifications play a 
role in the development of PV.
OBJECTIVES: To analyse DNA methylation and histone modification patterns in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with PV.
METHODS: PBMC samples were isolated from 24 patients with PV and 20 healthy
controls. Skin lesion biopsies and control skin specimens were obtained from 25
patients with PV and 15 healthy controls. Global DNA methylcytosine levels, as
well as histone acetylation and methylation levels, were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. mRNA expression levels were determined using
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Genomic DNA methylation in PBMCs of patients with PV was increased
relative to controls. DNMT1 expression levels were significantly higher in PV
PBMCs than in controls. MBD3 expression was repressed in PV PBMCs compared with
healthy controls. Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation
levels were significantly decreased in patient PBMCs compared with healthy
controls. These changes were accompanied by increased HDAC1, HDAC2 and SUV39H2
and decreased SUV39H1 and EZH2 in PV PBMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant DNA methylation and histone modifications occur in PBMCs of
patients with PV, possibly due to the deregulation of epigenetic modifier genes. 
These changes may contribute to the pathological immune responses in PV.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22512277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Haematologica. 2012 Oct;97(10):1582-5. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.064683. Epub
2012 Apr 17.

Molecular analyses of 15,542 patients with suspected BCR-ABL1-negative
myeloproliferative disorders allow to develop a stepwise diagnostic workflow.

Schnittger S(1), Bacher U, Eder C, Dicker F, Alpermann T, Grossmann V, Kohlmann
A, Kern W, Haferlach C, Haferlach T.

Author information: 
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Munich, Germany. susanne.schnittger@mll.com

We investigated 15,542 patients with suspected BCR-ABL1- negative
myeloproliferative or myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm (including 359 
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) by a molecular marker set. JAK2V617F was
detected in the suspected categories as follows: polycythemia vera 88.3%, primary
myelofibrosis 53.8%, essential thrombocythemia 50.2%, and not further
classifiable myeloproliferative neoplasms 38.0%. JAK2 exon 12 mutations were
detected in 40.0% JAK2V617F-negative suspected polycythemia vera, MPLW515
mutations in 13.2%JAK2V617F-negative primary myelofibrosis and 7.1%
JAK2V617F-negative essential thrombocythemia. TET2 mutations were distributed
across all entities but were most frequent in suspected chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (77.8%). CBL mutations were identified in suspected chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia (13.9%), primary myelofibrosis (8.0%), and not further
classifiable myeloproliferative neoplasm (7.0%). This leads to a stepwise
workflow for suspected myeloproliferative neoplasms starting with JAK2V617F and
investigating JAK2V617F-negative patients for JAK2 exon 12 or MPL mutations,
respectively. In cases in which a myeloproliferative neoplasm cannot be
established, analysis for TET2, CBL and EZH2 mutations may be indicated.

PMCID: PMC3487560
PMID: 22511494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 15;26(8):751-5. doi: 10.1101/gad.191163.112.

A complex Polycomb issue: the two faces of EZH2 in cancer.

Hock H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. hock.hanno@mgh.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 1;26(7):651-6.

In the April 1, 2012, issue of Genes & Development, Simon and colleagues (pp.
651-656) demonstrated that the disruption of Ezh2 in mice is sufficient to cause 
T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Moreover, in concert with concurrent
studies, the authors revealed that similar mechanisms are involved in human
T-ALL. These data contrast with previous findings showing that increased EZH2
activity promotes cancer.

PMCID: PMC3337450
PMID: 22508723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 15;72(12):3091-104. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3546. Epub
2012 Apr 13.

Polycomb protein EZH2 regulates tumor invasion via the transcriptional repression
of the metastasis suppressor RKIP in breast and prostate cancer.

Ren G(1), Baritaki S, Marathe H, Feng J, Park S, Beach S, Bazeley PS, Beshir AB, 
Fenteany G, Mehra R, Daignault S, Al-Mulla F, Keller E, Bonavida B, de la Serna
I, Yeung KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cancer Biology, College of Medicine, Health
Science Campus, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.

Epigenetic modifications such as histone methylation play an important role in
human cancer metastasis. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), which encodes the
histone methyltransferase component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), 
is overexpressed widely in breast and prostate cancers and epigenetically
silences tumor suppressor genes. Expression levels of the novel tumor and
metastasis suppressor Raf-1 kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP) have been shown to
correlate negatively with those of EZH2 in breast and prostate cell lines as well
as in clinical cancer tissues. Here, we show that the RKIP/EZH2 ratio
significantly decreases with the severity of disease and is negatively associated
with relapse-free survival in breast cancer. Using a combination of loss- and
gain-of-function approaches, we found that EZH2 negatively regulated RKIP
transcription through repression-associated histone modifications. Direct
recruitment of EZH2 and suppressor of zeste 12 (Suz12) to the proximal E-boxes of
the RKIP promoter was accompanied by H3-K27-me3 and H3-K9-me3 modifications. The 
repressing activity of EZH2 on RKIP expression was dependent on histone
deacetylase promoter recruitment and was negatively regulated upstream by
miR-101. Together, our findings indicate that EZH2 accelerates cancer cell
invasion, in part, via RKIP inhibition. These data also implicate EZH2 in the
regulation of RKIP transcription, suggesting a potential mechanism by which EZH2 
promotes tumor progression and metastasis.

PMID: 22505648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Apr;10(4):546-57. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0605.

Environmental estrogens differentially engage the histone methyltransferase EZH2 
to increase risk of uterine tumorigenesis.

Greathouse KL(1), Bredfeldt T, Everitt JI, Lin K, Berry T, Kannan K, Mittelstadt 
ML, Ho SM, Walker CL.

Author information: 
(1)Science Park Research Division, Department of Carcinogenesis, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas, USA.

Environmental exposures during sensitive windows of development can reprogram
normal physiologic responses and alter disease susceptibility later in life in a 
process known as developmental reprogramming. For example, exposure to the
xenoestrogen diethylstilbestrol during reproductive tract development can
reprogram estrogen-responsive gene expression in the myometrium, resulting in
hyperresponsiveness to hormone in the adult uterus and promotion of
hormone-dependent uterine leiomyoma. We show here that the environmental
estrogens genistein, a soy phytoestrogen, and the plasticizer bisphenol A, differ
in their pattern of developmental reprogramming and promotion of tumorigenesis
(leiomyomas) in the uterus. Whereas both genistein and bisphenol A induce genomic
estrogen receptor (ER) signaling in the developing uterus, only genistein induced
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT nongenomic ER signaling to the histone
methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). As a result, this
pregenomic signaling phosphorylates and represses EZH2 and reduces levels of
H3K27me3 repressive mark in chromatin. Furthermore, only genistein caused
estrogen-responsive genes in the adult myometrium to become hyperresponsive to
hormone; estrogen-responsive genes were repressed in bisphenol A-exposed uteri.
Importantly, this pattern of EZH2 engagement to decrease versus increase H3K27
methylation correlated with the effect of these xenoestrogens on tumorigenesis.
Developmental reprogramming by genistein promoted development of uterine
leiomyomas, increasing tumor incidence and multiplicity, whereas bisphenol A did 
not. These data show that environmental estrogens have distinct nongenomic
effects in the developing uterus that determines their ability to engage the
epigenetic regulator EZH2, decrease levels of the repressive epigenetic histone
H3K27 methyl mark in chromatin during developmental reprogramming, and promote
uterine tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3879949
PMID: 22504913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Leukemia. 2012 Sep;26(9):2027-31. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.86. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Spliceosome and other novel mutations in chronic lymphocytic leukemia and myeloid
malignancies.

Damm F(1), Nguyen-Khac F, Fontenay M, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Spliceosome mutations represent a new generation of acquired genetic alterations 
that affect both myeloid and lymphoid malignancies. A substantial proportion of
patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) or chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) harbor such mutations, which are often missense in type. Genotype-phenotype
associations have been demonstrated for one of these mutations, SF3B1, with ring 
sideroblasts in MDS and 11q22 deletions in CLL. Spliceosome mutations might
result in defective spliceosome assembly, deregulated global mRNA splicing,
nuclear-cytoplasm export and altered expression of multiple genes. Such mutations
are infrequent in other lymphomas, which instead display a separate group of
novel mutations involving genes whose products are believed to affect histone
acetylation and methylation and chromatin structure (for example, EZH2 and MLL2).
On the other hand, some mutations (for example, NOTCH1) occur in both CLL and
other immature and mature lymphoid malignancies. In the current review, we
discuss potential mechanisms of cell transformation associated with spliceosome
mutations, touch upon the increasing evidence regarding the clonal involvement of
hematopoietic stem cells in some cases of otherwise mature lymphoid disorders and
summarize recent information on recently described mutations in lymphomas.

PMID: 22484420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cell Metab. 2012 Apr 4;15(4):505-17. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.03.008.

Yin Yang 1 deficiency in skeletal muscle protects against rapamycin-induced
diabetic-like symptoms through activation of insulin/IGF signaling.

Blättler SM(1), Cunningham JT, Verdeguer F, Chim H, Haas W, Liu H, Romanino K,
Rüegg MA, Gygi SP, Shi Y, Puigserver P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA.

Rapamycin and its derivatives are mTOR inhibitors used in tissue transplantation 
and cancer therapy. A percentage of patients treated with these inhibitors
develop diabetic-like symptoms, but the molecular mechanisms are unknown. We show
here that chronic rapamycin treatment in mice led to insulin resistance with
suppression of insulin/IGF signaling and genes associated within this pathway,
such as Igf1-2, Irs1-2, and Akt1-3. Importantly, skeletal muscle-specific YY1
knockout mice were protected from rapamycin-induced diabetic-like symptoms. This 
protection was caused by hyperactivation of insulin/IGF signaling with increased 
gene expression in this cascade that, in contrast to wild-type mice, was not
suppressed by rapamycin. Mechanistically, rapamycin induced YY1 dephosphorylation
and recruitment to promoters of insulin/IGF genes, which promoted interaction
with the polycomb protein-2 corepressor. This was associated with H3K27
trimethylation leading to decreased gene expression and insulin signaling. These 
results have implications for rapamycin action in human diseases and biological
processes such as longevity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3324784
PMID: 22482732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Expert Rev Hematol. 2012 Apr;5(2):177-85. doi: 10.1586/ehm.12.5.

The role of histone methyltransferase EZH2 in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Xu F(1), Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, the Sixth People's Hospital affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

Previous epigenetics research in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) mainly focused
on the DNA methylation of tumor suppressor genes. Recent studies reported that
around 6% of MDS patients have several EZH2 mutations including missense,
frameshift and truncated mutations. Histone methyltransferase EZH2 plays a
critical role in epigenetic regulation as a bridge between histone
methylation/deacetylation and DNA methylation. EZH2 is frequently overexpressed
and considered to be an oncogene in cancers; nevertheless, EZH2 is considered as 
a candidate tumor suppressor gene in MDS due to EZH2 mutations associated with
poor survival. Many questions still need further discussion. Moreover,
3-deazaneplanocin can reduce EZH2 levels and H3K27 trimethylation, and
synergistic effects are seen in combination with DNA demethylation agents or
histone deacetylation inhibitors. All of the above give us more chances to
improve epigenetic therapy in MDS. Therefore, the molecular mechanisms of EZH2 in
tumorigenesis and the role of EZH2 in MDS are studied.

PMID: 22475286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Leuk Res. 2012 Aug;36(8):1049-54. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.03.001. Epub 2012
Apr 1.

Synergistic antileukemic action of a combination of inhibitors of DNA methylation
and histone methylation.

Momparler RL(1), Idaghdour Y, Marquez VE, Momparler LF.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pharmacologie, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada. richard.l.momparler@umontreal.ca

DNA methylation and histone methylation are both involved in epigenetic
regulation of gene expression and their dysregulation can play an important role 
in leukemogenesis. Aberrant DNA methylation has been reported to silence the
expression of tumor suppressor genes in leukemia. Overexpression of the histone
methyltransferase, EZH2, a subunit of the polycomb group repressive complex 2
(PRC2), was observed to promote oncogenesis. This is due to aberrant gene
silencing by the trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) by EZH2. Since
both these epigenetic silencing events are reversible, they are interesting
targets for chemotherapeutic intervention by using an inhibitor of DNA
methylation, such as 5-aza-2'-deoxcytidine (5-AZA-CdR), and 3-deazaneplanocin-A
(DZNep), an inhibitor of the EZH2. Human HL-60 and murine L1210 leukemic cells
exposed in vitro to 5-AZA-CdR and DZNep in combination showed a synergistic loss 
of clonogenicity in a colony assay as compared to each agent alone. This positive
chemotherapeutic interaction was also observed in mice with L1210 leukemia.
Quantitative PCR showed that the combination also produced a remarkable
synergistic activation of the tumor suppressor genes, CDKN1A and FBXO32.
Microarray analysis showed that 5-AZA-CdR plus DZNep produced a synergistic
activation of >150 genes. Our results indicate that 5-AZA-CdR plus DZNep can
reactivate target genes that are silenced by two distinct epigenetic mechanisms
leading to a loss of the proliferative potential of leukemic cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22472464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Oncogene. 2013 Feb 14;32(7):930-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.110. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

The Polycomb complex PRC2 supports aberrant self-renewal in a mouse model of
MLL-AF9;Nras(G12D) acute myeloid leukemia.

Shi J(1), Wang E, Zuber J, Rappaport A, Taylor M, Johns C, Lowe SW, Vakoc CR.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

The Trithorax and Polycomb groups of chromatin regulators are critical for
cell-lineage specification during normal development; functions that often become
deregulated during tumorigenesis. As an example, oncogenic fusions of the
Trithorax-related protein mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) can initiate aggressive
leukemias by altering the transcriptional circuitry governing hematopoietic cell 
differentiation, a process that requires multiple epigenetic pathways to
implement. Here we used shRNA screening to identify chromatin regulators uniquely
required in a mouse model of MLL-fusion acute myeloid leukemia, which revealed a 
role for the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in maintenance of this disease.
shRNA-mediated suppression of PRC2 subunits Eed, Suz12 or Ezh1/Ezh2 led to
proliferation arrest and differentiation of leukemia cells, with a minimal impact
on growth of several non-transformed hematopoietic cell lines. The requirement
for PRC2 in leukemia is partly because of its role in direct transcriptional
repression of genes that limit the self-renewal potential of hematopoietic cells,
including Cdkn2a. In addition to implicating a role for PRC2 in the pathogenesis 
of MLL-fusion leukemia, our results suggest, more generally, that Trithorax and
Polycomb group proteins can cooperate with one another to maintain aberrant
lineage programs in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4102143
PMID: 22469984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Cancer Genet. 2012 Mar;205(3):113-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.01.002.

MicroRNA-26a regulates tumorigenic properties of EZH2 in human lung carcinoma
cells.

Dang X(1), Ma A, Yang L, Hu H, Zhu B, Shang D, Chen T, Luo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiration, The First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. dxming112@163.com

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of 21-23 nucleotide RNA molecules that play
critical roles in the regulation of various cancers, including human lung cancer.
Among them, miR-26a has been identified as a tumor-related regulator in several
cancers, but its pathophysiologic properties and correlation with the development
of human lung cancer remain unclear. In this study, it was determined that
miR-26a expression is clearly down-regulated in human lung cancer tissues
relative to normal tissues. Meanwhile, the overexpression of miR-26a in the A549 
human lung cancer cell line dramatically inhibited cell proliferation, blocked
G1/S phase transition, induced apoptosis, and inhibited cell metastasis and
invasion in vitro. In contrast, a miR-26a inhibitor was used to transfect A549
cells, and the inhibition of endogenous miR-26a promoted cell metastasis and
invasion. In addition, miR-26a expression inhibited the expression of enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and transactivated downstream target genes, including
disabled homolog 2 (Drosophila) interacting protein gene (DAB2IP) and human
Runt-related transcription factor 3 (RUNX3), which suggests that EZH2 is a
potential target of miR-26a as previously reported. In conclusion, miR-26a plays 
an important role as an anti-oncogene in the molecular mechanism of human lung
cancer and could potentially be used for the treatment of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22469510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Exp Mol Pathol. 2012 Jun;92(3):318-26. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Mallory-Denk bodies form when EZH2/H3K27me3 fails to methylate DNA in the nuclei 
of human and mice liver cells.

French BA(1), Oliva J, Bardag-Gorce F, Li J, Zhong J, Buslon V, French SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA 90509, USA. 
sfrench@labiomed.org

EZH2/H3K27me3 and polycomb group complex (PcG) play a major role in regulating
global gene expression including tumor suppressor genes. EZH2 is linked to cell
cycle regulated EZH2 phosphorylation by CDK1, a mitotic kinase which increases in
arrested mitosis compared to S phase. CDK1 phosphorylation of EZH2 accelerates
the degradation of pEZH2. Phospho-EZH2 is subjected to ubiquitination. The
half-like of pEZH2 is shorter when compared to total EZH2. In the present study, 
pEZH2 was found concentrated together with ubiquitin in the Mallory-Denk bodies
(MDB) that were formed in hepatocytes in the livers of drug primed mice refed DDC
and humans with alcoholic hepatitis or hepatocellular carcinoma. The cells that
formed MDBs in the mice livers studied were associated with a growth advantage
and a high proliferative index. However, the livers from patients with alcoholic 
hepatitis showed evidence of cell cycle arrest where PCNA, cyclin D1 and p27
positive nuclei were numerous but Ki-67 positive nuclei were scarce. It is
concluded that MDB formation is linked to the cell cycle and global gene
expression (i.e. loss of gene silencing) through its association with the
regulation of the polycomb group PRC2/EZH2/H3K27me3 complex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3354044
PMID: 22465358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Horm Mol Biol Clin Investig. 2012 Apr 1;9(1):3-10. doi: 10.1515/hmbci-2011-0136.

Molecular basis of pregnancy-induced breast cancer prevention.

Russo J, Russo IH.

Reduction in breast cancer risk is associated with elevated circulating levels of
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) during the first trimester of gestation. The
knowledge that hCG also modifies the genomic signature of breast epithelial
cells, from highly susceptible to refractory, to undergo neoplastic
transformation, and also exerts both preventive and therapeutic effects on
chemically induced mammary cancer, lead us to select this hormone for inducing
chromatin remodeling in breast epithelial cells as a surrogate end point of
complete differentiation and cancer prevention. We have found that chromatin
remodeling is the driving force of the differences between the nulliparous and
parous breast. In the parous breast, the epithelial cells have a condensed
chromatin and increased reactivity with anti-H3K9me2 [di-methyl histone 3 (H3)
(Lysine 9)] and H3K27me3 antibodies. This is accompanied by upregulation of
noncoding RNA (ncRNA) elements including X2-inactive specific transcript (XIST)
and chromatin remodeling genes, such as chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein
2 (CHD2) and the chromobox homolog 3 (CBX3), whose products are required for
controlling recruitment of protein/protein or DNA/protein interactions Another
important gene upregulated in the parous breast epithelial cells is the
histone-lysine N-methyltransferase or enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a
member of the polycomb group (PcG) forming multimeric protein complexes that
maintains the transcriptional repressive state of genes over successive cell
generations. The fact that recent studies indicate that ncRNAs recruit PcG
complexes to the locus of transcription or to sites located elsewhere in the
genome cause us to postulate that the increased chromatin condensation in the
parous breast has been initiated by ncRNAs, a postulate supported by the observed
upregulation of several ncRNAs that included the XIST. The identification of a
specific genomic signature of pregnancy has uncovered a novel tool that will
serve as a surrogate biomarker for testing new chemopreventive agents and will
significantly advance the field of cancer prevention. The clinical impact of this
work is that it validates in an experimental system the genomic signature of
prevention identified in the human parous breast and establish the bases for the 
use of the hormone hCG in the prevention of breast cancer, an approach that has
not been fully developed until now.

PMID: 25961350  [PubMed]


289. J Pathol. 2012 Sep;228(1):31-44. doi: 10.1002/path.4032. Epub 2012 May 23.

Lack of microRNA-101 causes E-cadherin functional deregulation through EZH2
up-regulation in intestinal gastric cancer.

Carvalho J(1), van Grieken NC, Pereira PM, Sousa S, Tijssen M, Buffart TE,
Diosdado B, Grabsch H, Santos MA, Meijer G, Seruca R, Carvalho B, Oliveira C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto
(IPATIMUP), Portugal; Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Portugal.

E-cadherin expression disruption is commonly observed in metastatic epithelial
cancers and is a crucial step in gastric cancer (GC) initiation and progression. 
As aberrant expression of microRNAs often perturb the normal expression/function 
of pivotal cancer-related genes, we characterized and dissected a pathway that
causes E-cadherin dysfunction via loss of microRNA-101 and up-regulation of EZH2 
expression in GC. MicroRNA microarray expression profiling and array-CGH were
used to reinforce miR-101 involvement in GC. By using quantitative real-time PCR 
and quantitative SNaPshot genomic PCR, we confirmed that miR-101 was
significantly down-regulated in GC (p < 0.0089) in comparison with normal gastric
mucosas and, at least in 65% of the GC cases analysed, this down-regulation was
caused by deletions and/or microdeletions at miR-101 genomic loci. Moreover,
around 40% of cases showing miR-101 down-regulation displayed concomitant EZH2
over-expression (at the RNA and protein levels), which, in turn, was associated
with loss/aberrant expression of E-cadherin. Interestingly, this occurred
preferentially in intestinal-type GCs, retaining allele(s) untargeted by
classical CDH1-inactivating mechanisms. We also demonstrated that miR-101 gain of
function or direct inhibition of EZH2 in Kato III GC cells led to a strong
depletion of endogenous EZH2 and consequent rescue of E-cadherin membranous
localization, mimicking results obtained in clinical GC samples. In conclusion,
we show that deletions and/or microdeletions at both miR-101 genomic loci cause
mature miR-101 down-regulation, subsequent EZH2 over-expression and E-cadherin
dysfunction, specifically in intestinal-type GC.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22450781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33729. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033729. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Loss of let-7 up-regulates EZH2 in prostate cancer consistent with the
acquisition of cancer stem cell signatures that are attenuated by BR-DIM.

Kong D(1), Heath E, Chen W, Cher ML, Powell I, Heilbrun L, Li Y, Ali S, Sethi S, 
Hassan O, Hwang C, Gupta N, Chitale D, Sakr WA, Menon M, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

The emergence of castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) contributes to the
high mortality of patients diagnosed with prostate cancer (PCa), which in part
could be attributed to the existence and the emergence of cancer stem cells
(CSCs). Recent studies have shown that deregulated expression of microRNAs
(miRNAs) contributes to the initiation and progression of PCa. Among several
known miRNAs, let-7 family appears to play a key role in the recurrence and
progression of PCa by regulating CSCs; however, the mechanism by which let-7
family contributes to PCa aggressiveness is unclear. Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 
(EZH2), a putative target of let-7 family, was demonstrated to control stem cell 
function. In this study, we found loss of let-7 family with corresponding
over-expression of EZH2 in human PCa tissue specimens, especially in higher
Gleason grade tumors. Overexpression of let-7 by transfection of let-7 precursors
decreased EZH2 expression and repressed clonogenic ability and sphere-forming
capacity of PCa cells, which was consistent with inhibition of EZH2 3'UTR
luciferase activity. We also found that the treatment of PCa cells with BR-DIM
(formulated DIM: 3,3'-diindolylmethane by Bio Response, Boulder, CO, abbreviated 
as BR-DIM) up-regulated let-7 and down-regulated EZH2 expression, consistent with
inhibition of self-renewal and clonogenic capacity. Moreover, BR-DIM intervention
in our on-going phase II clinical trial in patients prior to radical
prostatectomy showed upregulation of let-7 consistent with down-regulation of
EZH2 expression in PCa tissue specimens after BR-DIM intervention. These results 
suggest that the loss of let-7 mediated increased expression of EZH2 contributes 
to PCa aggressiveness, which could be attenuated by BR-DIM treatment, and thus
BR-DIM is likely to have clinical impact.

PMCID: PMC3307758
PMID: 22442719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1638-44. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.12.004. Epub
2012 Mar 19.

Clinical and biological relevance of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in
triple-negative breast cancer.

Hussein YR(1), Sood AK, Bandyopadhyay S, Albashiti B, Semaan A, Nahleh Z, Roh J, 
Han HD, Lopez-Berestein G, Ali-Fehmi R.

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The polycomb group protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2, is a transcriptional
repressor involved in cell cycle regulation and has been linked to aggressive
breast cancer. We examined the clinical and biological significance of enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 expression in triple-negative breast cancers. Tissue
microarrays were constructed with invasive breast cancer cases and stained with
the enhancer of zeste homolog 2, cytokeratin 5/6, epidermal growth factor
receptor 1, and p53. The expression of these markers was correlated with
clinicopathologic variables and patients' outcome. Furthermore, in vivo enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2 gene silencing was achieved using small interfering RNA
incorporated into chitosan nanoparticles. Of 261 cases of invasive breast cancer,
high expression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 was detected in 87 (33%)
cases, and it was strongly associated with a triple-negative breast cancer
phenotype (P < .001) compared with all other non-triple-negative breast cancers. 
Furthermore, high enhancer of zeste homolog 2 was significantly associated with
high histologic grade (P = .01), estrogen receptor negativity (P < .001),
progesterone receptor negativity (P < .001), epidermal growth factor receptor
positivity (P = .04), and high p53 expression (P < .001). Survival analysis
demonstrated that patients with high enhancer of zeste homolog 2 had a poorer
overall survival compared with those with low enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (P =
.03), and it retained its significance as an independent prognostic factor (P =
.02). In addition, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 gene silencing resulted in a
significant reduction in tumor growth (P < .01) in the orthotopic MB-231 mouse
model of breast carcinoma. Our results show that high enhancer of zeste homolog 2
expression is significantly associated with triple-negative breast cancer and
decreased survival. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 may represent a potential
therapeutic target for this aggressive disease, which warrants further
investigation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4194857
PMID: 22436627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 1;26(7):651-6. doi: 10.1101/gad.186411.111. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

A key role for EZH2 and associated genes in mouse and human adult T-cell acute
leukemia.

Simon C(1), Chagraoui J, Krosl J, Gendron P, Wilhelm B, Lemieux S, Boucher G,
Chagnon P, Drouin S, Lambert R, Rondeau C, Bilodeau A, Lavallée S, Sauvageau M,
Hébert J, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)The Leucegene Group, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer,
University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2012 Apr 15;26(8):751-5.

In this study, we show the high frequency of spontaneous <U+03B3>d T-cell leukemia
(T-ALL) occurrence in mice with biallelic deletion of enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(Ezh2). Tumor cells show little residual H3K27 trimethylation marks compared with
controls. EZH2 is a component of the PRC2 Polycomb group protein complex, which
is associated with DNA methyltransferases. Using next-generation sequencing, we
identify alteration in gene expression levels of EZH2 and acquired mutations in
PRC2-associated genes (DNMT3A and JARID2) in human adult T-ALL. Together, these
studies document that deregulation of EZH2 and associated genes leads to the
development of mouse, and likely human, T-ALL.

PMCID: PMC3323876
PMID: 22431509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 May 1;260(3):250-9. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2012.03.002.
Epub 2012 Mar 9.

Sodium arsenite represses the expression of myogenin in C2C12 mouse myoblast
cells through histone modifications and altered expression of Ezh2, Glp, and
Igf-1.

Hong GM(1), Bain LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, Department of Biological Sciences, 
Clemson University, 132 Long Hall, Clemson, SC 29634, USA.

Arsenic is a toxicant commonly found in water systems and chronic exposure can
result in adverse developmental effects including increased neonatal death,
stillbirths, and miscarriages, low birth weight, and altered locomotor activity. 
Previous studies indicate that 20 nM sodium arsenite exposure to C2C12 mouse
myocyte cells delayed myoblast differentiation due to reduced myogenin
expression, the transcription factor that differentiates myoblasts into myotubes.
In this study, several mechanisms by which arsenic could alter myogenin
expression were examined. Exposing differentiating C2C12 cells to 20 nM arsenic
increased H3K9 dimethylation (H3K9me2) and H3K9 trimethylation (H3K9me3) by
3-fold near the transcription start site of myogenin, which is indicative of
increased repressive marks, and reduced H3K9 acetylation (H3K9Ac) by 0.5-fold,
indicative of reduced permissive marks. Protein expression of Glp or Ehmt1, a
H3-K9 methyltransferase, was also increased by 1.6-fold in arsenic-exposed cells.
In addition to the altered histone remodeling status on the myogenin promoter,
protein and mRNA levels of Igf-1, a myogenic growth factor, were significantly
repressed by arsenic exposure. Moreover, a 2-fold induction of Ezh2 expression,
and an increased recruitment of Ezh2 (3.3-fold) and Dnmt3a (~2-fold) to the
myogenin promoter at the transcription start site (-40 to +42), were detected in 
the arsenic-treated cells. Together, we conclude that the repressed myogenin
expression in arsenic-exposed C2C12 cells was likely due to a combination of
reduced expression of Igf-1, enhanced nuclear expression and promoter recruitment
of Ezh2, and altered histone remodeling status on myogenin promoter (-40 to +42).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3335964
PMID: 22426358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032927. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Scalable in situ hybridization on tissue arrays for validation of novel cancer
and tissue-specific biomarkers.

Kiflemariam S(1), Andersson S, Asplund A, Pontén F, Sjöblom T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Tissue localization of gene expression is increasingly important for accurate
interpretation of large scale datasets from expression and mutational analyses.
To this end, we have (1) developed a robust and scalable procedure for generation
of mRNA hybridization probes, providing >95% first-pass success rate in probe
generation to any human target gene and (2) adopted an automated staining
procedure for analyses of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and tissue
microarrays. The in situ mRNA and protein expression patterns for genes with
known as well as unknown tissue expression patterns were analyzed in normal and
malignant tissues to assess procedure specificity and whether in situ
hybridization can be used for validating novel antibodies. We demonstrate
concordance between in situ transcript and protein expression patterns of the
well-known pathology biomarkers KRT17, CHGA, MKI67, PECAM1 and VIL1, and provide 
independent validation for novel antibodies to the biomarkers BRD1, EZH2, JUP and
SATB2. The present study provides a foundation for comprehensive in situ gene set
or transcriptome analyses of human normal and tumor tissues.

PMCID: PMC3297615
PMID: 22412953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 May;97(5):E710-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-3068. Epub
2012 Mar 7.

Down-regulation of the miR-25 and miR-30d contributes to the development of
anaplastic thyroid carcinoma targeting the polycomb protein EZH2.

Esposito F(1), Tornincasa M, Pallante P, Federico A, Borbone E, Pierantoni GM,
Fusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale del Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare,
Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia di Napoli, Università degli Studi di Napoli
Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

CONTEXT: We have previously demonstrated that a set of micro-RNA (miRNA) is
significantly down-regulated in anaplastic thyroid carcinomas with respect to
normal thyroid tissues and to differentiated thyroid carcinomas.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to evaluate the role of two of these down-regulated 
miRNA, miR-25 and miR-30d, in thyroid carcinogenesis.
DESIGN: miR-25 and miR-30d expression was restored in the ACT-1, 8505c, and FRO
anaplastic thyroid cell lines, and their effects on cell proliferation,
migration, and target expression were evaluated.
RESULTS: We report that miR-25 and miR-30d target the polycomb protein enhancer
of zeste 2 (EZH2) that has oncogenic activity and is drastically up-regulated in 
anaplastic thyroid carcinomas but not in the differentiated ones. Ectopic
expression of miR-25 and miR-30d inhibited proliferation and colony formation of 
anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cells by inducing G2/M-phase cell-cycle arrest.
Finally, we found an inverse correlation between the expression of these miRNA
and the EZH2 protein levels in anaplastic thyroid carcinomas, suggesting a
critical role of these miRNA in regulating EZH2 expression also in vivo.
CONCLUSION: The down-regulation of miR-25 and miR-30d could contribute to the
process of thyroid cancer progression, leading to the development of anaplastic
carcinomas targeting EZH2 mRNA.

PMID: 22399519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 27;109(13):5028-33. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1202258109. Epub 2012 Mar 6.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 is required for MLL-AF9 leukemia.

Neff T(1), Sinha AU, Kluk MJ, Zhu N, Khattab MH, Stein L, Xie H, Orkin SH,
Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber/Children's Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A growing body of data suggests the importance of epigenetic mechanisms in
cancer. Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) has been implicated in self-renewal 
and cancer progression, and its components are overexpressed in many cancers.
However, its role in cancer development and progression remains unclear. We used 
conditional alleles for the PRC2 components enhancer of zeste 2 (Ezh2) and
embryonic ectoderm development (Eed) to characterize the role of PRC2 function in
leukemia development and progression. Compared with wild-type leukemia, Ezh2-null
MLL-AF9-mediated acute myeloid leukemia (AML) failed to accelerate upon secondary
transplantation. However, Ezh2-null leukemias maintained self-renewal up to the
third round of transplantation, indicating that Ezh2 is not strictly required for
MLL-AF9 AML, but plays a role in leukemia progression. Genome-wide analyses of
PRC2-mediated trimethylation of histone 3 demonstrated locus-specific persistence
of H3K27me3 despite inactivation of Ezh2, suggesting partial compensation by
Ezh1. In contrast, inactivation of the essential PRC2 gene, Eed, led to complete 
ablation of PRC2 function, which was incompatible with leukemia growth. Gene
expression array analyses indicated more profound gene expression changes in
Eed-null compared with Ezh2-null leukemic cells, including down-regulation of Myc
target genes and up-regulation of PRC2 targets. Manipulating PRC2 function may be
of therapeutic benefit in AML.

PMCID: PMC3324004
PMID: 22396593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Genes Dev. 2012 Mar 1;26(5):439-44. doi: 10.1101/gad.181800.111.

EZH2 couples pancreatic regeneration to neoplastic progression.

Mallen-St Clair J(1), Soydaner-Azeloglu R, Lee KE, Taylor L, Livanos A,
Pylayeva-Gupta Y, Miller G, Margueron R, Reinberg D, Bar-Sagi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10016, USA.

Although the polycomb group protein Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is well
recognized for its role as a key regulator of cell differentiation, its
involvement in tissue regeneration is largely unknown. Here we show that EZH2 is 
up-regulated following cerulein-induced pancreatic injury and is required for
tissue repair by promoting the regenerative proliferation of progenitor cells.
Loss of EZH2 results in impaired pancreatic regeneration and accelerates
KRas(G12D)-driven neoplasia. Our findings implicate EZH2 in constraining
neoplastic progression through homeostatic mechanisms that control pancreatic
regeneration and provide insights into the documented link between chronic
pancreatic injury and an increased risk for pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3305982
PMID: 22391448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(19):2713-9.

Moving beyond VEGF for anti-angiogenesis strategies in gynecologic cancer.

Thanapprapasr D(1), Hu W, Sood AK, Coleman RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, 1155 Herman Pressler Dr. CPB 6.3271, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Gynecologic cancer is a major burden in both developed and developing countries. 
Almost a half million deaths from gynecologic cancer are reported each year.
Understanding the molecular biology of cancer is a principle resource leading to 
the identification of new potential therapeutic targets, which may be parlayed
into novel therapeutic options in gynecologic cancer. Focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase, which plays a pivotal role in many aspects of 
malignant growth including cancer cell survival, migration, invasion,
angiogenesis and metastasis. Various human cancer tissues have demonstrated high 
expression of FAK or activated FAK, which has been correlated with survival of
cancer patients. Among gynecologic cancers, reports have emerged demonstrating
that FAK is involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian, endometrial, and cervical
cancers. In addition, the polycomb group protein enhancer of Zeste homologue 2
(EZH2), Dll4/notch and EphA2 has also emerged as important regulators of
endothelial cell biology and angiogenesis. Herein, we review the role of these
new targets in tumor angiogenesis and the rationale for further clinical
development.

PMCID: PMC3740204
PMID: 22390757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Hematol Oncol. 2012 Mar 5;5:4. doi: 10.1186/1756-8722-5-4.

Cytogenetic and molecular predictors of response in patients with myeloid
malignancies without del[5q] treated with lenalidomide.

Sugimoto Y(1), Sekeres MA, Makishima H, Traina F, Visconte V, Jankowska A, Jerez 
A, Szpurka H, O'Keefe CL, Guinta K, Afable M, Tiu R, McGraw KL, List AF,
Maciejewski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Cleveland Clinic
Taussig Cancer Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND: While lenalidomide (LEN) shows high efficacy in myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) with del[5q], responses can be also seen in patients presenting
without del[5q]. We hypothesized that improved detection of chromosomal
abnormalities with new karyotyping tools may better predict response to LEN.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We have studied clinical, molecular and cytogenetic features 
of 42 patients with MDS, myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), MDS/MPN overlap
syndromes and secondary acute myeloid leukemia (sAML) without del[5q] by
metaphase cytogenetics (MC) who underwent therapy with LEN.
RESULTS: Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or single nucleotide
polymorphism array (SNP-A)-based karyotyping marginally increased the diagnostic 
yield over MC, detecting 2/42 (4.8%) additional cases with del[5q], one of whom
were responded to LEN. Responses were more often observed in patients with a
normal karyotype by MC (60% vs abnormal MC; 17%, p = .08) and those with gain of 
chromosome 8 material by either of all 3 karyotyping methods (83% vs all other
chromosomal abnormalities; 44% p = .11). However, 5 out of those 6 patients
received combined LEN/AZA therapy and it may also suggest those with gain of
chromosome 8 material respond well to AZA. The addition of FISH or SNP-A did not 
improve the predictive value of normal cytogenetics by MC. Mutational analysis of
TET2, UTX, CBL, EZH2, ASXL1, TP53, RAS, IDH1/2, and DNMT-3A was performed on 21
of 41 patients, and revealed 13 mutations in 11 patients, but did not show any
molecular markers of responsiveness to LEN.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal karyotype and gain of chromosome 8 material was predictive of
response to LEN in non-del[5q] patients with myeloid malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3323440
PMID: 22390313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nature. 2012 Mar 4;483(7391):598-602. doi: 10.1038/nature10953.

Chromatin-modifying enzymes as modulators of reprogramming.

Onder TT(1), Kara N, Cherry A, Sinha AU, Zhu N, Bernt KM, Cahan P, Marcarci BO,
Unternaehrer J, Gupta PB, Lander ES, Armstrong SA, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Children's Hospital Boston
and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) by somatic cell
reprogramming involves global epigenetic remodelling. Whereas several proteins
are known to regulate chromatin marks associated with the distinct epigenetic
states of cells before and after reprogramming, the role of specific
chromatin-modifying enzymes in reprogramming remains to be determined. To address
how chromatin-modifying proteins influence reprogramming, we used short hairpin
RNAs (shRNAs) to target genes in DNA and histone methylation pathways, and
identified positive and negative modulators of iPSC generation. Whereas
inhibition of the core components of the polycomb repressive complex 1 and 2,
including the histone 3 lysine 27 methyltransferase EZH2, reduced reprogramming
efficiency, suppression of SUV39H1, YY1 and DOT1L enhanced reprogramming.
Specifically, inhibition of the H3K79 histone methyltransferase DOT1L by shRNA or
a small molecule accelerated reprogramming, significantly increased the yield of 
iPSC colonies, and substituted for KLF4 and c-Myc (also known as MYC). Inhibition
of DOT1L early in the reprogramming process is associated with a marked increase 
in two alternative factors, NANOG and LIN28, which play essential functional
roles in the enhancement of reprogramming. Genome-wide analysis of H3K79me2
distribution revealed that fibroblast-specific genes associated with the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition lose H3K79me2 in the initial phases of
reprogramming. DOT1L inhibition facilitates the loss of this mark from genes that
are fated to be repressed in the pluripotent state. These findings implicate
specific chromatin-modifying enzymes as barriers to or facilitators of
reprogramming, and demonstrate how modulation of chromatin-modifying enzymes can 
be exploited to more efficiently generate iPSCs with fewer exogenous
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3501145
PMID: 22388813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Ann Oncol. 2012 May;23(5):1370-1. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds031. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

EZH2 polymorphism and benefit from bevacizumab in colorectal cancer: another
piece to the puzzle.

Fornaro L, Crea F, Masi G, Paolicchi E, Loupakis F, Graziano F, Salvatore L,
Ronzoni M, Ricci V, Cremolini C, Schirripa M, Danesi R, Falcone A.

PMID: 22383679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Hepatology. 2012 Aug;56(2):622-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.25679. Epub 2012 Jun 11.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 epigenetically silences multiple tumor suppressor
microRNAs to promote liver cancer metastasis.

Au SL(1), Wong CC, Lee JM, Fan DN, Tsang FH, Ng IO, Wong CM.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Liver Research and Department of Pathology, Li Ka
Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Epigenetic alterations and microRNA (miRNA) deregulation are common in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) tri-methylating 
enzyme, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) mediates epigenetic silencing of gene 
expression and is frequently up-regulated in human cancers. In this study we
aimed to delineate the implications of EZH2 up-regulation in miRNA deregulation
and HCC metastasis. Expressions of a total of 90 epigenetic regulators were first
determined in 38 pairs of primary HCCs and their corresponding nontumorous
livers. We identified EZH2 and its associated polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) as one of the most significantly deregulated epigenetic regulators in
primary HCC samples. Up-regulation of EZH2 was next confirmed in 69.5% (41/59) of
primary HCCs. Clinicopathologically, EZH2 up-regulation was associated with HCC
progression and multiple HCC metastatic features, including venous invasion (P = 
0.043), direct liver invasion (P = 0.014), and absence of tumor encapsulation (P 
= 0.043). We further demonstrated that knockdown of EZH2 in HCC cell lines
reduced the global levels of tri-methylated H3K27, and suppressed HCC motility in
vitro and pulmonary metastasis in a nude mouse model. By interrogating the miRNA 
expression profile in EZH2-knockdown cell lines and primary HCC samples, we
identified a subset of miRNA that was epigenetically suppressed by EZH2 in human 
HCC. These included well-characterized tumor-suppressor miRNAs, such as
miR-139-5p, miR-125b, miR-101, let-7c, and miR-200b. Pathway enrichment analysis 
revealed a common regulatory role of these EZH2-silenced miRNAs in modulating
cell motility and metastasis-related pathways. Our findings suggest that EZH2
exerts its prometastatic function by way of epigenetic silencing of multiple
tumor suppressor miRNAs.CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that EZH2
epigenetically silenced multiple miRNAs that negatively regulate HCC metastasis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22370893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Asian J Androl. 2012 May;14(3):436-50. doi: 10.1038/aja.2011.160. Epub 2012 Feb
27.

Specific changes in the expression of imprinted genes in prostate
cancer--implications for cancer progression and epigenetic regulation.

Ribarska T(1), Bastian KM, Koch A, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany

Epigenetic dysregulation comprising DNA hypermethylation and hypomethylation,
enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) overexpression and altered patterns of
histone modifications is associated with the progression of prostate cancer. DNA 
methylation, EZH2 and histone modifications also ensure the parental-specific
monoallelic expression of at least 62 imprinted genes. Although it is therefore
tempting to speculate that epigenetic dysregulation may extend to imprinted
genes, expression changes in cancerous prostates are only well documented for
insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2). A literature and database survey on
imprinted genes in prostate cancer suggests that the expression of most imprinted
genes remains unchanged despite global disturbances in epigenetic mechanisms.
Instead, selective genetic and epigenetic changes appear to lead to the
inactivation of a sub-network of imprinted genes, which might function in the
prostate to limit cell growth induced via the PI3K/Akt pathway, modulate androgen
responses and regulate differentiation. Whereas dysregulation of IGF2 may
constitute an early change in prostate carcinogenesis, inactivation of this
imprinted gene network is rather associated with cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3720155
PMID: 22367183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Biomaterials. 2012 May;33(14):3693-709. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.01.016. 
Epub 2012 Feb 21.

Nuclear localization signal-enhanced RNA interference of EZH2 and Oct4 in the
eradication of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma-derived cancer stem cells.

Lo WL(1), Chien Y, Chiou GY, Tseng LM, Hsu HS, Chang YL, Lu KH, Chien CS, Wang
ML, Chen YW, Huang PI, Hu FW, Yu CC, Chu PY, Chiou SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry and Institute of Oral Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taiwan.

Metastasis is the major cause of high mortality in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC), in which HNSCC-derived cancer stem cells (CSCs) may be
involved. Several reports have coupled non-viral gene delivery with RNA
interference (RNAi) to target specific genes in cancer cells. However, the
delivery efficiency of RNAi is limited and remained to be improved. Moreover, the
therapeutic effect of non-viral gene delivery approaches on HNSCC-derived CSCs is
still uncertain. In this study, we found that EZH2 and Oct4 are upregulated in
HNSCC-derived ALDH1+/CD44+ CSC-like cells. Polyurethane-short branch PEI
(PU-PEI)-based administration of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) encoding small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against EZH2 and Oct4 (siEZH2/siOct4) led to partial
anti-cancer capacity and mild suppression of CSC-like properties. By
pre-conjugation of nuclear localization signal (NLS) to siRNA-expressing dsDNA,
the anti-cancer efficacy was enhanced due to elevated nuclear delivery. Notably, 
the NLS-preconjugated siEZH2/siOct4 constructs remarkably repressed
epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation (EMT) and radioresistance in
ALDH1+/CD44+ CSC-like cells, in which Wnt5A and CyclinD1 may be involved
respectively. We furthermore demonstrated that this improved method was capable
of reducing tumor growth and metastasis in vivo. Our findings may provide a
feasible non-viral gene delivery method to eradicate HNSCC-derived CSCs and
improve HNSCC therapy.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22361100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):4752-61. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06768-11. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Epigenetic histone modification of Epstein-Barr virus BZLF1 promoter during
latency and reactivation in Raji cells.

Murata T(1), Kondo Y, Sugimoto A, Kawashima D, Saito S, Isomura H, Kanda T,
Tsurumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Kanokoden,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) predominantly establishes latent infection in B
cells, and the reactivation of the virus from latency is dependent on the
expression of the viral BZLF1 protein. The BZLF1 promoter (Zp) normally exhibits 
only low basal activity but is activated in response to chemical or biological
inducers, such as 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), calcium ionophores,
or histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors. In some cell lines latently infected
with EBV, an HDAC inhibitor alone can induce BZLF1 transcription, while the
treatment does not enhance expression in other cell lines, such as B95-8 or Raji 
cells, suggesting unknown suppressive mechanisms besides histone deacetylation in
those cells. Here, we found the epigenetic modification of the BZLF1 promoter in 
latent Raji cells by histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), H3K9me2/me3,
and H4K20me3. Levels of active markers such as histone acetylation and H3K4me3
were low in latent cells but increased upon reactivation. Treatment with
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), an inhibitor of H3K27me3 and H4K20me3, significantly
enhanced the BZLF1 transcription in Raji cells when in combination with an HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA). The knockdown of Ezh2 or Suv420h1, histone
methyltransferases for H3K27me3 or H4K20me3, respectively, further proved the
suppression of Zp by the methylations. Taken together, the results indicate that 
H3K27 methylation and H4K20 methylation are involved, at least partly, in the
maintenance of latency, and histone acetylation and H3K4 methylation correlate
with the reactivation of the virus in Raji cells.

PMCID: PMC3347330
PMID: 22357272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031597. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Winnowing DNA for rare sequences: highly specific sequence and methylation based 
enrichment.

Thompson JD(1), Shibahara G, Rajan S, Pel J, Marziali A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Rare mutations in cell populations are known to be hallmarks of many diseases and
cancers. Similarly, differential DNA methylation patterns arise in rare cell
populations with diagnostic potential such as fetal cells circulating in maternal
blood. Unfortunately, the frequency of alleles with diagnostic potential,
relative to wild-type background sequence, is often well below the frequency of
errors in currently available methods for sequence analysis, including very high 
throughput DNA sequencing. We demonstrate a DNA preparation and purification
method that through non-linear electrophoretic separation in media containing
oligonucleotide probes, achieves 10,000 fold enrichment of target DNA with single
nucleotide specificity, and 100 fold enrichment of unmodified methylated DNA
differing from the background by the methylation of a single cytosine residue.

PMCID: PMC3280224
PMID: 22355378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Exp Med. 2012 Mar 12;209(3):445-54. doi: 10.1084/jem.20111709. Epub 2012 Feb
20.

Lethal myelofibrosis induced by Bmi1-deficient hematopoietic cells unveils a
tumor suppressor function of the polycomb group genes.

Oguro H(1), Yuan J, Tanaka S, Miyagi S, Mochizuki-Kashio M, Ichikawa H, Yamazaki 
S, Koseki H, Nakauchi H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins form the multiprotein polycomb repressive complexes
(PRC) 1 and 2, and function as transcriptional repressors through histone
modifications. They maintain the proliferative capacity of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells by repressing the transcription of tumor suppressor genes,
namely Ink4a and Arf, and thus have been characterized as oncogenes. However, the
identification of inactivating mutations in the PcG gene, EZH2, unveiled a tumor 
suppressor function in myeloid malignancies, including primary myelofibrosis
(PMF). Here, we show that loss of another PcG gene, Bmi1, causes pathological
hematopoiesis similar to PMF. In a mouse model, loss of Bmi1 in Ink4a-Arf(-/-)
hematopoietic cells induced abnormal megakaryocytopoiesis accompanied by marked
extramedullary hematopoiesis, which eventually resulted in lethal myelofibrosis. 
Absence of Bmi1 caused derepression of a cohort of genes, including Hmga2, which 
is an oncogene overexpressed in PMF. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
revealed that Bmi1 directly represses the transcription of Hmga2. Overexpression 
of Hmga2 in hematopoietic stem cells induced a myeloproliferative state with
enhanced megakaryocytopoiesis in mice, implicating Hmga2 in the development of
pathological hematopoiesis in the absence of Bmi1. Our findings provide the first
genetic evidence of a tumor suppressor function of Bmi1 and uncover the role of
PcG proteins in restricting growth by silencing oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3302226
PMID: 22351929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Chromosoma. 2012 Jun;121(3):221-34. doi: 10.1007/s00412-012-0361-1. Epub 2012 Feb
19.

Inner workings and regulatory inputs that control Polycomb repressive complex 2.

O'Meara MM(1), Simon JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, University of Minnesota,
321 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a conserved multisubunit enzyme that
methylates histone H3 on lysine-27. This chromatin modification is a hallmark of 
target genes transcriptionally silenced by the Polycomb system. At its core, PRC2
activity depends upon the SET domain active site of its catalytic subunit, EZH2, 
as well as critical stimulatory inputs from noncatalytic subunits, especially EED
and SU(Z)12. We review recent progress on this core PRC2 machinery, including key
features of the active site, control mechanisms that operate via EZH2
phosphorylation, and subunit elements and architectures that influence PRC2
function. Among these, we highlight work identifying an EED regulatory site that 
enables PRC2 to bind pre-existing methylated H3-K27 and stimulate enzyme output. 
These advances illuminate basic inner workings of PRC2 and also provide insights 
that could aid design of PRC2 inhibitors. The chromatin landscape that PRC2
encounters in vivo is decorated with many histone modifications that accompany
active transcription, such as H3-K4 methylation. It has long been assumed that
these "active" modifications oppose PRC2 at some level but, until recently,
mechanisms of this antagonistic cross-talk have been elusive. We discuss new
findings that illuminate how H3-K4 and H3-K36 methylation, H3-K27 acetylation,
and H3-S28 phosphorylation each exert a negative impact on PRC2 function. The
emerging picture presents PRC2 as a cooperative multipart machine, intricately
outfitted to sense and respond to the local chromatin environment and other cues.
This PRC2 design ensures flexibility and fine tuning of its fundamental gene
silencing roles in diverse biological contexts.

PMCID: PMC3351537
PMID: 22349693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 6;109(10):3879-84. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121343109. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

Discovery and prioritization of somatic mutations in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) by whole-exome sequencing.

Lohr JG(1), Stojanov P, Lawrence MS, Auclair D, Chapuy B, Sougnez C,
Cruz-Gordillo P, Knoechel B, Asmann YW, Slager SL, Novak AJ, Dogan A, Ansell SM, 
Link BK, Zou L, Gould J, Saksena G, Stransky N, Rangel-Escareño C,
Fernandez-Lopez JC, Hidalgo-Miranda A, Melendez-Zajgla J, Hernández-Lemus E,
Schwarz-Cruz y Celis A, Imaz-Rosshandler I, Ojesina AI, Jung J, Pedamallu CS,
Lander ES, Habermann TM, Cerhan JR, Shipp MA, Getz G, Golub TR.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02412, USA.

To gain insight into the genomic basis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), 
we performed massively parallel whole-exome sequencing of 55 primary tumor
samples from patients with DLBCL and matched normal tissue. We identified
recurrent mutations in genes that are well known to be functionally relevant in
DLBCL, including MYD88, CARD11, EZH2, and CREBBP. We also identified somatic
mutations in genes for which a functional role in DLBCL has not been previously
suspected. These genes include MEF2B, MLL2, BTG1, GNA13, ACTB, P2RY8, PCLO, and
TNFRSF14. Further, we show that BCL2 mutations commonly occur in patients with
BCL2/IgH rearrangements as a result of somatic hypermutation normally occurring
at the IgH locus. The BCL2 point mutations are primarily synonymous, and likely
caused by activation-induced cytidine deaminase-mediated somatic hypermutation,
as shown by comprehensive analysis of enrichment of mutations in WRCY target
motifs. Those nonsynonymous mutations that are observed tend to be found outside 
of the functionally important BH domains of the protein, suggesting that strong
negative selection against BCL2 loss-of-function mutations is at play. Last, by
using an algorithm designed to identify likely functionally relevant but
infrequent mutations, we identify KRAS, BRAF, and NOTCH1 as likely drivers of
DLBCL pathogenesis in some patients. Our data provide an unbiased view of the
landscape of mutations in DLBCL, and this in turn may point toward new
therapeutic strategies for the disease.

PMCID: PMC3309757
PMID: 22343534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 15;31(46):4878-87. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.641. Epub 2012 Feb
13.

The SRA protein UHRF1 promotes epigenetic crosstalks and is involved in prostate 
cancer progression.

Babbio F(1), Pistore C, Curti L, Castiglioni I, Kunderfranco P, Brino L, Oudet P,
Seiler R, Thalman GN, Roggero E, Sarti M, Pinton S, Mello-Grand M, Chiorino G,
Catapano CV, Carbone GM, Bonapace IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Functional Biology, University of Insubria, Via A
da Giussano 12, Busto Arsizio, Italy.

Epigenetic silencing of tumour suppressor genes is an important mechanism
involved in cell transformation and tumour progression. The Set and
RING-finger-associated domain-containing protein UHRF1 might be an important link
between different epigenetic pathways. Here, we report that UHRF1 is frequently
overexpressed in human prostate tumours and has an important role in prostate
cancer pathogenesis and progression. Analysis of human prostate cancer samples by
microarrays and immunohistochemistry showed increased expression of UHRF1 in
about half of the cases. Moreover, UHRF1 expression was associated with reduced
overall survival after prostatectomy in patients with organ-confined prostate
tumours (P < 0.0001). UHRF1 expression was negatively correlated with several
tumour suppressor genes and positively with the histone methyltransferase (HMT)
EZH2 both in prostate tumours and cell lines. UHRF1 knockdown reduced
proliferation, clonogenic capability and anchorage-independent growth of prostate
cancer cells. Depletion of UHRF1 resulted in reactivation of several tumour
suppressor genes. Gene reactivation upon UHRF1 depletion was associated with
changes in histone H3K9 methylation, acetylation and DNA methylation, and
impaired binding of the H3K9 HMT Suv39H1 to the promoter of silenced genes.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed direct interaction between UHRF1 and
Suv39H1. Our data support the notion that UHRF1, along with Suv39H1 and DNA
methyltransferases, contributes to epigenetic gene silencing in prostate tumours.
This could represent a parallel and convergent pathway to the H3K27 methylation
catalyzed by EZH2 to synergistically promote inactivation of tumour suppressor
genes. Deregulated expression of UHRF1 is involved in the prostate cancer
pathogenesis and might represent a useful marker to distinguish indolent cancer
from those at high risk of lethal progression.

PMID: 22330138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31605. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031605. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

TET2 mutations are associated with specific 5-methylcytosine and
5-hydroxymethylcytosine profiles in patients with chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia.

Pérez C(1), Martínez-Calle N, Martín-Subero JI, Segura V, Delabesse E,
Fernandez-Mercado M, Garate L, Alvarez S, Rifon J, Varea S, Boultwood J,
Wainscoat JS, Cruz Cigudosa J, Calasanz MJ, Cross NC, Prósper F, Agirre X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Myeloproliferative Syndromes, Oncology Area, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) has recently been associated with a high
incidence of diverse mutations in genes such as TET2 or EZH2 that are implicated 
in epigenetic mechanisms. We have performed genome-wide DNA methylation arrays
and mutational analysis of TET2, IDH1, IDH2, EZH2 and JAK2 in a group of 24
patients with CMML. 249 genes were differentially methylated between CMML
patients and controls. Using Ingenuity pathway analysis, we identified enrichment
in a gene network centered around PLC, JNK and ERK suggesting that these
pathways, whose deregulation has been recently described in CMML, are affected by
epigenetic mechanisms. Mutations of TET2, JAK2 and EZH2 were found in 15 patients
(65%), 4 patients (17%) and 1 patient (4%) respectively while no mutations in the
IDH1 and IDH2 genes were identified. Interestingly, patients with wild type TET2 
clustered separately from patients with TET2 mutations, showed a higher degree of
hypermethylation and were associated with higher risk karyotypes. Our results
demonstrate the presence of aberrant DNA methylation in CMML and identifies TET2 
mutant CMML as a biologically distinct disease subtype with a different
epigenetic profile.

PMCID: PMC3273467
PMID: 22328940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Androl. 2012 Sep-Oct;33(5):1058-66. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Specialized distribution of the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 in the nuclear
apical region of round spermatids and its interaction with the histone variant
H1t2.

Lambrot R(1), Jones S, Saint-Phar S, Kimmins S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, McGill University, 21111 Lakeshore Rd,
Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Québec, Canada H9X 3V9.

The formation of sperm requires tightly regulated gene expression and unique
chromatin remodeling. In the present study, we investigated the spermatogenic
distribution of the lysine-specific histone H3 methyltransferase Ezh2 in mice.
The distribution of Ezh2 was highly regulated with its localization predominantly
restricted to round spermatids in the perinuclear acrosome region. This
localization is concomitant with the dramatic epigenetic reorganization that
occurs during spermiogenesis leading to an extreme compaction of the chromatin.
Spermiogenesis involves the incorporation of sperm-specific nuclear proteins,
including the testis-specific histone variant H1t2. Using immunofluorescence,
Ezh2 was shown to juxtapose H1t2, and an interaction in chromatin was confirmed
by immunoprecipitation. These findings suggest that, in the testis, the apical
region of the round spermatid nucleus could be a specialized epigenetic region
where methylation of histones serves a role in the spermiogenic chromatin
remodeling and that Ezh2 might be a key effector of this event.

PMID: 22323620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2989-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116418109. Epub 2012 Feb 8.

Mutation of A677 in histone methyltransferase EZH2 in human B-cell lymphoma
promotes hypertrimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27).

McCabe MT(1), Graves AP, Ganji G, Diaz E, Halsey WS, Jiang Y, Smitheman KN, Ott
HM, Pappalardi MB, Allen KE, Chen SB, Della Pietra A 3rd, Dul E, Hughes AM,
Gilbert SA, Thrall SH, Tummino PJ, Kruger RG, Brandt M, Schwartz B, Creasy CL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Discovery Performance Unit, Cancer Research, Oncology
Research and Development, GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA 19426, USA.
michael.t.mccabe@gsk.com

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2012 Jun;4(3):252.

Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) is a repressive
posttranslational modification mediated by the histone methyltransferase EZH2.
EZH2 is a component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 and is overexpressed in 
many cancers. In B-cell lymphomas, its substrate preference is frequently altered
through somatic mutation of the EZH2 Y641 residue. Herein, we identify mutation
of EZH2 A677 to a glycine (A677G) among lymphoma cell lines and primary tumor
specimens. Similar to Y641 mutant cell lines, an A677G mutant cell line revealed 
aberrantly elevated H3K27me3 and decreased monomethylated H3K27 (H3K27me1) and
dimethylated H3K27 (H3K27me2). A677G EZH2 possessed catalytic activity with a
substrate specificity that was distinct from those of both WT EZH2 and Y641
mutants. Whereas WT EZH2 displayed a preference for substrates with less
methylation [unmethylated H3K27 (H3K27me0):me1:me2 k(cat)/K(m) ratio = 9:6:1] and
Y641 mutants preferred substrates with greater methylation (H3K27me0:me1:me2
k(cat)/K(m) ratio = 1:2:13), the A677G EZH2 demonstrated nearly equal efficiency 
for all three substrates (H3K27me0:me1:me2 k(cat)/K(m) ratio = 1.1:0.6:1). When
transiently expressed in cells, A677G EZH2, but not WT EZH2, increased global
H3K27me3 and decreased H3K27me2. Structural modeling of WT and mutant EZH2
suggested that the A677G mutation acquires the ability to methylate H3K27me2
through enlargement of the lysine tunnel while preserving activity with
H3K27me0/me1 substrates through retention of the Y641 residue that is crucial for
orientation of these smaller substrates. This mutation highlights the interplay
between Y641 and A677 residues in the substrate specificity of EZH2 and
identifies another lymphoma patient population that harbors an activating
mutation of EZH2.

PMCID: PMC3287005
PMID: 22323599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10509-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320234. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

Hypermethylated in cancer 1 (HIC1) recruits polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
to a subset of its target genes through interaction with human polycomb-like
(hPCL) proteins.

Boulay G(1), Dubuissez M, Van Rechem C, Forget A, Helin K, Ayrault O, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Université Lille Nord de France, Institut Pasteur de Lille,
Lille 59021, France.

HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1) is a tumor suppressor gene epigenetically
silenced or deleted in many human cancers. HIC1 is involved in regulatory loops
modulating p53- and E2F1-dependent cell survival, growth control, and stress
responses. HIC1 is also essential for normal development because Hic1-deficient
mice die perinatally and exhibit gross developmental defects throughout the
second half of development. HIC1 encodes a transcriptional repressor with five
C(2)H(2) zinc fingers mediating sequence-specific DNA binding and two repression 
domains: an N-terminal BTB/POZ domain and a central region recruiting CtBP and
NuRD complexes. By yeast two-hybrid screening, we identified the Polycomb-like
protein hPCL3 as a novel co-repressor for HIC1. Using multiple biochemical
strategies, we demonstrated that HIC1 interacts with hPCL3 and its paralog PHF1
to form a stable complex with the PRC2 members EZH2, EED, and Suz12. Confirming
the implication of HIC1 in Polycomb recruitment, we showed that HIC1 shares some 
of its target genes with PRC2, including ATOH1. Depletion of HIC1 by siRNA
interference leads to a partial displacement of EZH2 from the ATOH1 promoter.
Furthermore, in vivo, ATOH1 repression by HIC1 is associated with Polycomb
activity during mouse cerebellar development. Thus, our results identify HIC1 as 
the first transcription factor in mammals able to recruit PRC2 to some target
promoters through its interaction with Polycomb-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC3323039
PMID: 22315224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Jul;69(13):2161-72. doi: 10.1007/s00018-012-0920-x.

Epigenetic regulation of skin: focus on the Polycomb complex.

Zhang J(1), Bardot E, Ezhkova E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10128, USA.

Chromatin regulators have recently emerged as key players in the control of
tissue development and tumorigenesis. One specific chromatin regulator, the
Polycomb complex, has been shown to regulate the identity of embryonic stem
cells, but its role in controlling fates of multipotent progenitors in developing
tissues is still largely unknown. Recent findings have revealed that this complex
plays a critical role in control of skin stem cell renewal and differentiation.
Moreover, the expression of Polycomb complex components is often aberrant in skin
diseases, including skin cancers. This review will detail recent findings on
Polycomb control of skin and highlight critical unknown questions.

PMCID: PMC4456015
PMID: 22314499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031005. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Conditional ablation of Ezh2 in murine hearts reveals its essential roles in
endocardial cushion formation, cardiomyocyte proliferation and survival.

Chen L(1), Ma Y, Kim EY, Yu W, Schwartz RJ, Qian L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Engineering, Basic Research Laboratories, Texas Heart 
Institute, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Ezh2 is a histone trimethyltransferase that silences genes mainly via catalyzing 
trimethylation of histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27Me3). The role of Ezh2 as a regulator
of gene silencing and cell proliferation in cancer development has been
extensively investigated; however, its function in heart development during
embryonic cardiogenesis has not been well studied. In the present study, we used 
a genetically modified mouse system in which Ezh2 was specifically ablated in the
mouse heart. We identified a wide spectrum of cardiovascular malformations in the
Ezh2 mutant mice, which collectively led to perinatal death. In the Ezh2 mutant
heart, the endocardial cushions (ECs) were hypoplastic and the
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process was impaired. The hearts of
Ezh2 mutant mice also exhibited decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation and
increased apoptosis. We further identified that the Hey2 gene, which is important
for cardiomyocyte proliferation and cardiac morphogenesis, is a downstream target
of Ezh2. The regulation of Hey2 expression by Ezh2 may be independent of Notch
signaling activity. Our work defines an indispensible role of the chromatin
remodeling factor Ezh2 in normal cardiovascular development.

PMCID: PMC3270034
PMID: 22312437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1318-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-365213.

Genetic defects in PRC2 components other than EZH2 are not common in myeloid
malignancies.

Kroeze LI, Nikoloski G, da Silva-Coelho P, van Hoogen P, Stevens-Linders E,
Kuiper RP, Schnittger S, Haferlach T, Pahl HL, van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1097-8.

PMID: 22308284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Haematologica. 2012 Feb;97(2):168-78. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.051235.

HOXC4 homeoprotein efficiently expands human hematopoietic stem cells and
triggers similar molecular alterations as HOXB4.

Auvray C(1), Delahaye A, Pflumio F, Haddad R, Amsellem S, Miri-Nezhad A, Broix L,
Yacia A, Bulle F, Fichelson S, Vigon I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris.

BACKGROUND: Expansion of hematopoietic stem cells represents an important
objective for improving cell and gene therapy protocols. Retroviral transduction 
of the HoxB4 homeogene in mouse and human hematopoietic stem cells and
hematopoietic progenitors is known to promote the cells' expansion. A safer
approach consists in transferring homeobox proteins into hematopoietic stem cells
taking advantage of the natural ability of homeoproteins to cross cell membranes.
Thus, HOXB4 protein transfer is operative for expanding human hematopoietic
cells, but such expansion needs to be improved.
DESIGN AND METHODS: To that aim, we evaluated the effects of HOXC4, a protein
encoded by a HOXB4 paralog gene, by co-culturing HOXC4-producing stromal cells
with human CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. Numbers of progenitors and stem cells
were assessed by in vitro cloning assays and injection into immuno-deficient
mice, respectively. We also looked for activation or inhibition of target
downstream gene expression.
RESULTS: We show that the HOXC4 homeoprotein expands human hematopoietic immature
cells by 3 to 6 times ex vivo and significantly improves the level of in vivo
engraftment. Comparative transcriptome analysis of CD34(+) cells subjected or not
to HOXB4 or HOXC4 demonstrated that both homeoproteins regulate the same set of
genes, some of which encode key hematopoietic factors and signaling molecules.
Certain molecules identified herein are factors reported to be involved in stem
cell fate or expansion in other models, such as MEF2C, EZH2, DBF4, DHX9, YPEL5
and Pumilio.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study may help to identify new HOX downstream key
factors potentially involved in hematopoietic stem cell expansion or in
leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3269473
PMID: 22298821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(8):1433-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06315-11. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

Twist-1 induces Ezh2 recruitment regulating histone methylation along the
Ink4A/Arf locus in mesenchymal stem cells.

Cakouros D(1), Isenmann S, Cooper L, Zannettino A, Anderson P, Glackin C,
Gronthos S.

Author information: 
(1)Mesenchymal Stem Cell Group, Department of Haematology, SA Pathology, and
Centre for Stem Cell Research, Robinson Institute, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, SA, Australia. Dimitrios.Cakouros2@health.sa.gov.au

The main impairment to tissue maintenance during aging is the reduced capacity
for stem cell self-renewal over time due to senescence, the irreversible block in
proliferation. We have previously described that the basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor Twist-1 can greatly enhance the life span of bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs). In the present study, we
show that Twist-1 potently suppresses senescence and the Ink4A/Arf locus with a
dramatic decrease in the expression of p16 and to some extent a decrease in p14. 
Furthermore, the polycomb group protein and histone methyltransferase Ezh2, which
suppresses the Ink4A/Arf locus, was found to be induced by Twist-1, resulting in 
an increase in H3K27me3 along the Ink4A/Arf locus, repressing transcription of
both p16/p14 and senescence of human MSCs. Furthermore, Twist-1 inhibits the
expression of the bHLH transcription factor E47, which is normally expressed in
senescent MSCs and induces transcription of the p16 promoter. Reduced Twist-1
wild-type expression and function in bone cells derived from Saethre-Chotzen
patients also revealed an increase in senescence. These studies for the first
time link Twist-1 to histone methylation of the Ink4A/Arf locus by controlling
the expression of histone methyltransferases as well as the expression of other
bHLH factors.

PMCID: PMC3318575
PMID: 22290439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Semin Oncol. 2012 Feb;39(1):67-73. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2011.11.004.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia and atypical chronic myeloid leukemia: novel
pathogenetic lesions.

Muramatsu H(1), Makishima H, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) and atypical chronic myeloid leukemia
(aCML) are distinct, yet related, entities of myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative 
neoplasms (MDS/MPN) characterized by morphologic dysplasia with accumulation of
monocytes or neutrophils, respectively. Our understanding of the molecular
pathogenesis of CMML and aCML has advanced, mainly due to the application of
novel technologies such as array-based karyotyping and next-generation
sequencing. In addition to previously known recurrent aberrations, somatic
uniparental disomy affecting chromosomes 3, 4, 7, and 11 frequently occurs in
CMML. Novel somatic mutations of genes, including those associated with
proliferation signaling (CBL, RAS, RUNX1, JAK2 (V617F)) and with modification of 
epigenetic status (TET2, ASXL1, UTX, EZH2) have been found. Various combinations 
of mutations suggest a multistep pathogenesis and may account for clinical
heterogeneity. Most recently, several spliceosome-associated-gene mutations were 
reported and SRSF2 mutations are frequently detected in CMML. The prognostic and 
diagnostic significance of these molecular lesions, in particular their value as 
biomarkers of response or resistance to specific therapies, while uncertain now
is likely to be clarified as large systematic studies come to completion.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3523950
PMID: 22289493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Oncotarget. 2012 Jan;3(1):1-2.

Histone code, human growth and cancer.

Crea F.

Comment on
    Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1127-33.

Future studies should shed new light on the complex relationship between HPTMs
and human development. In particular, the molecular function of EZH2 and NSD1 in 
bone development should be addressed. Moreover, histone methylation and
demethylation may be modulated by novel small molecule inhibitors[10, 11], which 
may pave the way to a therapeutic approach for those rare syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3292884
PMID: 22287500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Int J Cancer. 2012 Oct 15;131(8):1800-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27455. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

Targeting the enhancer of zeste homologue 2 in medulloblastoma.

Alimova I(1), Venkataraman S, Harris P, Marquez VE, Northcott PA, Dubuc A, Taylor
MD, Foreman NK, Vibhakar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital and University of Colorado, 
Anschutz Medical Campus, CO, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 that catalyzes the trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys 27,
and represses gene transcription. EZH2 enhances cancer-cell proliferation and
regulates stem cell maintenance and differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that
EZH2 is highly expressed in medulloblastoma, a highly malignant brain tumor of
childhood, and this altered expression is correlated with genomic gain of
chromosome 7 in a subset of medulloblastoma. Inhibition of EZH2 by RNAi
suppresses medulloblastoma tumor cell growth. We show that 3-deazaneplanocin A, a
chemical inhibitor of EZH2, can suppress medulloblastoma cell growth partially by
inducing apoptosis. Suppression of EZH2 expression diminishes the ability of
tumor cells to form spheres in culture and strongly represses the ability of
known oncogenes to transform neural stem cells. These findings establish a role
of EZH2 in medulloblastoma and identify EZH2 as a potential therapeutic target
especially in high-risk tumors.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3375399
PMID: 22287205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029410. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 targets murine cytomegalovirus chromatin for
modification and associates with viral replication centers.

Abraham CG(1), Kulesza CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, United States of America.

Regulation of viral transcription by chromatin structure has emerged as a
fundamental determinant in the establishment of lytic and latent herpesvirus
infections. The Polycomb group (PcG) of epigenetic repressors promotes
heterochromatin formation by trimethylating histone H3 on lysine-27 (H3K27me3)
and regulates development, stem cell renewal and differentiation and the cell
cycle. These cellular processes are tightly coupled to the molecular switch
between lytic and latent herpesvirus infections. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, we observed enrichment of H3K27me3 at the major
immediate-early (MIE) locus of murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) very early following
infection of permissive fibroblasts. As lytic replication progressed, we observed
a loss of H3K27me3 enrichment concomitant with the appearance of H3K4me3.
However, late during infection, as viral replication centers are established, we 
observed a significant increase in PcG protein association with chromatin.
Additionally, in co-immunofluorescence assays using confocal microscopy, we
detected strong enrichments for PcG protein within the viral replication
compartment, suggesting an association between viral DNA synthesis machinery and 
PcG proteins. Together, our results suggest a novel, dynamic interaction between 
PcG epigenetic repressors and MCMV genomes.

PMCID: PMC3261147
PMID: 22279536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29974. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029974. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Analysis of marker-defined HNSCC subpopulations reveals a dynamic regulation of
tumor initiating properties.

Bragado P(1), Estrada Y, Sosa MS, Avivar-Valderas A, Cannan D, Genden E, Teng M, 
Ranganathan AC, Wen HC, Kapoor A, Bernstein E, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Head and neck squamous carcinoma (HNSCC) tumors carry dismal long-term prognosis 
and the role of tumor initiating cells (TICs) in this cancer is unclear. We
investigated in HNSCC xenografts whether specific tumor subpopulations
contributed to tumor growth. We used a CFSE-based label retentions assay, CD49f
(a6-integrin) surface levels and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity to
profile HNSCC subpopulations. The tumorigenic potential of marker-positive and
-negative subpopulations was tested in nude (Balb/c nu/nu) and NSG
(NOD.Cg-Prkdc(scid) Il2rg(tm1Wjl)/SzJ) mice and chicken embryo chorioallantoic
membrane (CAM) assays. Here we identified in HEp3, SQ20b and FaDu HNSCC
xenografts a subpopulation of G0/G1-arrested slow-cycling
CD49f(high)/ALDH1A1(high)/H3K4/K27me3(low) subpopulation (CD49f+) of tumor cells.
A strikingly similar CD49f(high)/H3K27me3(low) subpopulation is also present in
primary human HNSCC tumors and metastases. While only sorted
CD49f(high)/ALDH(high), label retaining cells (LRC) proliferated immediately in
vivo, with time the CD49f(low)/ALDH(low), non-LRC (NLRC) tumor cell
subpopulations were also able to regain tumorigenic capacity; this was linked to 
restoration of CD49f(high)/ALDH(high), label retaining cells. In addition, CD49f 
is required for HEp3 cell tumorigenicity and to maintain low levels of
H3K4/K27me3. CD49f+ cells also displayed reduced expression of the histone-lysine
N-methyltransferase EZH2 and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. This suggests that although 
transiently quiescent, their unique chromatin structure is poised for rapid
transcriptional activation. CD49f- cells can "reprogram" and also achieve this
state eventually. We propose that in HNSCC tumors, epigenetic mechanisms likely
driven by CD49f signaling dynamically regulate HNSCC xenograft phenotypic
heterogeneity. This allows multiple tumor cell subpopulations to drive tumor
growth suggesting that their dynamic nature renders them a "moving target" and
their eradication might require more persistent strategies.

PMCID: PMC3262798
PMID: 22276135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30393. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030393. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

The role of EZH2 in the regulation of the activity of matrix metalloproteinases
in prostate cancer cells.

Shin YJ(1), Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The George Washington
University Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States of America.

Degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM), a critical step in cancer
metastasis, is determined by the balance between MMPs (matrix metalloproteinases)
and their inhibitors TIMPs (tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases). In cancer
cells, this balance is shifted towards MMPs, promoting ECM degradation. Here, we 
show that EZH2 plays an active role in this process by repressing the expression 
of TIMP2 and TIMP3 in prostate cancer cells. The TIMP genes are derepressed by
knockdown of EZH2 expression in human prostate cancer cells but repressed by
overexpression of EZH2 in benign human prostate epithelial cells. EZH2 catalyzes 
H3K27 trimethylation and subsequent DNA methylation of the TIMP gene promoters.
Overexpression of EZH2 confers an invasive phenotype on benign prostate
epithelial cells; however, this phenotype is suppressed by cooverexpression of
TIMP3. EZH2 knockdown markedly reduces the proteolytic activity of MMP-9, thereby
decreasing the invasive activity of prostate cancer cells. These results suggest 
that the transcriptional repression of the TIMP genes by EZH2 may be a major
mechanism to shift the MMPs/TIMPs balance in favor of MMP activity and thus to
promote ECM degradation and subsequent invasion of prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3260297
PMID: 22272343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nat Genet. 2012 Jan 22;44(3):343-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.1068.

Epigenetic repression of cardiac progenitor gene expression by Ezh2 is required
for postnatal cardiac homeostasis.

Delgado-Olguín P(1), Huang Y, Li X, Christodoulou D, Seidman CE, Seidman JG,
Tarakhovsky A, Bruneau BG.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Jul 6;111(2):162-4.

Adult-onset diseases can be associated with in utero events, but mechanisms for
this remain unknown(1,2). The Polycomb histone methyltransferase Ezh2 stabilizes 
transcription by depositing repressive marks during development that persist into
adulthood(3-9), but its function in postnatal organ homeostasis is unknown. We
show that Ezh2 stabilizes cardiac gene expression and prevents cardiac pathology 
by repressing the homeodomain transcription factor gene Six1, which functions in 
cardiac progenitor cells but is stably silenced upon cardiac differentiation.
Deletion of Ezh2 in cardiac progenitors caused postnatal myocardial pathology and
destabilized cardiac gene expression with activation of Six1-dependent skeletal
muscle genes. Six1 induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and skeletal muscle gene
expression. Furthermore, genetically reducing Six1 levels rescued the pathology
of Ezh2-deficient hearts. Thus, Ezh2-mediated repression of Six1 in
differentiating cardiac progenitors is essential for stable gene expression and
homeostasis in the postnatal heart. Our results suggest that epigenetic
dysregulation in embryonic progenitor cells is a predisposing factor for adult
disease and dysregulated stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3288669
PMID: 22267199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Leukemia. 2012 Jul;26(7):1701-3. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.16. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

A somatic EZH2 mutation in childhood acute myeloid leukemia.

Ernst T, Pflug A, Rinke J, Ernst J, Bierbach U, Beck JF, Hochhaus A, Gruhn B.

PMID: 22266912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Apr;1825(2):186-96. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2011.12.003. 
Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Interrogating genomic and epigenomic data to understand prostate cancer.

Kim J(1), Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Major breakthroughs at the beginning of this century in high-throughput
technologies have profoundly transformed biological research. Significant
knowledge has been gained regarding our biological system and its disease such as
malignant transformation. In this review, we summarize leading discoveries in
prostate cancer research derived from the use of high-throughput approaches
powered by microarrays and massively parallel next-generation sequencing (NGS).
These include the seminal discovery of chromosomal translocations such as
TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusions as well as the identification of critical oncogenes
exemplified by the polycomb group protein EZH2. We then demonstrate the power of 
interrogating genomic and epigenomic data in understanding the plethora of
mechanisms of transcriptional regulation. As an example, we review how androgen
receptor (AR) binding events are mediated at multiple levels through protein-DNA 
interaction, histone and DNA modifications, as well as high-order chromatin
structural changes.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3307852
PMID: 22240201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Blood. 2012 Feb 23;119(8):1882-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388470. Epub 2012
Jan 11.

Patient age at diagnosis is associated with the molecular characteristics of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Klapper W(1), Kreuz M, Kohler CW, Burkhardt B, Szczepanowski M, Salaverria I,
Hummel M, Loeffler M, Pellissery S, Woessmann W, Schwänen C, Trümper L,
Wessendorf S, Spang R, Hasenclever D, Siebert R; Molecular Mechanisms in
Malignant Lymphomas Network Project of the Deutsche Krebshilfe.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hematopathology Section and Lymph Node Registry,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel/University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. wklapper@path.uni-kiel.de

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is the most frequent type of B-cell lymphoma in
adult patients but also occurs in children. Patients are currently assigned to
therapy regimens based on arbitrarily chosen age limits only (eg, 18 or 60 years)
and not biologically justified limits. A total of 364 diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas and related mature aggressive B-cell lymphomas other than Burkitt
lymphoma from all age groups were analyzed by comprehensive molecular profiling. 
The probability of several biologic features previously reported to be associated
with poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, such as ABC subtype, BCL2
expression, or cytogenetic complexity, increases with age at diagnosis.
Similarly, various genetic features, such as IRF4 translocations, gains in 1q21, 
18q21, 7p22, and 7q21, as well as changes in 3q27, including gains and
translocations affecting the BCL6 locus, are significantly associated with
patient age, but no cut-offs between age groups could be defined. If age was
incorporated in multivariate analyses, genetic complexity lost its prognostic
significance, whereas the prognostic impact of ABC subtype and age were additive.
Our data indicate that aging is a major determinant of lymphoma biology. They
challenge current concepts regarding both prognostic biomarkers and treatment
stratification based on strict age cut-offs.

PMID: 22238326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nat Med. 2012 Feb 6;18(2):298-301. doi: 10.1038/nm.2651.

Genetic inactivation of the polycomb repressive complex 2 in T cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ntziachristos P(1), Tsirigos A, Van Vlierberghe P, Nedjic J, Trimarchi T,
Flaherty MS, Ferres-Marco D, da Ros V, Tang Z, Siegle J, Asp P, Hadler M, Rigo I,
De Keersmaecker K, Patel J, Huynh T, Utro F, Poglio S, Samon JB, Paietta E,
Racevskis J, Rowe JM, Rabadan R, Levine RL, Brown S, Pflumio F, Dominguez M,
Ferrando A, Aifantis I.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Pathology, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an immature hematopoietic
malignancy driven mainly by oncogenic activation of NOTCH1 signaling. In this
study we report the presence of loss-of-function mutations and deletions of the
EZH2 and SUZ12 genes, which encode crucial components of the Polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), in 25% of T-ALLs. To further study the role of PRC2 in T-ALL,
we used NOTCH1-dependent mouse models of the disease, as well as human T-ALL
samples, and combined locus-specific and global analysis of NOTCH1-driven
epigenetic changes. These studies demonstrated that activation of NOTCH1
specifically induces loss of the repressive mark Lys27 trimethylation of histone 
3 (H3K27me3) by antagonizing the activity of PRC2. These studies suggest a tumor 
suppressor role for PRC2 in human leukemia and suggest a hitherto unrecognized
dynamic interplay between oncogenic NOTCH1 and PRC2 function for the regulation
of gene expression and cell transformation.

PMCID: PMC3274628
PMID: 22237151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Nature. 2012 Jan 11;481(7380):157-63. doi: 10.1038/nature10725.

The genetic basis of early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Zhang J(1), Ding L, Holmfeldt L, Wu G, Heatley SL, Payne-Turner D, Easton J, Chen
X, Wang J, Rusch M, Lu C, Chen SC, Wei L, Collins-Underwood JR, Ma J, Roberts KG,
Pounds SB, Ulyanov A, Becksfort J, Gupta P, Huether R, Kriwacki RW, Parker M,
McGoldrick DJ, Zhao D, Alford D, Espy S, Bobba KC, Song G, Pei D, Cheng C,
Roberts S, Barbato MI, Campana D, Coustan-Smith E, Shurtleff SA, Raimondi SC,
Kleppe M, Cools J, Shimano KA, Hermiston ML, Doulatov S, Eppert K, Laurenti E,
Notta F, Dick JE, Basso G, Hunger SP, Loh ML, Devidas M, Wood B, Winter S,
Dunsmore KP, Fulton RS, Fulton LL, Hong X, Harris CC, Dooling DJ, Ochoa K,
Johnson KJ, Obenauer JC, Evans WE, Pui CH, Naeve CW, Ley TJ, Mardis ER, Wilson
RK, Downing JR, Mullighan CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, St Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Early T-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ETP ALL) is an aggressive
malignancy of unknown genetic basis. We performed whole-genome sequencing of 12
ETP ALL cases and assessed the frequency of the identified somatic mutations in
94 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cases. ETP ALL was characterized by
activating mutations in genes regulating cytokine receptor and RAS signalling
(67% of cases; NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, IL7R, JAK3, JAK1, SH2B3 and BRAF), inactivating 
lesions disrupting haematopoietic development (58%; GATA3, ETV6, RUNX1, IKZF1 and
EP300) and histone-modifying genes (48%; EZH2, EED, SUZ12, SETD2 and EP300). We
also identified new targets of recurrent mutation including DNM2, ECT2L and RELN.
The mutational spectrum is similar to myeloid tumours, and moreover, the global
transcriptional profile of ETP ALL was similar to that of normal and myeloid
leukaemia haematopoietic stem cells. These findings suggest that addition of
myeloid-directed therapies might improve the poor outcome of ETP ALL.

PMCID: PMC3267575
PMID: 22237106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Br J Haematol. 2012 May;157(3):387-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08986.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 12.

EZH2 mutations and their association with PICALM-MLLT10 positive acute leukaemia.

Grossmann V, Bacher U, Kohlmann A, Artusi V, Klein HU, Dugas M, Schnittger S,
Alpermann T, Kern W, Haferlach T, Haferlach C.

PMID: 22235851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Int J Hematol. 2012 Jan;95(1):8-16. doi: 10.1007/s12185-011-0996-3. Epub 2012 Jan
11.

Mutations in epigenetic regulators in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Nikoloski G(1), van der Reijden BA, Jansen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre and Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life
Sciences, Geert Grooteplein zuid 8, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
g.nikoloski@labgk.umcn.nl

Until recently, the genetic aberrations that are causally linked to the
pathogenesis of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and myeloproliferative neoplasms 
were largely unknown. Using novel technologies like high-resolution SNP-array
analysis and next generation sequencing, various genes have now been identified
that are recurrently mutated. Strikingly, several of the newly identified genes
(ASXL1, DNMT3A, EZH2, IDH1 and IDH2, and TET2) are involved in the epigenetic
regulation of gene expression. Aberrant epigenetic modifications have been
described in many types of cancer, including myeloid malignancies. It has been
proposed that repression of genes that are crucial for the cessation of the cell 
cycle and induction of differentiation might contribute to the malignant
transformation of normal hematopoietic cells. Several therapies that aim to
re-express silenced genes are currently being tested in MDS, like histone
deacetylase inhibitors and hypomethylating agents. It will be interesting to
assess whether patients carrying mutations in epigenetic regulators respond
differently to these novel forms of epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 22234528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Nat Commun. 2012 Jan 10;3:623. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1623.

Ectopic expression of the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 in haematopoietic stem
cells causes myeloproliferative disease.

Herrera-Merchan A(1), Arranz L, Ligos JM, de Molina A, Dominguez O, Gonzalez S.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Aging Group, Spanish National Cardiovascular Research Center (CNIC),
E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Recent evidence shows increased and decreased expression of Ezh2 in cancer,
suggesting a dual role as an oncogene or tumour suppressor. To investigate the
mechanism by which Ezh2-mediated H3K27 methylation leads to cancer, we generated 
conditional Ezh2 knock-in (Ezh2-KI) mice. Here we show that induced Ezh2
haematopoietic expression increases the number and proliferation of repopulating 
haematopoietic stem cells. Ezh2-KI mice develop myeloproliferative disorder,
featuring excessive myeloid expansion in bone marrow and spleen, leukocytosis and
splenomegaly. Competitive and serial transplantations demonstrate progressive
myeloid commitment of Ezh2-KI haematopoietic stem cells. Transplanted
self-renewing haematopoietic stem cells from Ezh2-KI mice induce
myeloproliferative disorder, suggesting that the Ezh2 gain-of-function arises in 
the haematopoietic stem cell pool, and not at later stages of myelopoiesis. At
the molecular level, Ezh2 regulates haematopoietic stem cell-specific genes such 
as Evi-1 and Ntrk3, aberrantly found in haematologic malignancies. These results 
demonstrate a stem cell-specific Ezh2 oncogenic role in myeloid disorders, and
suggest possible therapeutic applications in Ezh2-related haematological
malignancies.

PMID: 22233633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Carcinog. 2014 Aug;53(8):589-97. doi: 10.1002/mc.21871. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

EZH2 genetic variants affect risk of gastric cancer in the Chinese Han
population.

Zhou Y(1), Du WD, Wu Q, Liu Y, Chen G, Ruan J, Xu S, Yang F, Zhou FS, Tang XF,
Tang HY, Zuo XB, Zhang FY, Sun LD, Zhang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Genome Research of Anhui Province, Anhui Medical University, Hefei,
China; Department of Biology, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

Enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) gene encodes a histone methyltransferase that
constitutes the catalytic component of the polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2)
to initiate epigenetic silencing of genes. It is reported that the expression
level of EZH2 in gastric cancer tissue was highly correlated with tumor
progression, however, whether EZH2 genetic variants were associated with the risk
of gastric cancer remains yet unknown. In this study, we conducted a genotyping
analysis for EZH2 in 311 cases of gastric cancer and 425 controls from the
Chinese Han population. We found five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP;
rs12670401, rs6464926, rs2072407, rs734005, and rs734004) of EZH2 gene were
significantly associated with the risk of gastric cancer. Of which, the
rs12670401 with the minor allele C and rs6464926 with the minor allele T revealed
strong associations with increased gastric cancer risk [P = 0.009, adjusted odds 
ratio (aOR)<U+2009>= 1.327, 95% CI = 1.075-1.683 and P = 0.012, aOR = 1.310, 95% CI =
1.059-1.619]. The other three SNPs, rs2072407, rs734005, and rs734004 contributed
to significantly reduced risk of gastric cancer (P = 0.033, aOR<U+2009>= 0.787, 95% CI =
0.633-0.981, P = 0.045, aOR<U+2009>= 0.799, 95% CI = 0.642-0.995 and P = 0.048, aOR<U+2009>=
0.803, 95% CI = 0.645-0.999), respectively. We further found that rs12670401 and 
rs6464926 were in a strong LD while rs2072407, rs734005, and rs734004 were in
another. Haplotype analysis of the five SNPs showed that haplotype CCTCT reduced 
the risk of gastric cancer (P = 0.031 and aOR<U+2009>= 0.784), while haplotype GTCTC
significantly elevated the risk of gastric cancer (P = 0.011 and aOR<U+2009>= 1.310). We
concluded that EZH2 variants were significantly associated with gastric cancer
risk. Our results for the first time provided new insight into susceptibility
factors of EZH2 gene variants in carcinogenesis of gastric cancer of the Chinese 
Han population.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22228224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 20;417(3):1074-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.099. Epub 2011 Dec 26.

RAS oncogenic signal upregulates EZH2 in pancreatic cancer.

Fujii S(1), Fukamachi K, Tsuda H, Ito K, Ito Y, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, Chiba, Japan.

The neoplastic transformation by mutant RAS is thought to require remodeling of
expression of an entire set of genes. However, the underlying mechanism for
initiation of gene expression remodeling in tumorigenesis remains elusive. This
study was aimed to define the oncogenic role of EZH2, a histone modifier protein 
that is induced by oncogenic mutant RAS, using pancreatic cancers of transgenic
rats exogenously expressing human mutant RAS. Immunohistochemical observation of 
preneoplastic or cancerous lesions in the animal model suggested that
upregulation of Ezh2 protein is an initiating event in pancreatic carcinogenesis.
MEK-inhibition or Elk-1-knockdown downregulated EZH2, and MEK-inhibition or
EZH2-knockdown restored expression of a tumor suppressor, RUNX3 in human and rat 
pancreatic cancer cells activated by the oncogenic RAS. Furthermore, Elk-1- or
EZH2-knockdown inhibited growth of the cancer cells. These results strongly
suggested that the oncogenic RAS upregulates EZH2 through MEK-ERK signaling,
resulted in downregulation of tumor suppressors including RUNX3 in pancreatic
carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22222375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Genes Dev. 2012 Jan 1;26(1):37-42. doi: 10.1101/gad.173930.111.

PRC2 directly methylates GATA4 and represses its transcriptional activity.

He A(1), Shen X, Ma Q, Cao J, von Gise A, Zhou P, Wang G, Marquez VE, Orkin SH,
Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) promotes tissue-specific differentiation by 
depositing trimethylated histone H3 Lys 27 (H3K27me3) epigenetic marks to silence
ectopic gene expression programs. Here, we show that EZH2, the catalytic subunit 
of PRC2, is required for cardiac morphogenesis. Both in vitro and in fetal
hearts, EZH2 interacted with cardiac transcription factor GATA4 and directly
methylated it at Lys 299. PRC2 methylation of GATA4 attenuated its
transcriptional activity by reducing its interaction with and acetylation by
p300. Our results reveal a new mechanism of PRC2-mediated transcriptional
repression in which PRC2 methylates a transcription factor to inhibit its
transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3258964
PMID: 22215809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(1):59-65. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

EZH2 methyltransferase and H3K27 methylation in breast cancer.

Yoo KH(1), Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. ryuk@mail.nih.gov

Histone modifications are thought to control the regulation of genetic programs
in normal physiology and cancer. Methylation (mono-, di-, and tri-methylation) on
histone H3 lysine (K) 27 induces transcriptional repression, and thereby
participates in controlling gene expression patterns. Enhancer of zeste (EZH) 2, 
a methyltransferase and component of the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2),
plays an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of the H3K27me3 repressive 
chromatin mark. Abnormal EZH2 expression has been associated with various cancers
including breast cancer. Here, we discuss the contribution of EZH2 and the PRC2
complex in controlling the H3K27 methylation status and subsequent consequences
on genomic instability and the cell cycle in breast cancer cells. We also discuss
distinct molecular mechanisms used by EZH2 to suppress BRCA1 functions.

PMCID: PMC3226033
PMID: 22211105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(12):6197-201.

Down-regulation of EZH2 by RNA interference inhibits proliferation and invasion
of ACHN cells via the Wnt/ß- catenin pathway.

Yuan JB(1), Yang LY, Tang ZY, Zu XB, Qi L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha,
China.

Although enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been reported as an independent
prognostic factor in renal cell carcinoma (RCC), little is known about the exact 
mechanism of EZH2 in promoting the genesis of RCC. However, several studies have 
shown that dysregulation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway plays a crucial
role. Therefore, we determined whether EZH2 could affect ACHN human RCC cell
proliferation and invasion via the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. In the present study,
we investigated the effects of short interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated EZH2 gene
silencing on Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in ACHN cells. EZH2-siRNA markedly inhibited
the proliferation and invasion capabilities of ACHN, while also reducing the
expression of EZH2, Wnt3a and ß-catenin. In contrast, cellular expression of
GSK-3ß (glycogen synthase kinase-3ß), an inhibitor of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, 
was conspicuously higher after transfection of EZH2 siRNA. These preliminary
findings suggest EZH2 may promote proliferation and invasion of ACHN cells via
action on the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 23464430  [PubMed - in process]


340. Epigenetics. 2012 Jan 1;7(1):71-82. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.1.18750. Epub 2012 Jan 1.

Role of DNMT3B in the regulation of early neural and neural crest specifiers.

Martins-Taylor K(1), Schroeder DI, LaSalle JM, Lalande M, Xu RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, University of Connecticut Stem Cell Institute, Farmington, CT,
USA.

The de novo DNA methyltransferase DNMT3B functions in establishing DNA
methylation patterns during development. DNMT3B missense mutations cause
immunodeficiency, centromere instability and facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome. The
restriction of Dnmt3b expression to neural progenitor cells, as well as the mild 
cognitive defects observed in ICF patients, suggests that DNMT3B may play an
important role in early neurogenesis. We performed RNAi knockdown of DNMT3B in
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) in order to investigate the mechanistic
contribution of DNMT3B to DNA methylation and early neuronal differentiation.
While DNMT3B was not required for early neuroepithelium specification, DNMT3B
deficient neuroepithelium exhibited accelerated maturation with earlier
expression, relative to normal hESCs, of mature neuronal markers (such as
NEUROD1) and of early neuronal regional specifiers (such as those for the neural 
crest). Genome-wide analyses of DNA methylation by MethylC-seq identified novel
regions of hypomethylation in the DNMT3B knockdowns along the X chromosome as
well as pericentromeric regions, rather than changes to promoters of specific
dysregulated genes. We observed a loss of H3K27me3 and the polycomb complex
protein EZH2 at the promoters of early neural and neural crest specifier genes
during differentiation of DNMT3B knockdown but not normal hESCs. Our results
indicate that DNMT3B mediates large-scale methylation patterns in hESCs and that 
DNMT3B deficiency in the cells alters the timing of their neuronal
differentiation and maturation.

PMCID: PMC3329505
PMID: 22207353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Cell. 2012 Jan 27;45(2):255-62. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.11.019. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Polycomb protein Ezh1 promotes RNA polymerase II elongation.

Mousavi K(1), Zare H, Wang AH, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20852, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2012 Jan 27;45(2):145-6.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins initiate the formation of repressed chromatin
domains and regulate developmental gene expression. A mammalian PcG protein,
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), triggers transcriptional repression by
catalyzing the addition of methyl groups onto lysine 27 of histone H3
(H3K27me2/3). This action facilitates the binding of other PcG proteins to
chromatin for purposes of transcriptional silencing. Interestingly, there exists 
a paralog of Ezh2, termed Ezh1, whose primary function remains unclear. Here, we 
provide evidence for genome-wide association of Ezh1 complex with active
epigenetic mark (H3K4me3), RNA polymerase II (Pol II), and mRNA production. Ezh1 
depletion reduced global Pol II occupancy within gene bodies and resulted in
delayed transcriptional activation during differentiation of skeletal muscle
cells. Conversely, overexpression of wild-type Ezh1 led to premature gene
activation and rescued Pol II occupancy defects in Ezh1-depleted cells.
Collectively, these findings reveal a role for a PcG complex in promoting mRNA
transcription.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22196887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028585. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

EZH2 codon 641 mutations are common in BCL2-rearranged germinal center B cell
lymphomas.

Ryan RJ(1), Nitta M, Borger D, Zukerberg LR, Ferry JA, Harris NL, Iafrate AJ,
Bernstein BE, Sohani AR, Le LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. Ryan.Russell@mgh.harvard.edu

Mutations at codon 641 of EZH2 are recurrent in germinal center B cell lymphomas,
and the most common variants lead to altered EZH2 enzymatic activity and enhanced
tri-methylation of histone H3 at lysine 27, a repressive chromatin modification. 
As an initial step toward screening patients for cancer genotype-directed
therapy, we developed a screening assay for EZH2 codon 641 mutations amenable for
testing formalin-fixed clinical specimens, based on the sensitive SNaPshot single
nucleotide extension technology. We detected EZH2 mutations in 12/55 (22%)
follicular lymphomas (FL), 5/35 (14%) diffuse large B cell lymphomas with a
germinal center immunophenotype (GCB-DLBCL), and 2/11 (18%) high grade B cell
lymphomas with concurrent rearrangements of BCL2 and MYC. No EZH2 mutations were 
detected in cases of Burkitt lymphoma (0/23). EZH2 mutations were frequently
associated with the presence of BCL2 rearrangement (BCL2-R) in both the FL (28%
of BCL-R cases versus 0% of BCL2-WT cases, p<0.05) and GCB-DLBCL groups (33% of
BCL2-R cases versus 4% of BCL2-WT cases, p<0.04), and across all lymphoma types
excluding BL (27% of BCL2-R cases versus 3% of BCL2-WT cases, p<0.003). We
confirmed gain-of-function activity for all previously reported EZH2 codon 641
mutation variants. Our findings suggest that EZH2 mutations constitute an
additional genetic "hit" in many BCL2-rearranged germinal center B cell
lymphomas. Our work may be helpful in the selection of lymphoma patients for
future trials of pharmacologic agents targeting EZH2 and EZH2-regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC3237460
PMID: 22194861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Jan;44(1):70-9. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr109.

Targeting protein lysine methylation and demethylation in cancers.

He Y(1), Korboukh I, Jin J, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

During the last decade, we saw an explosion of studies investigating the role of 
lysine methylation/demethylation of histones and non-histone proteins, such as
p53, NF-kappaB, and E2F1. These 'Ying-Yang' post-translational modifications are 
important to fine-tuning the activity of these proteins. Lysine methylation and
demethylation are catalyzed by protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs) and
protein lysine demethylases (PKDMs). PKMTs, PKDMs, and their substrates have been
shown to play important roles in cancers. Although the underlying mechanisms of
tumorigenesis are still largely unknown, growing evidence is starting to link
aberrant regulation of methylation to tumorigenesis. This review focuses on
summarizing the recent progress in understanding of the function of protein
lysine methylation, and in the discovery of small molecule inhibitors for PKMTs
and PKDMs. We also discuss the potential and the caveats of targeting protein
lysine methylation for the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3244655
PMID: 22194015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1127-33.

Germline mutations in the oncogene EZH2 cause Weaver syndrome and increased human
height.

Tatton-Brown K(1), Hanks S, Ruark E, Zachariou A, Duarte Sdel V, Ramsay E, Snape 
K, Murray A, Perdeaux ER, Seal S, Loveday C, Banka S, Clericuzio C, Flinter F,
Magee A, McConnell V, Patton M, Raith W, Rankin J, Splitt M, Strenger V, Taylor
C, Wheeler P, Temple KI, Cole T; Childhood Overgrowth Collaboration, Douglas J,
Rahman N.

Collaborators: Amor D, Andries S, Archer H, Armstrong R, Ashton-Prolla P, Baralle
D, Barnicoat A, Barrow M, Beales P, Becker K, Beckh-Arnold E, Berg J, Bernhard B,
Bhat M, Birch J, Bitner M, Blair E, Bliek J, Blyth M, Brady A, Brice G, Brueton
L, Burn J, Canham N, Castle B, Cecconi M, Chandler K, Chandrasena R, Cilliers D, 
Clarke A, Clayton-Smith J, Clericuzio C, Cole T, Colley A, Collins A, Connell F, 
Cook J, Crow Y, Dabir T, Dalton A, Danda S, Davies S, Day R, Dennis N, Deshpande 
C, Desouza B, Devlin L, Differ AM, Dinwiddie R, Dobbie A, Donnai D, Ellis I,
Elmslie F, Firth H, Fisher R, Fitzpatrick D, Flinter F, Foley P, Foulds N, Fryer 
A, Gallagher A, Garcia S, Gardiner C, Gibbons R, Gillerot Y, Goudie D,
Gowrishanker K, Graham C, Gregersen N, Harper J, Hughes H, Henderson A, Hennekam 
R, Hobson E, Holder S, Homfray T, Huma Z, Hurst J, Irving M, Izatt L, Jagadeeth
S, Jessen C, Johnson D, Josifova D, Joss S, Kerr B, Liebelt J, Kini U, Krause A, 
Kumar A, Kumar D, Lam W, Lapunzina P, Lees M, Leonard N, Livesey A, Longman C,
Lucassen A, Lunt P, Lynch S, MacDonnell J, Magee A, Maher E, Male A, Mansour S,
McConnell V, McEntagart M, McKee S, McKeown C, Mehta S, Metcalfe K, Mohammed S,
Monaghan G, Montgomery T, Morgan A, Morrison P, Morton J, Mudgal R, Murday V,
Nampoothiri S, Nemeth A, Newbury-Ecob R, Oley C, Owen C, Park SM, Parker M, Patel
C, Patton M, Pilz D, Pinkney M, Pocha M, Pottinger C, Prescott K, Price S,
Proctor A, Quarrell O, Rankin J, Raymond L, Rea G, Reardon W, Reid E, Robards M, 
Roposch A, Rosser E, Rourke D, Ruddy D, Saggar A, Sampson J, Sandford R, Sarkar
A, Scott R, Semple R, Sharif S, Shaw A, Shaw-Smith C, Shears D, Shelagh J, Smith 
G, Smithson S, Splitt M, Stevens M, Stewart F, Stewart H, Stopps K, Suri M,
Sweeney E, Tanateles G, Taylor C, Temple K, Tischowitz M, Tolmie J, Tomkins S,
Turnpenny P, Van-Haelst M, Van Maldergem L, Vandersteen A, Vasudevan P, Wakeling 
E, Walker L, Williams D, Wilson L, Woods G, Wright M, Zankl A.

Comment in
    Oncotarget. 2012 Jan;3(1):3-4.
    Oncotarget. 2012 Jan;3(1):1-2.

The biological processes controlling human growth are diverse, complex and poorly
understood. Genetic factors are important and human height has been shown to be a
highly polygenic trait to which common and rare genetic variation contributes.
Weaver syndrome is a human overgrowth condition characterised by tall stature,
dysmorphic facial features, learning disability and variable additional features.
We performed exome sequencing in four individuals with Weaver syndrome,
identifying a mutation in the histone methyltransferase, EZH2, in each case.
Sequencing of EZH2 in additional individuals with overgrowth identified a further
15 mutations. The EZH2 mutation spectrum in Weaver syndrome shows considerable
overlap with the inactivating somatic EZH2 mutations recently reported in myeloid
malignancies. Our data establish EZH2 mutations as the cause of Weaver syndrome
and provide further links between histone modifications and regulation of human
growth.

PMCID: PMC3282071
PMID: 22190405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Hematol. 2012 Mar;87(3):245-50. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22257. Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Frequent deletions of JARID2 in leukemic transformation of chronic myeloid
malignancies.

Puda A(1), Milosevic JD, Berg T, Klampfl T, Harutyunyan AS, Gisslinger B, Rumi E,
Pietra D, Malcovati L, Elena C, Doubek M, Steurer M, Tosic N, Pavlovic S,
Guglielmelli P, Pieri L, Vannucchi AM, Gisslinger H, Cazzola M, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna,
Austria.

Chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
have an inherent tendency to progress to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Using
high-resolution SNP microarrays, we studied a total of 517 MPN and MDS patients
in different disease stages, including 77 AML cases with previous history of MPN 
(N = 46) or MDS (N = 31). Frequent chromosomal deletions of variable sizes were
detected, allowing the mapping of putative tumor suppressor genes involved in the
leukemic transformation process. We detected frequent deletions on the short arm 
of chromosome 6 (del6p). The common deleted region on 6p mapped to a 1.1-Mb
region and contained only the JARID2 gene--member of the polycomb repressive
complex 2 (PRC2). When we compared the frequency of del6p between chronic and
leukemic phase, we observed a strong association of del6p with leukemic
transformation (P = 0.0033). Subsequently, analysis of deletion profiles of other
PRC2 members revealed frequent losses of genes such as EZH2, AEBP2, and SUZ12;
however, the deletions targeting these genes were large. We also identified two
patients with homozygous losses of JARID2 and AEBP2. We observed frequent
codeletion of AEBP2 and ETV6, and similarly, SUZ12 and NF1. Using next generation
exome sequencing of 40 patients, we identified only one somatic mutation in the
PRC2 complex member SUZ12. As the frequency of point mutations in PRC2 members
was found to be low, deletions were the main type of lesions targeting PRC2
complex members. Our study suggests an essential role of the PRC2 complex in the 
leukemic transformation of chronic myeloid disorders.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22190018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jan 15;11(2):286-95. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.2.18707. Epub 2012 Jan
15.

The BRAF(V600E) causes widespread alterations in gene methylation in the genome
of melanoma cells.

Hou P(1), Liu D, Dong J, Xing M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 1;11(3):434-5.

Although BRAF(V600E) is well known to play an important role in the tumorigenesis
of melanoma, its molecular mechanism, particularly the epigenetic aspect, has
been incompletely understood. Here, we investigated the role of BRAF(V600E)
signaling in altering gene methylation in the genome of melanoma cells using a
methylated CpG island amplification/CpG island microarray system and searched for
genes coupled to the BRAF(V600E) signaling through methylation aberrations. The
results indicated that a wide range of genes with broad functions were linked to 
BRAF(V600E) signaling through their hyper- or hypomethylation. Expression of 59
genes hypermethylated upon BRAF knockdown was selectively tested and found to be 
largely correspondingly underexpressed, suggesting that these genes were
naturally hypomethylated, and overexpressed with BRAF(V600E) in melanoma. This
BRAF(V600E)-promoted hypomethylation was confirmed on genes selectively examined 
in primary melanoma tumors. Some of these genes were functionally tested and
demonstrated to play a role in melanoma cell proliferation and invasion. As a
mechanism of aberrant gene methylation driven by BRAF(V600E), expression of the
DNA methyltransferase 1 and histone methyltransferase EZH2 was profoundly
affected by BRAF(V600E). We have thus uncovered a previously unrecognized
prominent epigenetic mechanism in the tumorigenesis of melanoma driven by
BRAF(V600E). Many of the functionally important genes controlled by the
BRAF(V600E) signaling through aberrant methylation may prove to be novel
therapeutic targets for melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3293379
PMID: 22189819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jan 17;106(2):243-7. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.551. Epub 2011 Dec
20.

The role of EZH2 in tumour progression.

Chang CJ(1), Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Accumulated evidence shows that EZH2 is deregulated in a wide range of cancer
types, and it has a crucial role in stem cell maintenance and tumour development.
Therefore, blocking EZH2 expression or activity may represent a promising
strategy for anticancer treatment. In this review, we address the current
understanding of the mechanisms underlying EZH2 regulation alongside the function
of EZH2 gene targets that are involved in cancer progression. Finally, we will
describe cancer therapies that target EZH2 or its downstream cascades, which
could potentially reverse the oncogenic and stemness properties of the tumour
cells to suppress cancer progression and recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3261672
PMID: 22187039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Feb;32(4):840-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06148-11. Epub 2011 Dec
19.

Myc regulates the transcription of the PRC2 gene to control the expression of
developmental genes in embryonic stem cells.

Neri F(1), Zippo A, Krepelova A, Cherubini A, Rocchigiani M, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.

Myc family members are critical to maintain embryonic stem cells (ESC) in the
undifferentiated state. However, the mechanism by which they perform this task
has not yet been elucidated. Here we show that Myc directly upregulates the
transcription of all core components of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) 
as well as the ESC-specific PRC2-associated factors. By expressing Myc protein
fused with the estrogen receptor (Myc-ER) in fibroblasts, we observed that Myc,
binding to the regulatory elements of Suz12, Ezh2, and Eed, induces the
acetylation of histones H3 and H4 and the recruitment of elongating RNA
polymerase II at their promoters. The silencing of both c-Myc and N-Myc in ESC
results in reduced expression of PRC2 and H3K27me3 at Polycomb target
developmental regulators and upregulation of genes involved in primitive endoderm
differentiation. The ectopic expression of PRC2 in ESC, either silenced for c-Myc
and N-Myc or induced to differentiate by leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
withdrawal, is sufficient to maintain the H3K27me3 mark at genes with bivalent
histone modifications and keep repressed the genes involved in ESC
differentiation. Thus, Myc proteins control the expression of developmental
regulators via the upregulation of the Polycomb PRC2 complex.

PMCID: PMC3272981
PMID: 22184065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Genome Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):322-31. doi: 10.1101/gr.131508.111. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Cooperation between Polycomb and androgen receptor during oncogenic
transformation.

Zhao JC(1), Yu J, Runkle C, Wu L, Hu M, Wu D, Liu JS, Wang Q, Qin ZS, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a hormone-activated transcription factor that plays
important roles in prostate development and function, as well as malignant
transformation. The downstream pathways of AR, however, are incompletely
understood. AR has been primarily known as a transcriptional activator inducing
prostate-specific gene expression. Through integrative analysis of genome-wide AR
occupancy and androgen-regulated gene expression, here we report AR as a globally
acting transcriptional repressor. This repression is mediated by
androgen-responsive elements (ARE) and dictated by Polycomb group protein EZH2
and repressive chromatin remodeling. In embryonic stem cells, AR-repressed genes 
are occupied by EZH2 and harbor bivalent H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 modifications that 
are characteristic of differentiation regulators, the silencing of which
maintains the undifferentiated state. Concordantly, these genes are silenced in
castration-resistant prostate cancer rendering a stem cell-like lack of
differentiation and tumor progression. Collectively, our data reveal an
unexpected role of AR as a transcriptional repressor inhibiting non-prostatic
differentiation and, upon excessive signaling, resulting in cancerous
dedifferentiation.

PMCID: PMC3266039
PMID: 22179855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Jan 13;90(1):110-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.018. Epub
2011 Dec 15.

Mutations in EZH2 cause Weaver syndrome.

Gibson WT(1), Hood RL, Zhan SH, Bulman DE, Fejes AP, Moore R, Mungall AJ, Eydoux 
P, Babul-Hirji R, An J, Marra MA; FORGE Canada Consortium, Chitayat D, Boycott
KM, Weaver DD, Jones SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada. wtgibson@cfri.ubc.ca

We used trio-based whole-exome sequencing to analyze two families affected by
Weaver syndrome, including one of the original families reported in 1974.
Filtering of rare variants in the affected probands against the parental variants
identified two different de novo mutations in the enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2). Sanger sequencing of EZH2 in a third classically-affected proband
identified a third de novo mutation in this gene. These data show that mutations 
in EZH2 cause Weaver syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3257956
PMID: 22177091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2012 Mar;7(1):34-42. doi: 10.1007/s11899-011-0105-y.

Disordered epigenetic regulation in the pathophysiology of myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Zhang SJ(1), Abdel-Wahab O.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 408 East 69th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The discovery of mutations activating JAK-STAT signaling in the majority of
patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) led to identification of
tyrosine kinase activation as the common predominant mechanism driving MPN
pathogenesis. Nevertheless, the existence of additional genetic events that
modify the MPN phenotype, predate JAK2 mutations, or contribute to leukemic
transformation of MPNs was suspected. Recent advances in genomic technologies
have led to the discovery of mutations in a number of epigenetic modifiers in
patients with MPNs, including mutations in TET2, ASXL1, IDH1, IDH2, and EZH2. In 
addition to mutation, alterations in the expression or activity of
chromatin-modifying/reading proteins PRMT5 and L3MBTL1 have been found to be
important in MPN development. Moreover, the JAK2 mutation itself recently has
been shown to directly affect histone post-translational modifications. This
article reviews the clinical and functional implications of epigenetic
alterations in the pathogenesis of MPNs.

PMID: 22170482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Mol Carcinog. 2013 Mar;52(3):229-36. doi: 10.1002/mc.21848. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Polycomb group protein EZH2-mediated E-cadherin repression promotes metastasis of
oral tongue squamous cell carcinoma.

Wang C(1), Liu X, Chen Z, Huang H, Jin Y, Kolokythas A, Wang A, Dai Y, Wong DT,
Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a critical component of the
polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that regulates many essential biological
processes, including embryogenesis and many developmental events. The oncogenic
role of EZH2 has recently been implicated in several cancer types. In this study,
we first confirmed that the over-expression of EZH2 is a frequent event in oral
tongue squamous cell carcinoma (OTSCC). We further demonstrated that EZH2
over-expression is correlated with advanced stages of the disease and is
associated with lymph node metastasis. Statistical analysis revealed that EZH2
over-expression was correlated with reduced overall survival. Furthermore,
over-expression of EZH2 was correlated with reduced expression of tumor
suppressor gene E-cadherin. These observations were confirmed in vitro, in which 
knockdown of EZH2-induced E-cadherin expression and reduced cell migration and
invasion. In contrast, ectopic transfection of EZH2 led to reduced E-cadherin
expression and enhanced cell migration and invasion. Furthermore, EZH2 may act on
cell migration in part by suppressing the E-cadherin expression. Taken together, 
these data suggest that EZH2 plays major roles in the progression of OTSCC, and
may serve as a biomarker or therapeutic target for patients at risk of
metastasis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3400713
PMID: 22161744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program. 2011;2011:543-9. doi:
10.1182/asheducation-2011.1.543.

Genetics of myelodysplastic syndromes: new insights.

Graubert T(1), Walter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. graubert@medicine.wustl.edu

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogenous group of hematologic
malignancies characterized by clonal expansion of BM myeloid cells with impaired 
differentiation. The identification of recurrent mutations in MDS samples has led
to new insights into the pathophysiology of these disorders. Of particular
interest is the recent recognition that genes involved in the regulation of
histone function (EZH2, ASXL1, and UTX) and DNA methylation (DNMT3A, IDH1/IDH2,
and TET2) are recurrently mutated in MDS, providing an important link between
genetic and epigenetic alterations in this disease. The mechanism by which these 
mutated genes contribute to disease pathogenesis is an active area of research,
with a current focus on which downstream target genes may be affected. Recent
advances from sequencing studies suggest that multiple mutations are required for
MDS initiation and progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The past several 
years have yielded many new insights, but the complete genetic landscape of MDS
is not yet known. Moreover, few (if any) of the findings are sufficiently robust 
to be incorporated into routine clinical practice at this time. Additional
studies will be required to understand the prognostic implications of these
mutations for treatment response, progression to AML, and survival.

PMID: 22160087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Circ Res. 2012 Feb 3;110(3):406-15. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.252205. Epub 2011
Dec 8.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 regulates normal development of the mouse heart.

He A(1), Ma Q, Cao J, von Gise A, Zhou P, Xie H, Zhang B, Hsing M, Christodoulou 
DC, Cahan P, Daley GQ, Kong SW, Orkin SH, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, Pu WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Children's Hospital Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2012 Feb 3;110(3):372-4.

RATIONALE: Epigenetic marks are crucial for organogenesis, but their role in
heart development is poorly understood. Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)
trimethylates histone H3 at lysine 27, which establishes H3K27me3 repressive
epigenetic marks that promote tissue-specific differentiation by silencing
ectopic gene programs.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the function of PRC2 in murine heart development using a
tissue-restricted conditional inactivation strategy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Inactivation of the PRC2 subunit Ezh2 by Nkx2-5(Cre)
(Ezh2(NK)) caused lethal congenital heart malformations, namely, compact
myocardial hypoplasia, hypertrabeculation, and ventricular septal defect.
Candidate and genome-wide RNA expression profiling and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses of Ezh2(NK) heart identified genes directly
repressed by EZH2. Among these were the potent cell cycle inhibitors Ink4a/b
(inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 A and B), the upregulation of which was 
associated with decreased cardiomyocyte proliferation in Ezh2(NK). EZH2-repressed
genes were enriched for transcriptional regulators of noncardiomyocyte expression
programs such as Pax6, Isl1, and Six1. EZH2 was also required for proper
spatiotemporal regulation of cardiac gene expression, because Hcn4, Mlc2a, and
Bmp10 were inappropriately upregulated in ventricular RNA. PRC2 was also required
later in heart development, as indicated by cardiomyocyte-restricted TNT-Cre
inactivation of the PRC2 subunit Eed. However, Ezh2 inactivation by TNT-Cre did
not cause an overt phenotype, likely because of functional redundancy with Ezh1. 
Thus, early Ezh2 inactivation by Nk2-5(Cre) caused later disruption of
cardiomyocyte gene expression and heart development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals a previously undescribed role of EZH2 in
regulating heart formation and shows that perturbation of the epigenetic
landscape early in cardiogenesis has sustained disruptive effects at later
developmental stages.

PMCID: PMC3282145
PMID: 22158708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Mar;5(3):484-91. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0414. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

ALDH1A1 is a novel EZH2 target gene in epithelial ovarian cancer identified by
genome-wide approaches.

Li H(1), Bitler BG, Vathipadiekal V, Maradeo ME, Slifker M, Creasy CL, Tummino
PJ, Cairns P, Birrer MJ, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Cancer Program and Epigenetics and Progenitor Cell Keystone Program,
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) remains the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in
the United States. EZH2 silences gene expression through trimethylating lysine 27
on histone H3 (H3K27Me3). EZH2 is often overexpressed in EOC and has been
suggested as a target for EOC intervention. However, EZH2 target genes in EOC
remain poorly understood. Here, we mapped the genomic loci occupied by
EZH2/H3K27Me3 using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation
sequencing (ChIP-seq) and globally profiled gene expression in EZH2-knockdown EOC
cells. Cross-examination of gene expression and ChIP-seq revealed a list of 60
EZH2 direct target genes whose expression was upregulated more than 1.5-fold upon
EZH2 knockdown. For three selected genes (ALDH1A1, SSTR1, and DACT3), we
validated their upregulation upon EZH2 knockdown and confirmed the binding of
EZH2/H3K27Me3 to their genomic loci. Furthermore, the presence of H3K27Me3 at the
genomic loci of these EZH2 target genes was dependent upon EZH2. Interestingly,
expression of ALDH1A1, a putative marker for EOC stem cells, was significantly
downregulated in high-grade serous EOC (n = 53) compared with ovarian surface
epithelial cells (n = 10, P < 0.001). Notably, expression of ALDH1A1 negatively
correlated with expression of EZH2 (n = 63, Spearman r = -0.41, P < 0.001). Thus,
we identified a list of 60 EZH2 target genes and established that ALDH1A1 is a
novel EZH2 target gene in EOC cells. Our results suggest a role for EZH2 in
regulating EOC stem cell equilibrium via regulation of ALDH1A1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3294119
PMID: 22144423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 20;287(4):2798-809. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.258947. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

TCF12 protein functions as transcriptional repressor of E-cadherin, and its
overexpression is correlated with metastasis of colorectal cancer.

Lee CC(1), Chen WS, Chen CC, Chen LL, Lin YS, Fan CS, Huang TS.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Cancer Research, National Health Research Institutes,
Miaoli 350, Taiwan.

A correlation of TCF12 mRNA overexpression with colorectal cancer (CRC)
metastasis was suggested by microarray data and validated by the survey of 120
patients. Thirty-three (27.5%) of the 120 patients showed tumor TCF12 mRNA
overexpression and had a higher rate of metastatic occurrence (p = 0.020) and a
poorer survival outcome (p = 0.014). Abundant TCF12 levels were also observed in 
human CRC cell lines such as SW620 and LoVo, but a relatively low level was
detected in SW480 cells. Knockdown of TCF12 expression in SW620 and LoVo cells
drastically reduced their activities of migration, invasion, and metastasis.
Tight cell-cell contact and an increase in E-cadherin but a concomitant decrease 
in fibronectin were observed in TCF12-knockdown cells. Connexin 26, connexin 43, 
and gap-junction activity were also increased upon TCF12-knockdown. In contrast, 
ectopic TCF12 overexpression in SW480 cells facilitated fibronectin expression
and cell migration and invasion activities but diminished cellular levels of
E-cadherin, connexin 26, connexin 43, and gap junction. A physical association of
TCF12 with the E-cadherin promoter was evidenced by chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay. TCF12 was tightly correlated with cellular expression of Bmi1 and EZH2 and
was co-immunoprecipitable with Bmi1 and EZH2, suggesting that TCF12
transcriptionally suppressed E-cadherin expression via polycomb group-repressive 
complexes. Clinically, TCF12 mRNA overexpression was also correlated with
E-cadherin mRNA down-regulation in the tumor tissues of our 120 patients (p =
0.013). These studies suggested that TCF12 functioned as a transcriptional
repressor of E-cadherin and its overexpression was significantly correlated with 
the occurrence of CRC metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3268437
PMID: 22130667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Epigenomics. 2011 Dec;3(6):715-32. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.93.

Epigenetic and epigenomic mechanisms shape sarcoma and other mesenchymal tumor
pathogenesis.

Bennani-Baiti IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria. idriss.bennani@ccri.at

Sarcomas comprise a large number of rare, histogenetically heterogeneous,
mesenchymal tumors. Cancers such as Ewing's sarcoma, liposarcoma,
rhabdomyosarcoma and synovial sarcoma can be generated by the transduction of
mesenchymal stem cell progenitors with sarcoma-pathognomonic oncogenic fusions, a
neoplastic transformation process accompanied by profound locus-specific and
pangenomic epigenetic alterations. The epigenetic activities of histone-modifying
and chromatin-remodeling enzymes such as SUV39H1/KMT1A, EZH2/KMT6A and BMI1 are
central to epigenetic-regulated transformation, a property we coin oncoepigenic. 
Sarcoma-specific oncoepigenic aberrations modulate critical signaling pathways
that control cell growth and differentiation including several miRNAs, Wnt,
PI3K/AKT, Sav-RASSF1-Hpo and regulators of the G1 and G2/M checkpoints of the
cell cycle. Herein an overview of the current knowledge of this rapidly evolving 
field that will undoubtedly uncover additional oncoepigenic mechanisms and yield 
druggable targets in the near future is discussed.

PMID: 22126291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Epigenomics. 2011 Apr;3(2):127-8. doi: 10.2217/epi.11.4.

EZH2 and cancer stem cells: fact or fiction?

Crea F.

PMID: 22122274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1274-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-364422. Epub 2011
Nov 23.

Inhibition of histone methylation arrests ongoing graft-versus-host disease in
mice by selectively inducing apoptosis of alloreactive effector T cells.

He S(1), Wang J, Kato K, Xie F, Varambally S, Mineishi S, Kuick R, Mochizuki K,
Liu Y, Nieves E, Mani RS, Chinnaiyan AM, Marquez VE, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 1500 E Medical Drive,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5942, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1102-3.

Histone methylation is thought to be important for regulating Ag-driven T-cell
responses. However, little is known about the effect of modulating histone
methylation on inflammatory T-cell responses. We demonstrate that in vivo
administration of the histone methylation inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep)
arrests ongoing GVHD in mice after allogeneic BM transplantation. DZNep caused
selective apoptosis in alloantigen-activated T cells mediating host tissue
injury. This effect was associated with the ability of DZNep to selectively
reduce trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27, deplete the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2 specific to trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27, and
activate proapoptotic gene Bim repressed by Ezh2 in antigenic-activated T cells. 
In contrast, DZNep did not affect the survival of alloantigen-unresponsive T
cells in vivo and naive T cells stimulated by IL-2 or IL-7 in vitro. Importantly,
inhibition of histone methylation by DZNep treatment in vivo preserved the
antileukemia activity of donor T cells and did not impair the recovery of
hematopoiesis and lymphocytes, leading to significantly improved survival of
recipients after allogeneic BM transplantation. Our findings indicate that
modulation of histone methylation may have significant implications in the
development of novel approaches to treat ongoing GVHD and other T cell-mediated
inflammatory disorders in a broad context.

PMCID: PMC3338164
PMID: 22117046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2012 Aug;83(2):184-93. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2011.10.007. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Polycomb genes and cancer: time for clinical application?

Crea F(1), Paolicchi E, Marquez VE, Danesi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pharmacology, University of Pisa,
Via Roma 55, 56100 Pisa, Italy. fr.crea@gmail.com

Polycomb group genes (PcGs) are epigenetic effectors, essential for stem cell
self-renewal and pluripotency. Two main Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC1,
PRC2) mediate gene silencing through histone post-translational modifications.
PcGs have been the focus of investigation in cancer research. Many cancer types
show an over-expression of PcGs, predicting poor prognosis, metastasis and
chemoresistance. Genetic polymorphisms of EZH2 (a PRC2 component) are
significantly associated to lung cancer risk. Recently, 3-Deazaneplanocin A
(DZNeP) was identified as an efficient inhibitor of PRC2 activity. DZNeP impairs 
cancer stem cell self-renewal and tumorigenicity. Despite the well-established
role of PcGs in cancer stem cell biology, few studies dissected the clinical
significance of these genes. In this paper, we explore PcGs as predictive and
prognostic factors in oncology, with particular emphasis on what they can add to 
current biomarkers. We also propose a model for the rational development of
DZNeP-based anticancer regimens and suggest the therapeutic applications of this 
drug.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22112692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27722. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027722. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Epigenetic regulation of miR-212 expression in lung cancer.

Incoronato M(1), Urso L, Portela A, Laukkanen MO, Soini Y, Quintavalle C, Keller 
S, Esteller M, Condorelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS SDN, Naples, Italy.

Many studies have shown that microRNA expression in cancer may be regulated by
epigenetic events. Recently, we found that in lung cancer miR-212 was strongly
down-regulated. However, mechanisms involved in the regulation of miR-212
expression are unknown. Therefore, we addressed this point by investigating the
molecular mechanisms of miR-212 silencing in lung cancer. We identified histone
modifications rather than DNA hypermethylation as epigenetic events that regulate
miR-212 levels in NSCLC. Moreover, we found that miR-212 silencing in vivo is
closely associated with the severity of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3216999
PMID: 22110741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):335-45. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2182. Epub
2011 Nov 22.

Curcumin analogue CDF inhibits pancreatic tumor growth by switching on suppressor
microRNAs and attenuating EZH2 expression.

Bao B(1), Ali S, Banerjee S, Wang Z, Logna F, Azmi AS, Kong D, Ahmad A, Li Y,
Padhye S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

The histone methyltransferase EZH2 is a central epigenetic regulator of cell
survival, proliferation, and cancer stem cell (CSC) function. EZH2 expression is 
increased in various human cancers, including highly aggressive pancreatic
cancers, but the mechanisms underlying for its biologic effects are not yet well 
understood. In this study, we probed EZH2 function in pancreatic cancer using
diflourinated-curcumin (CDF), a novel analogue of the turmeric spice component
curcumin that has antioxidant properties. CDF decreased pancreatic cancer cell
survival, clonogenicity, formation of pancreatospheres, invasive cell migration, 
and CSC function in human pancreatic cancer cells. These effects were associated 
with decreased expression of EZH2 and increased expression of a panel of
tumor-suppressive microRNAs (miRNA), including let-7a, b, c, d, miR-26a, miR-101,
miR-146a, andmiR-200b, c that are typically lost in pancreatic cancer.
Mechanistic investigations revealed that reexpression of miR-101 was sufficient
to limit the expression of EZH2 and the proinvasive cell surface adhesion
molecule EpCAM. In an orthotopic xenograft model of human pancreatic cancer,
administration of CDF inhibited tumor growth in a manner associated with reduced 
expression of EZH2, Notch-1, CD44, EpCAM, and Nanog and increased expression of
let-7, miR-26a, and miR-101. Taken together, our results indicated that CDF
inhibited pancreatic cancer tumor growth and aggressiveness by targeting an
EZH2-miRNA regulatory circuit for epigenetically controlled gene expression.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3792589
PMID: 22108826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Hepatology. 2012 Apr;55(4):1271-81. doi: 10.1002/hep.24792. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Rosmarinic acid and baicalin epigenetically derepress peroxisomal
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> in hepatic stellate cells for their
antifibrotic effect.

Yang MD(1), Chiang YM, Higashiyama R, Asahina K, Mann DA, Mann J, Wang CC,
Tsukamoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Southern California Research Center for ALPD and Cirrhosis and Department of
Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) undergo myofibroblastic transdifferentiation
(activation) to participate in liver fibrosis and identification of molecular
targets for this cell fate regulation is essential for development of efficacious
therapeutic modalities for the disease. Peroxisomal proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) is required for differentiation of HSCs and its epigenetic
repression underlies HSC activation. The herbal prescription Yang-Gan-Wan (YGW)
prevents liver fibrosis, but its active ingredients and molecular mechanisms are 
unknown. Here we demonstrate YGW prevents and reverses HSC activation by way of
epigenetic derepression of Ppar<U+03B3> involving reductions in MeCP2 expression and its
recruitment to Ppar<U+03B3> promoter, suppressed expression of PRC2 methyltransferase
EZH2, and consequent reduction of H2K27di-methylation at the 3' exon.
High-performance liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (HPLC/MS) and nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) analyses identify polyphenolic rosmarinic acid (RA) and 
baicalin (BC) as active phytocompounds. RA and BC suppress the expression and
signaling by canonical Wnts, which are implicated in the aforementioned Ppar<U+03B3>
epigenetic repression. RA treatment in mice with existing cholestatic liver
fibrosis inhibits HSC activation and progression of liver fibrosis.CONCLUSION:
These results demonstrate a therapeutic potential of YGW and its active component
RA and BC for liver fibrosis by way of Ppar<U+03B3> derepression mediated by suppression
of canonical Wnt signaling in HSCs.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3302956
PMID: 22095555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(3):937-47. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1877-4. 
Epub 2011 Nov 18.

High miR-26a and low CDC2 levels associate with decreased EZH2 expression and
with favorable outcome on tamoxifen in metastatic breast cancer.

Jansen MP(1), Reijm EA, Sieuwerts AM, Ruigrok-Ritstier K, Look MP,
Rodríguez-González FG, Heine AA, Martens JW, Sleijfer S, Foekens JA, Berns EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Josephine Nefkens Institute and Cancer
Genomics Center, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Room Be401, PO Box 2040, 3000 
CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.p.h.m.jansen@erasmusmc.nl

Comment in
    Pharmacogenomics. 2012 Apr;13(6):645-9.

For patients with metastatic breast cancer, we previously described that
increased EZH2 expression levels were associated with an adverse outcome to
tamoxifen therapy. Main objective of the present study is to investigate miR-26a 
and miR-101 levels, which both target EZH2, for their association with molecular 
pathways and with efficacy of tamoxifen as first-line monotherapy for metastatic 
breast cancer. Expression levels were measured using quantitative Real-Time
Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) in primary breast cancer specimens of 235
estrogen receptor-a (ER)-positive patients. Pathway analysis was performed on
microarray data available for 65 of these tumors. Logistic regression and Cox
uni- and multivariate analysis were performed to relate expression levels with
clinical benefit and time to progression (TTP). Increasing levels of miR-26a were
significantly (P < 0.005) associated with both clinical benefit and prolonged
TTP, whereas miR-101 was not. Cell cycle regulation and CCNE1 and CDC2 were the
only significant overlapping pathway and genes differentially expressed between
tumors with high and low levels of miR-26a and EZH2, respectively. In addition,
increasing mRNA levels of CCNE1 (P < 0.05) and CDC2 (P < 0.001) were related to
poor outcome. Multivariate analysis revealed miR-26a and CDC2 as an optimal set
of markers associated with outcome on tamoxifen therapy, independently of
traditional predictive factors. To summarize, only miR-26a levels are related
with treatment outcome. Cell cycle regulation is the only overlapping pathway
linked to miR-26a and EZH2 levels. Low mRNA levels of EZH2, CCNE1, and CDC2, and 
high levels of miR-26a are associated with favorable outcome on tamoxifen.

PMCID: PMC3387494
PMID: 22094936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Nat Immunol. 2011 Nov 16;12(12):1139-40. doi: 10.1038/ni.2163.

Turning transcription on or off with STAT5: when more is less.

Farrar MA, Harris LM.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Dec;12(12):1212-20.

PMID: 22089213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Mar;5(3):355-64. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0299. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Metformin inhibits cell proliferation, migration and invasion by attenuating CSC 
function mediated by deregulating miRNAs in pancreatic cancer cells.

Bao B(1), Wang Z, Ali S, Ahmad A, Azmi AS, Sarkar SH, Banerjee S, Kong D, Li Y,
Thakur S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 740 Hudson Webber Cancer Research Center, 4100 John R Street,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2012 Mar;5(3):351-4.

Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the
United States, which is, in part, due to intrinsic (de novo) and extrinsic
(acquired) resistance to conventional therapeutics, suggesting that innovative
treatment strategies are required for overcoming therapeutic resistance to
improve overall survival of patients. Oral administration of metformin in
patients with diabetes mellitus has been reported to be associated with reduced
risk of pancreatic cancer and that metformin has been reported to kill cancer
stem cells (CSC); however, the exact molecular mechanism(s) has not been fully
elucidated. In the current study, we examined the effect of metformin on cell
proliferation, cell migration and invasion, and self-renewal capacity of CSCs and
further assessed the expression of CSC marker genes and microRNAs (miRNA) in
human pancreatic cancer cells. We found that metformin significantly decreased
cell survival, clonogenicity, wound-healing capacity, sphere-forming capacity
(pancreatospheres), and increased disintegration of pancreatospheres in both
gemcitabine-sensitive and gemcitabine-resistant pancreatic cancer cells.
Metformin also decreased the expression of CSC markers,CD44, EpCAM,EZH2, Notch-1,
Nanog and Oct4, and caused reexpression of miRNAs (let-7a,let-7b, miR-26a,
miR-101, miR-200b, and miR-200c) that are typically lost in pancreatic cancer and
especially in pancreatospheres. We also found that reexpression of miR-26a by
transfection led to decreased expression of EZH2 and EpCAM in pancreatic cancer
cells. These results clearly suggest that the biologic effects of metformin are
mediated through reexpression of miRNAs and decreased expression of CSC-specific 
genes, suggesting that metformin could be useful for overcoming therapeutic
resistance of pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3786260
PMID: 22086681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002359. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002359. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

Activation of Bmp2-Smad1 signal and its regulation by coordinated alteration of
H3K27 trimethylation in Ras-induced senescence.

Kaneda A(1), Fujita T, Anai M, Yamamoto S, Nagae G, Morikawa M, Tsuji S, Oshima
M, Miyazono K, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. kaneda@genome.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Cellular senescence involves epigenetic alteration, e.g. loss of H3K27me3 in
Ink4a-Arf locus. Using mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF), we here analyzed
transcription and epigenetic alteration during Ras-induced senescence on
genome-wide scale by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-sequencing and
microarray. Bmp2 was the most activated secreted factor with H3K4me3 gain and
H3K27me3 loss, whereas H3K4me3 loss and de novo formation of H3K27me3 occurred
inversely in repression of nine genes, including two BMP-SMAD inhibitors Smad6
and Noggin. DNA methylation alteration unlikely occurred. Ras-activated cells
senesced with nuclear accumulation of phosphorylated SMAD1/5/8. Senescence was
bypassed in Ras-activated cells when Bmp2/Smad1 signal was blocked by Bmp2
knockdown, Smad6 induction, or Noggin induction. Senescence was induced when
recombinant BMP2 protein was added to Bmp2-knocked-down Ras-activated cells.
Downstream Bmp2-Smad1 target genes were then analyzed genome-wide by
ChIP-sequencing using anti-Smad1 antibody in MEF that was exposed to BMP2. Smad1 
target sites were enriched nearby transcription start sites of genes, which
significantly correlated to upregulation by BMP2 stimulation. While Smad6 was one
of Smad1 target genes to be upregulated by BMP2 exposure, Smad6 repression in
Ras-activated cells with increased enrichment of Ezh2 and gain of H3K27me3
suggested epigenetic disruption of negative feedback by Polycomb. Among Smad1
target genes that were upregulated in Ras-activated cells without increased
repressive mark, Parvb was found to contribute to growth inhibition as Parvb
knockdown lead to escape from senescence. It was revealed through genome-wide
analyses in this study that Bmp2-Smad1 signal and its regulation by harmonized
epigenomic alteration play an important role in Ras-induced senescence.

PMCID: PMC3207904
PMID: 22072987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;72(1):315-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0961. Epub
2011 Nov 8.

EZH2 Mediates epigenetic silencing of neuroblastoma suppressor genes CASZ1, CLU, 
RUNX3, and NGFR.

Wang C(1), Liu Z, Woo CW, Li Z, Wang L, Wei JS, Marquez VE, Bates SE, Jin Q, Khan
J, Ge K, Thiele CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cell & Molecular Biology Section, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is the most common extracranial pediatric solid tumor with an 
undifferentiated status and generally poor prognosis, but the basis for these
characteristics remains unknown. In this study, we show that upregulation of the 
Polycomb protein histone methyltransferase EZH2, which limits differentiation in 
many tissues, is critical to maintain the undifferentiated state and poor
prognostic status of NB by epigenetic repression of multiple tumor suppressor
genes. We identified this role for EZH2 by examining the regulation of CASZ1, a
recently identified NB tumor suppressor gene whose ectopic restoration inhibits
NB cell growth and induces differentiation. Reducing EZH2 expression by RNA
interference-mediated knockdown or pharmacologic inhibiton with 3-deazaneplanocin
A increased CASZ1 expression, inhibited NB cell growth, and induced neurite
extension. Similarly, EZH2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) displayed
3-fold higher levels of CASZ1 mRNA compared with EZH2(+/+) MEFs. In cells with
increased expression of CASZ1, treatment with histone deacetylase (HDAC)
inhibitor decreased expression of EZH2 and the Polycomb Repressor complex
component SUZ12. Under steady-state conditions, H3K27me3 and PRC2 components
bound to the CASZ1 gene were enriched, but this enrichment was decreased after
HDAC inhibitor treatment. We determined that the tumor suppressors CLU, NGFR, and
RUNX3 were also directly repressed by EZH2 like CASZ1 in NB cells. Together, our 
findings establish that aberrant upregulation of EZH2 in NB cells silences
several tumor suppressors, which contribute to the genesis and maintenance of the
undifferentiated phenotype of NB tumors.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3487161
PMID: 22068036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2012 Feb;80(2):323-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2011.10.014.
Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Loading 3-deazaneplanocin A into pegylated unilamellar liposomes by forming
transient phenylboronic acid-drug complex and its pharmacokinetic features in
Sprague-Dawley rats.

Sun F(1), Li J, Yu Q, Chan E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) is an attractive epigenetic anticancer agent through 
the inhibition of the cellular enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) protein. The
purpose of this study was to improve the pharmacokinetic characteristics of DZNep
in vivo through developing a unilamellar pegylated liposomal formulation
encapsulating DZNep (L-DZNep). A remote-loading method in the presence of
phenylboronic acid (R-w-PBA) was developed to stably encapsulating DZNep inside
liposomes (encapsulation efficiency=50.7% at molar ratio of 1:10 of drug to
lipids) through forming a transient PBA-DZNep complex. The pharmacokinetics of
L-DZNep was investigated in Sprague-Dawley rats. In comparison with free drug,
encapsulation of the DZNep in pegylated liposomes resulted in 99.3% reduction of 
the plasma clearance, whereas it increased the elimination half-life from 1.1 h
to 8.0 h and the area under the plasma concentration curve by 138-fold. These
findings demonstrate a novel approach (R-w-PBA method) through the development of
L-DZNep, which may be extensively applied for the encapsulation of hydrophilic
nucleoside analogs containing vicinal hydroxyl groups and protonable amino in the
pegylated liposomes. Additionally, the pegylated liposomes could effectively
prolong the retention of DZNep in the systemic circulation and therefore is
highly likely to increase the DZNep's tumor localization.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22061261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Pathologe. 2011 Nov;32 Suppl 2:271-6. doi: 10.1007/s00292-011-1504-5.

[Precursors of acute leukemia: myelodysplastic syndromes and myeloproliferative
neoplasms].

[Article in German]

Kreipe HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Carl Neuberg Str.
1, 30625, Hannover, Deutschland. Kreipe.Hans@MH-Hannover.de

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) represent 
neoplastic proliferations of hematopoietic stem cells, which may progress to loss
of differentiation and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Transitions between MDSs and
MPNs as well as combinations between both disorders occur and MPNs may acquire
dysplastic features combined with cytopenia. Myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
neoplasms show dysplastic and myeloproliferative properties and have in common
genetic aberrations at the stem cell level (TET2, ASXL 1, CBL, IDH 1, IDH 2,
EZH2, p53, Runx1), which may be found in one cell or may affect different
hematopoietic stem cells, expanding in parallel. Progress to AML follows a linear
clonal evolution only in a subset of cases. Alternatively AML derives from
secondary clones, devoid of any marker mutation or originates from a common
aberrant progenitor cell which shares other but not the JAK2 ( V617F ) mutation.

PMID: 22033685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Transl Med. 2011 Nov 5;9:191. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-191.

Six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the prostate and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 as immunotherapeutic targets for lung cancer.

Hayashi S(1), Kumai T, Matsuda Y, Aoki N, Sato K, Kimura S, Kitada M, Tateno M,
Celis E, Kobayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.
shayashi@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: T-cell based immunotherapy for lung cancer (LC) could be a promising 
and novel therapeutic approach. Six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the
prostate (STEAP) and the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) are highly expressed in LC and since the expression of molecules in normal
tissue is significantly lower as compared to tumor cells, these proteins are
considered as potential tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) for developing T-cell
based immunotherapy.
METHODS: We assessed the capacity of predicted CD4 T-cell epitopes from STEAP and
EZH2 to induce anti-tumor immune responses to LC cell lines.
RESULTS: Out of several predicted epitopes, two synthetic peptides, STEAP281-296 
and EZH295-109, were effective in inducing CD4 T-cell responses that were
restricted by HLA-DR1, DR15, or DR53 molecules, indicating that the peptides
function as promiscuous T-cell epitopes. Moreover, STEAP281-296 and
EZH295-109-reactive T-cells could directly recognize STEAP or EZH2 expressing LC 
cells in an HLA-DR restricted manner. In addition, some STEAP-reactive T-cells
responded to STEAP+ tumor cell lysates presented by autologous dendric cells.
Most significantly, both of these peptides were capable of stimulating in vitro
T-cell responses in patients with LC.
CONCLUSIONS: Peptides STEAP281-296 and EZH295-109 function as strong CD4 T-cell
epitopes that can elicit effective anti-tumor T-cell responses against STEAP or
EZH2 expressing LC. These observations may facilitate the translation of T-cell
based immunotherapy into the clinic for the treatment of LC.

PMCID: PMC3219573
PMID: 22053850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1208-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-367243. Epub 2011
Nov 3.

Inactivation of polycomb repressive complex 2 components in myeloproliferative
and myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Score J(1), Hidalgo-Curtis C, Jones AV, Winkelmann N, Skinner A, Ward D, Zoi K,
Ernst T, Stegelmann F, Döhner K, Chase A, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1097-8.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is a highly conserved histone H3 lysine 
27 methyltransferase that regulates the expression of developmental genes.
Inactivating mutations of the catalytic component of PRC2, EZH2, are seen in
myeloid disorders. We reasoned that the other 2 core PRC2 components, SUZ12 and
EED, may also be mutational targets in these diseases, as well as associated
factors such as JARID2. SUZ12 mutations were identified in 1 of 2 patients with
myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative neoplasms with 17q acquired
uniparental disomy and in 2 of 2 myelofibrosis cases with focal 17q11 deletions. 
All 3 were missense mutations affecting the highly conserved VEFS domain.
Analysis of a further 146 myelodysplastic syndrome/myeloproliferative neoplasm
patients revealed an additional VEFS domain mutant, yielding a total mutation
frequency of 1.4% (2 of 148). We did not find mutations of JARID2 or EED in
association with acquired uniparental disomy for chromosome 6p or 11q,
respectively; however, screening unselected cases identified missense mutations
in EED (1 of 148; 1%) and JARID2 (3 of 148; 2%). All 3 SUZ12 mutations tested and
the EED mutation reduced PRC2 histone methyltransferase activity in vitro,
demonstrating that PRC2 function may be compromised in myeloid disorders by
mutation of distinct genes.

PMID: 22053108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Am J Hematol. 2012 Feb;87(2):204-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.22216. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

TP53 mutations and polymorphisms in primary myelofibrosis.

Raza S(1), Viswanatha D, Frederick L, Lasho T, Finke C, Knudson R, Ketterling R, 
Pardanani A, Tefferi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

A total of 107 patients with chronic-phase primary myelofibrosis (PMF) were
screened for TP53 mutations, which were detected in 4 (4%) cases: (i) E204E;
GAG>GAA (silent exon 6); (ii) G245D; GGC>GAC (exon 7); (iii) R175H; CGC>CAC (exon
5); and (iv) six base insert (GGCGAG) after bp13767 (exon 6). Three (75%) of the 
four TP53-mutated cases also carried JAK2V617F whereas none were positive for MPL
or IDH mutations. Two of the four TP53 mutated cases were also screened for TET2,
ASXL1, DNMT3A, and EZH2 mutations and were negative. There was no significant
difference in presenting features or survival between TP53 mutated and unmutated 
cases. TP53 exon 4 single nucleotide polymporphism (SNPs) data for codon 72 were 
available on 104 patients and included 56% with homozygous Arg72Arg, 33% with
heterozygous Pro72Arg, and 11% with homozygous Pro72Pro. There were no
significant differences among the three codon 72 genotypes in terms of presenting
characteristics or survival.

PMID: 22052707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Blood. 2011 Dec 15;118(25):6553-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-340554. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

Dependency on the polycomb gene Ezh2 distinguishes fetal from adult hematopoietic
stem cells.

Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Mishima Y, Miyagi S, Negishi M, Saraya A, Konuma T, Shinga
J, Koseki H, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2012 Jul 26;120(4):924.

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins are essential regulators of hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs). In contrast to Bmi1, a component of Polycomb repressive complex 1
(PRC1), the role of PRC2 and its components in hematopoiesis remains elusive.
Here we show that Ezh2, a core component of PRC2, is essential for fetal, but not
adult, HSCs. Ezh2-deficient embryos died of anemia because of insufficient
expansion of HSCs/progenitor cells and defective erythropoiesis in fetal liver.
Deletion of Ezh2 in adult BM, however, did not significantly compromise
hematopoiesis, except for lymphopoiesis. Of note, Ezh2-deficient fetal liver
cells showed a drastic reduction in trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27
(H3K27me3) accompanied by derepression of a large cohort of genes, whereas on
homing to BM, they acquired a high level of H3K27me3 and long-term repopulating
capacity. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed that Ezh1, the gene encoding a backup
enzyme, is highly expressed in HSCs/progenitor cells in BM compared with those in
fetal liver, whereas Ezh2 is ubiquitously expressed. These findings suggest that 
Ezh1 complements Ezh2 in the BM, but not in the fetal liver, and reveal that the 
reinforcement of PcG-mediated gene silencing occurs during the transition from
proliferative fetal HSCs to quiescent adult HSCs.

PMID: 22042701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Dev Neurosci. 2011;33(5):451-67. doi: 10.1159/000330884. Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Abnormal microRNA expression in Ts65Dn hippocampus and whole blood: contributions
to Down syndrome phenotypes.

Keck-Wherley J(1), Grover D, Bhattacharyya S, Xu X, Holman D, Lombardini ED,
Verma R, Biswas R, Galdzicki Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Down syndrome (DS; trisomy 21) is one of the most common genetic causes of
intellectual disability, which is attributed to triplication of genes located on 
chromosome 21. Elevated levels of several microRNAs (miRNAs) located on
chromosome 21 have been reported in human DS heart and brain tissues. The Ts65Dn 
mouse model is the most investigated DS model with a triplicated segment of mouse
chromosome 16 harboring genes orthologous to those on human chromosome 21. Using 
ABI TaqMan miRNA arrays, we found a set of miRNAs that were significantly up- or 
downregulated in the Ts65Dn hippocampus compared to euploid controls.
Furthermore, miR-155 and miR-802 showed significant overexpression in the Ts65Dn 
hippocampus, thereby confirming results of previous studies. Interestingly,
miR-155 and miR-802 were also overexpressed in the Ts65Dn whole blood but not in 
lung tissue. We also found overexpression of the miR-155 precursors, pri- and
pre-miR-155 derived from the miR-155 host gene, known as B cell integration
cluster, suggesting enhanced biogenesis of miR-155. Bioinformatic analysis
revealed that neurodevelopment, differentiation of neuroglia, apoptosis, cell
cycle, and signaling pathways including ERK/MAPK, protein kinase C,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, m-TOR and calcium signaling are likely targets of 
these miRNAs. We selected some of these potential gene targets and found
downregulation of mRNA encoding Ship1, Mecp2 and Ezh2 in Ts65Dn hippocampus.
Interestingly, the miR-155 target gene Ship1 (inositol phosphatase) was also
downregulated in Ts65Dn whole blood but not in lung tissue. Our findings provide 
insights into miRNA-mediated gene regulation in Ts65Dn mice and their potential
contribution to impaired hippocampal synaptic plasticity and neurogenesis, as
well as hemopoietic abnormalities observed in DS.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3254042
PMID: 22042248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Oct;19(5):1303-9.

[An update on epigenetic regulator gene mutations and pathogenesis of
myelodysplastic syndromes].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JY(1), Xiao ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin, China.

The myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is a group of heterogeneous clonal disorders. 
So far, the etiology and pathogenesis of MDS is poorly understood. Recently, more
and more epigenetic regulator gene such as TET2, ASXL1, EZH2, DNMT3A and UTX
mutations were detected in patients with MDS: TET2 may convert 5-methylcytosine
(5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (hmC). TET2 is the most frequently mutated gene 
in MDS known so far and it may act as tumor-suppressor gene. ASXL1 belongs to the
enhancer of trithorax and Polycomb (ETP) gene group. MDS phenotypes may be caused
not only by loss-of-function of ASXL1 but also by gain-of-function mutations,
overexpression of this gene and so on. EZH2 is a kind of histone
methyltransferase. EZH2 is frequently over-expressed in a wide variety of
cancerous tissue types, which reveals it has oncogenic activity. While, defined
mutations resulted in dysfunction of histone methyltransferase activity,
suggesting that EZH2 acts as a tumor suppressor for myeloid malignancies. DNMT3A 
belongs to the DNA methyltransferases (DNMT) gene family. It may be correlated
with abnormal methylation status in patients with MDS. UTX coding protein is a
histone demethylase, and UTX can affect cell proliferation as well as cell fate
decision. Inactivating UTX mutations are found in multiple cancer types recently.
These gene mutations may play key roles in the pathogenesis of MDS, which are
summarized in this review.

PMID: 22040993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nat Immunol. 2011 Oct 30;12(12):1212-20. doi: 10.1038/ni.2136.

Epigenetic repression of the Igk locus by STAT5-mediated recruitment of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2.

Mandal M(1), Powers SE, Maienschein-Cline M, Bartom ET, Hamel KM, Kee BL, Dinner 
AR, Clark MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Rheumatology and Gwen Knapp Center for
Lupus and Immunology Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Dec;12(12):1139-40.

During B lymphopoiesis, recombination of the locus encoding the immunoglobulin
<U+03BA>-chain complex (Igk) requires expression of the precursor to the B cell antigen 
receptor (pre-BCR) and escape from signaling via the interleukin 7 receptor
(IL-7R). By activating the transcription factor STAT5, IL-7R signaling maintains 
proliferation and represses Igk germline transcription by unknown mechanisms. We 
demonstrate that a STAT5 tetramer bound the Igk intronic enhancer (E(<U+03BA>i)), which 
led to recruitment of the histone methyltransferase Ezh2. Ezh2 marked
trimethylation of histone H3 at Lys27 (H3K27me3) throughout the <U+03BA>-chain joining
region (J(<U+03BA>)) to the <U+03BA>-chain constant region (C(<U+03BA>)). In the absence of Ezh2, IL-7
failed to repress Igk germline transcription. H3K27me3 modifications were lost
after termination of IL-7R-STAT5 signaling, and the transcription factor E2A
bound E(<U+03BA>i), which resulted in acquisition of H3K4me1 and acetylated histone H4
(H4Ac). Genome-wide analyses showed a STAT5 tetrameric binding motif associated
with transcriptional repression. Our data demonstrate how IL-7R signaling
represses Igk germline transcription and provide a general model for
STAT5-mediated epigenetic transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC3233979
PMID: 22037603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Jan 1;18(1):77-90. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0962. Epub
2011 Oct 25.

Polycomb repressor complex-2 is a novel target for mesothelioma therapy.

Kemp CD(1), Rao M, Xi S, Inchauste S, Mani H, Fetsch P, Filie A, Zhang M, Hong
JA, Walker RL, Zhu YJ, Ripley RT, Mathur A, Liu F, Yang M, Meltzer PA, Marquez
VE, De Rienzo A, Bueno R, Schrump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

PURPOSE: Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are critical epigenetic mediators of stem 
cell pluripotency, which have been implicated in the pathogenesis of human
cancers. This study was undertaken to examine the frequency and clinical
relevance of PcG protein expression in malignant pleural mesotheliomas (MPM).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Microarray, quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR
(qRT-PCR), immunoblot, and immunohistochemistry techniques were used to examine
PcG protein expression in cultured MPM, mesothelioma specimens, and normal
mesothelial cells. Lentiviral short hairpin RNA techniques were used to inhibit
EZH2 and EED expression in MPM cells. Proliferation, migration, clonogenicity,
and tumorigenicity of MPM cells either exhibiting knockdown of EZH2 or EED, or
exposed to 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), and respective controls were assessed by 
cell count, scratch and soft agar assays, and murine xenograft experiments.
Microarray and qRT-PCR techniques were used to examine gene expression profiles
mediated by knockdown of EZH2 or EED, or DZNep.
RESULTS: EZH2 and EED, which encode components of polycomb repressor complex-2
(PRC-2), were overexpressed in MPM lines relative to normal mesothelial cells.
EZH2 was overexpressed in approximately 85% of MPMs compared with normal pleura, 
correlating with diminished patient survival. Overexpression of EZH2 coincided
with decreased levels of miR-101 and miR-26a. Knockdown of EZH2 orEED, or DZNep
treatment, decreased global H3K27Me3 levels, and significantly inhibited
proliferation, migration, clonogenicity, and tumorigenicity of MPM cells. Common 
as well as differential gene expression profiles were observed following
knockdown of PRC-2 members or DZNep treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Pharmacologic inhibition of PRC-2 expression/activity is a novel
strategy for mesothelioma therapy.

© 2011 AACR.

PMID: 22028491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Aging (Albany NY). 2011 Sep;3(9):873-88.

Replicative senescence of mesenchymal stem cells causes DNA-methylation changes
which correlate with repressive histone marks.

Schellenberg A(1), Lin Q, Schüler H, Koch CM, Joussen S, Denecke B, Walenda G,
Pallua N, Suschek CV, Zenke M, Wagner W.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Biomedical Engineering, Stem Cell Biology and Cellular
Engineering, RWTH Aachen University Medical School, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

Cells in culture undergo replicative senescence. In this study, we analyzed
functional, genetic and epigenetic sequels of long-term culture in human
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Already within early passages the fibroblastoid
colony-forming unit (CFU-f) frequency and the differentiation potential of MSC
declined significantly. Relevant chromosomal aberrations were not detected by
karyotyping and SNP-microarrays. Subsequently, we have compared DNA-methylation
profiles with the Infinium HumanMethylation27 Bead Array and the profiles
differed markedly in MSC derived from adipose tissue and bone marrow. Notably,
all MSC revealed highly consistent senescence-associated modifications at
specific CpG sites. These DNA-methylation changes correlated with histone marks
of previously published data sets, such as trimethylation of H3K9, H3K27 and EZH2
targets. Taken together, culture expansion of MSC has profound functional
implications - these are hardly reflected by genomic instability but they are
associated with highly reproducible DNA-methylation changes which correlate with 
repressive histone marks. Therefore replicative senescence seems to be
epigenetically controlled.

PMCID: PMC3227452
PMID: 22025769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jul 1;21(10):1639-52. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0389. Epub 2012 
Jan 4.

Global gene expression analysis of very small embryonic-like stem cells reveals
that the Ezh2-dependent bivalent domain mechanism contributes to their
pluripotent state.

Shin DM(1), Liu R, Wu W, Waigel SJ, Zacharias W, Ratajczak MZ, Kucia M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute at the James Graham Brown Cancer Center, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. d0shin03@amc.seoul.kr

Recently, we identified a population of Oct4(+)Sca-1(+)Lin(-)CD45(-) very small
embryonic-like stem cells (VSELs) in murine and human adult tissues. VSELs can
differentiate in vitro into cells from all 3 germ layers and in vivo
tissue-committed stem cells. Open chromatin structure of core pluripotency
transcription factors (TFs) supports the pluripotent state of VSELs. However, it 
has been difficult to determine how primitive VSELs maintain pluripotency, owing 
to their limited number in adult tissues. Here, we demonstrate by genome-wide
gene-expression analysis with a small number of highly purified murine bone
marrow-derived VSELs that Oct4(+) VSELs (i) express a similar, yet nonidentical, 
transcriptome as embryonic stem cells (ESCs), (ii) highly express cell cycle
checkpoint genes, (iii) express at a low level genes involved in protein turnover
and mitogenic pathways, and (iv) highly express enhancer of zeste drosophila
homolog 2 (Ezh2), a polycomb group protein. Furthermore, as a result of high
expression of Ezh2, VSELs, like ESCs, exhibit bivalently modified nucleosomes
(trimethylated H3K27 and H3K4) at promoters of important homeodomain-containing
developmental TFs, thus preventing premature activation of the lineage-committing
factors. Notably, spontaneous or RNA interference-enforced downregulation of Ezh2
during VSEL differentiation removes the bivalent domain (BD) structure, which
leads to de-repression of several BD-regulated genes. Therefore, we suggest that 
Oct4(+) VSELs, like other pluripotent stem cells, maintain their pluripotent
state through an Ezh2-dependent BD-mediated epigenetic mechanism. Furthermore,
our global survey of VSEL gene expression signature would not only advance our
understanding of biological process for their pluripotency, differentiation, and 
quiescence but should also help to develop better protocols for ex vivo expansion
of VSELs.

PMCID: PMC3376460
PMID: 22023227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(6):752-62. Epub 2011 May 29.

Recurring mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms alter epigenetic regulation
of gene expression.

Reuther GW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute
USA.

The prevalence of activating JAK2 mutations in myeloproliferative neoplasms
(MPNs) suggests that aberrant gene expression due to deregulated signaling of the
JAK2/STAT pathway plays an important role in the etiology of these diseases.
While likely true, recent work has uncovered some fascinating new insights into
both the function of mutationally-activated JAK2 as well as other mutated gene
products in MPNs, and how these mutations may affect gene expression. In addition
to being a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase that relays signals from cytokine
receptors, activated JAK2 can also function in the nucleus where it
phosphorylates histones and deregulates binding of the transcriptional repressor 
HP1a. In addition, MPN-associated JAK2 mutants phosphorylate PRMT5 and inhibit
its histone methyltransferase activity. Thus, in addition to the classical
JAK/STAT pathway, JAK2 activating mutations in MPNs may deregulate gene
expression by altering epigenetic mechanisms. Studies aimed at identifying the
biochemical ramifications of other recurring MPN mutations also suggest
deregulated epigenetic modifications may be important in MPN formation. Mutant
TET2, as well as IDH1/2, impairs the hydroxylation of methylcytosine, thus
affecting DNA methylation. Likewise, mutations in EZH2, a histone methyl
transferase, ASXL1, which functions in chromatin modifier complexes, and the DNA 
methyltransferase DNMT3A, appear to inactivate the functions of these proteins
toward regulating the epigenetic state of genes. Thus, it is likely that the
control of gene expression by epigenetic mechanisms plays an important role in
MPNs, since multiple recurring mutations in MPNs alter normal epigenetic
regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3195930
PMID: 22016825  [PubMed]


382. Am J Cancer Res. 2011;1(6):726-39. Epub 2011 May 16.

Menin represses tumorigenesis via repressing cell proliferation.

Wu T, Hua X.

Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) results from mutations in the tumor
suppressor gene, MEN1, which encodes nuclear protein menin. Menin is important
for suppressing tumorigenesis in various endocrine and certain non-endocrine
tissues. Although menin suppresses MEN1 through a variety of mechanisms including
regulating apoptosis and DNA repair, the role of menin in regulating cell
proliferation is one of the best-studied functions. Here, we focus on reviewing
various mechanisms underlying menin-mediated inhibition of cell proliferation.
Menin inhibits cell proliferation to repress MEN1 through multiple mechanisms. 1)
Menin interacts with various histonemodifying enzymes, such as MLL, EZH2 and
HDACs, to affect gene transcription, leading to repression of cell proliferation.
2) Menin also interacts with various transcription factors, such as JunD, NF-<U+03BA>B, 
PPAR<U+03B3> and VDR, to induce or suppress gene transcription. As these various
transcription factors are known to regulate cell proliferation, their interaction
with menin may be relevant to menin's role in inhibiting cell proliferation. 3)
Menin inhibits cell proliferation via TGF-ß signaling and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathways. 4) Menin represses certain pro-proliferative factors involved in
endocrine tumors such as IGFBP-2, IGF2 and PTHrP to repress cell proliferation.
5) Menin affects cell cycle progression to inhibit cell proliferation. This
review is helpful in our understanding of the comprehensive mechanisms whereby
menin represses MEN1 through inhibiting cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3195934
PMID: 22016823  [PubMed]


383. J Autoimmun. 2011 Nov;37(3):180-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2011.09.006. Epub 2011 Oct
19.

Inhibited expression of hematopoietic progenitor kinase 1 associated with loss of
jumonji domain containing 3 promoter binding contributes to autoimmunity in
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Zhang Q(1), Long H, Liao J, Zhao M, Liang G, Wu X, Zhang P, Ding S, Luo S, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by T
cell overactivation and B cell hyper-stimulation. Hematopoietic progenitor kinase
1 (HPK1, also called MAP4K1) negatively regulates T cell-mediated immune
responses. However, the role of HPK1 and the mechanisms that regulate HPK1
expression in SLE remain poorly understood. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) microarray data, we identified markedly increased histone H3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) enrichment at the HPK1 promoter of SLE CD4+ T cells
relative to controls, and confirmed this observation using ChIP and real-time PCR
experiments. We further found that HPK1 mRNA and protein levels were
significantly decreased in CD4+ T cells of patients with SLE, and that this
decrease was not caused by exposure to standard SLE medications. Down-regulating 
HPK1 in healthy CD4+ T cells significantly accelerated T cell proliferation and
production of IFN<U+03B3> and IgG. Consistent with these findings, overexpressing HPK1
in SLE CD4+ T cells caused a significant decrease in T cell reactivity. In
addition, we observed a striking decrease in jumonji domain containing 3 (JMJD3) 
binding, but no marked change in enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) binding, at
the HPK1 promoter region in SLE CD4+ T cells compared to healthy controls. SiRNA 
knock down of JMJD3 in healthy CD4+ T cells led to decreased JMJD3 binding and
increased H3K27me3 enrichment at the HPK1 promoter region, thus inhibiting the
expression of HPK1. Concordantly, plasmid-induced overexpression of JMJD3 in SLE 
CD4+ T cells led to increased JMJD3 binding, decreased H3K27me3 enrichment, and
up-regulated HPK1 expression. Our results show for the first time that inhibited 
HPK1 expression in SLE CD4+ T cells is associated with loss of JMJD3 binding and 
increased H3K27me3 enrichment at the HPK1 promoter, contributing to T cell
overactivation and B cell overstimulation in SLE. These findings suggest that
HPK1 may serve as a novel target for effective SLE therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22014533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42414-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.271064. Epub 2011
Oct 17.

Corepressor protein CDYL functions as a molecular bridge between polycomb
repressor complex 2 and repressive chromatin mark trimethylated histone lysine
27.

Zhang Y(1), Yang X, Gui B, Xie G, Zhang D, Shang Y, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University
Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

Polycomb group proteins play essential roles in transcriptional regulation of
multiple gene families involved in various pathophysiological processes. It is
believed that Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) is targeted to chromatin by
the EED subunit to methylate histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27), leading to a
repressive chromatin state that inhibits gene expression. Here we report that the
chromodomain-containing protein CDYL specifically recognizes di- and
tri-methylated H3K27 (H3K27me2 and H3K27me3) and directly interacts with EZH2,
the catalytic subunit of PRC2. We show that CDYL dramatically enhances the
methyltransferase activity of PRC2 toward oligonucleosome substrates in vitro.
Genome-wide analysis of CDYL targets by ChIP sequencing revealed that CDYL and
PRC2 share a number of genomic targets. CDYL is required for chromatin targeting 
and maximal enzymatic activity of PRC2 at their common target sites. Our
experiments indicate that CDYL functions as a molecular bridge between PRC2 and
the repressive chromatin mark H3K27me3, forming a positive feedback loop to
facilitate the establishment and propagation of H3K27me3 modifications along the 
chromatin.

PMCID: PMC3234934
PMID: 22009739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Med Genet. 2011 Dec;48(12):810-8. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100294. Epub 2011
Oct 15.

Chromosome 1p21.3 microdeletions comprising DPYD and MIR137 are associated with
intellectual disability.

Willemsen MH(1), Vallès A, Kirkels LA, Mastebroek M, Olde Loohuis N, Kos A,
Wissink-Lindhout WM, de Brouwer AP, Nillesen WM, Pfundt R, Holder-Espinasse M,
Vallée L, Andrieux J, Coppens-Hofman MC, Rensen H, Hamel BC, van Bokhoven H,
Aschrafi A, Kleefstra T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding gene transcripts involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of genes. Recent studies identified miRNAs as
important regulators of learning and memory in model organisms. So far, no
mutations in specific miRNA genes have been associated with impaired cognitive
functions.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In three sibs and two unrelated patients with intellectual
disability (ID), overlapping 1p21.3 deletions were detected by genome-wide array 
analysis. The shortest region of overlap included dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase
(DPYD) and microRNA 137 (MIR137). DPYD is involved in autosomal recessive
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency. Hemizygous DPYD deletions were
previously suggested to contribute to a phenotype with autism spectrum disorder
and speech delay. Interestingly, the mature microRNA transcript microRNA-137
(miR-137) was recently shown to be involved in modulating neurogenesis in adult
murine neuronal stem cells. Therefore, this study investigated the possible
involvement of MIR137 in the 1p21.3-deletion phenotype. The patients displayed a 
significantly decreased expression of both precursor and mature miR-137 levels,
as well as significantly increased expression of the validated downstream targets
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and Enhancer of Zeste,
Drosophila, Homologue 2 (EZH2), and the newly identified target Kruppel-like
factor 4 (KLF4). The study also demonstrated significant enrichment of miR-137 at
the synapses of cortical and hippocampal neurons, suggesting a role of miR-137 in
regulating local synaptic protein synthesis machinery.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that dosage effects of MIR137 are associated with 
1p21.3 microdeletions and may therefore contribute to the ID phenotype in
patients with deletions harbouring this miRNA. A local effect at the synapse
might be responsible.

PMID: 22003227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nature. 2011 Oct 12;478(7369):349-55. doi: 10.1038/nature10502.

PDGF signalling controls age-dependent proliferation in pancreatic ß-cells.

Chen H(1), Gu X, Liu Y, Wang J, Wirt SE, Bottino R, Schorle H, Sage J, Kim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Determining the signalling pathways that direct tissue expansion is a principal
goal of regenerative biology. Vigorous pancreatic ß-cell replication in juvenile 
mice and humans declines with age, and elucidating the basis for this decay may
reveal strategies for inducing ß-cell expansion, a long-sought goal for diabetes 
therapy. Here we show that platelet-derived growth factor receptor (Pdgfr)
signalling controls age-dependent ß-cell proliferation in mouse and human
pancreatic islets. With age, declining ß-cell Pdgfr levels were accompanied by
reductions in ß-cell enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) levels and ß-cell
replication. Conditional inactivation of the Pdgfra gene in ß-cells accelerated
these changes, preventing mouse neonatal ß-cell expansion and adult ß-cell
regeneration. Targeted human PDGFR-a activation in mouse ß-cells stimulated
Erk1/2 phosphorylation, leading to Ezh2-dependent expansion of adult ß-cells.
Adult human islets lack PDGF signalling competence, but exposure of juvenile
human islets to PDGF-AA stimulated ß-cell proliferation. The discovery of a
conserved pathway controlling age-dependent ß-cell proliferation indicates new
strategies for ß-cell expansion.

PMCID: PMC3503246
PMID: 21993628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cancer. 2012 Jun 1;118(11):2858-71. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26575. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Up-regulation of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is associated positively with cyclin
D1 overexpression and poor clinical outcome in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma.

Cao W(1), Feng Z, Cui Z, Zhang C, Sun Z, Mao L, Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The authors previously observed that enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) overexpression was associated significantly with the development of oral
cancer. In the current study, they investigated whether EZH2 can function as a
prognostic predictor for patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC).
METHODS: Expression levels of EZH2 in HNSCC cells were detected using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot analyses. In
addition, the effects of EZH2 ablation on the proliferation and invasion of HNSCC
cells were investigated through small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown.
Real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry were used to evaluate EZH2 and cyclin D1
expression in 46 HNSCC samples, and the expression levels also were re-evaluated 
in 124 independent samples by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression was elevated remarkably in HNSCC specimens and cell
lines. Upon EZH2 silencing, the proliferation and invasion of HNSCC cells were
remarkably suppressed. EZH2 expression frequently was correlated with cyclin D1
expression (P = .034) and tumor differentiation (P = .020). In addition, both
EZH2 messenger RNA levels and EZH2 protein levels were strongly associated with
signs of histologic severity (P = .012 and P = .032, respectively). Univariate
analysis revealed that high EZH2 expression was associated with worse overall
survival (P = .001) and disease-free survival (P = .002). The combined expression
of EZH2 and cyclin D1 had superior prognostic ability for patients with HNSCC
than the expression of either marker alone. In multivariate analysis, EZH2
expression was identified as an independent predictor of overall and disease-free
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that EZH2 is an independent prognostic
indicator for patients with HNSCC. In addition, an analysis of the combined
expression of EZH2 and cyclin D1 can serve as a more powerful prognostic
predictor for patients with HNSCC.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21989926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Life Sci. 2011 Dec 5;89(23-24):886-95. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.09.011. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

16-hydroxycleroda-3,13-dien-15,16-olide regulates the expression of
histone-modifying enzymes PRC2 complex and induces apoptosis in CML K562 cells.

Lin YH(1), Lee CC, Chang FR, Chang WH, Wu YC, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Natural Products, College of Pharmacy, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

AIMS: Histone modifications play central epigenetic roles in regulating the
entire genome of the cell and cell proliferation. Herein, we investigated the
effects of the natural compound, 16-hydroxycleroda-3,13-dien-15,16-olide (PL3),
on the expressions of histone-modifying enzymes, and examined how it induces
apoptosis in leukemia K562 cells.
MAIN METHODS: Cell proliferation was determined by an MTT assay, and
histone-modifying enzyme gene expressions were investigated by a quantitative
real-time PCR. Protein expressions were analyzed by a Western blot analysis. The 
histone H3K27 distribution was observed with immunofluorescence staining. To
verify polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) complex downstream gene expressions, 
a gene-expression array was performed to determine gene regulations.
KEY FINDINGS: PL3 induced apoptosis and modulated many histone-modifying enzymes,
especially the two PRC2 components, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and
suppressor of zeste 12 homolog (Suz12). Genes repressed by PRC2 were shown to be 
reactivated by PL3. Of these, 10 genes targeted by the PRC2 complex were
identified, and expressions of 10 pro-/antiapoptotic genes were significantly
regulated; these effects may have contributed to PL3-induced apoptosis in K562
cells. Regulation of other histone-modifying enzymes, including Aurora B, may
also be involved in cell-cycle regulation.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that the induction of apoptosis by PL3 might
partly occur through both a reduction in PRC2-mediated gene silencing and the
reactivation of downstream tumor suppressor gene expressions. PL3 acts as a novel
small-molecule histone modulator, which can potentially contribute to cancer
chemotherapy singly or as a combined medication.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biomol Screen. 2012 Jan;17(1):71-84. doi: 10.1177/1087057111422256. Epub 2011
Oct 4.

Fluorescence-based methods for screening writers and readers of histone methyl
marks.

Allali-Hassani A(1), Wasney GA, Siarheyeva A, Hajian T, Arrowsmith CH, Vedadi M.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The histone methyltransferase (HMT) family of proteins consists of enzymes that
methylate lysine or arginine residues on histone tails as well as other proteins.
Such modifications affect chromatin structure and play a significant regulatory
role in gene expression. Many HMTs have been implicated in tumorigenesis and
progression of multiple malignancies and play essential roles in embryonic
development and stem cell renewal. Overexpression of some HMTs has been observed 
and is correlated positively with various types of cancer. Here the authors
report development of a continuous fluorescence-based methyltransferase assay in 
a 384-well format and its application in determining kinetic parameters for
EHMT1, G9a, PRMT3, SETD7, and SUV39H2 as well as for screening against libraries 
of small molecules to identify enzyme inhibitors. They also report the
development of a peptide displacement assay using fluorescence polarization in a 
384-well format to assay and screen protein peptide interactions such as those of
WDR5 and EED, components of MLL and EZH2 methyltransferase complexes. Using these
high-throughput screening methods, the authors have identified potent inhibitors 
and ligands for some of these proteins.

PMID: 21972038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell. 2011 Nov 18;44(4):667-78. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.027. Epub 2011 
Sep 29.

Genomic maps of long noncoding RNA occupancy reveal principles of RNA-chromatin
interactions.

Chu C(1), Qu K, Zhong FL, Artandi SE, Chang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2011 Nov;12(11):742.
    Nat Methods. 2011 Dec;8(12):1000.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are key regulators of chromatin state, yet the
nature and sites of RNA-chromatin interaction are mostly unknown. Here we
introduce Chromatin Isolation by RNA Purification (ChIRP), where tiling
oligonucleotides retrieve specific lncRNAs with bound protein and DNA sequences, 
which are enumerated by deep sequencing. ChIRP-seq of three lncRNAs reveal that
RNA occupancy sites in the genome are focal, sequence-specific, and numerous.
Drosophila roX2 RNA occupies male X-linked gene bodies with increasing tendency
toward the 3' end, peaking at CES sites. Human telomerase RNA TERC occupies
telomeres and Wnt pathway genes. HOTAIR lncRNA preferentially occupies a GA-rich 
DNA motif to nucleate broad domains of Polycomb occupancy and histone H3 lysine
27 trimethylation. HOTAIR occupancy occurs independently of EZH2, suggesting the 
order of RNA guidance of Polycomb occupancy. ChIRP-seq is generally applicable to
illuminate the intersection of RNA and chromatin with newfound precision genome
wide.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3249421
PMID: 21963238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):4589-600. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1462. Epub 2011
Sep 27.

Loss of Foxd3 results in decreased ß-cell proliferation and glucose intolerance
during pregnancy.

Plank JL(1), Frist AY, LeGrone AW, Magnuson MA, Labosky PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0494, USA.

A complete molecular understanding of ß-cell mass expansion will be useful for
the improvement of therapies to treat diabetic patients. During normal periods of
metabolic challenges, such as pregnancy, ß-cells proliferate, or self-renew, to
meet the new physiological demands. The transcription factor Forkhead box D3
(Foxd3) is required for maintenance and self-renewal of several diverse
progenitor cell lineages, and Foxd3 is expressed in the pancreatic primordium
beginning at 10.5 d postcoitum, becoming localized predominantly to ß-cells after
birth. Here, we show that mice carrying a pancreas-specific deletion of Foxd3
have impaired glucose tolerance, decreased ß-cell mass, decreased ß-cell
proliferation, and decreased ß-cell size during pregnancy. In addition, several
genes known to regulate proliferation, Foxm1, Skp2, Ezh2, Akt2, and Cdkn1a, are
misregulated in islets isolated from these Foxd3 mutant mice. Together, these
data place Foxd3 upstream of several pathways critical for ß-cell mass expansion 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3230055
PMID: 21952247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Transl Med. 2011 Sep 27;9:163. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-163.

mRNA expression levels and genetic status of genes involved in the EGFR and NF-<U+03BA>B
pathways in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer patients.

Santarpia M(1), Magri I, Sanchez-Ronco M, Costa C, Molina-Vila MA,
Gimenez-Capitan A, Bertran-Alamillo J, Mayo C, Benlloch S, Viteri S, Gasco A,
Mederos N, Carcereny E, Taron M, Rosell R.

Author information: 
(1)Pangaea Biotech, USP Dexeus University Institute, Sabino Arana 5- 19,
Barcelona, 08028, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has a dismal prognosis.
EGFR is overexpressed or mutated in a large proportion of cases. Downstream
components of the EGFR pathway and crosstalk with the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway have not been
examined at the clinical level. We explored the prognostic significance of the
mRNA expression of nine genes in the EGFR and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways and of BRCA1 and
RAP80 in patients in whom EGFR and K-ras gene status had previously been
determined. In addition, NFKBIA and DUSP22 gene status was also determined.
METHODS: mRNA expression of the eleven genes was determined by QPCR in 60
metastatic NSCLC patients and in nine lung cancer cell lines. Exon 3 of NFKBIA
and exon 6 of DUSP22 were analyzed by direct sequencing. Results were correlated 
with outcome to platinum-based chemotherapy in patients with wild-type EGFR and
to erlotinib in those with EGFR mutations.
RESULTS: BRCA1 mRNA expression was correlated with EZH2, AEG-1, Musashi-2, CYLD
and TRAF6 expression. In patients with low levels of both BRCA1 and AEG-1, PFS
was 13.02 months, compared to 5.4 months in those with high levels of both genes 
and 7.7 months for those with other combinations (P=0.025). The multivariate
analysis for PFS confirmed the prognostic role of high BRCA1/AEG-1 expression
(HR, 3.1; P=0.01). Neither NFKBIA nor DUSP22 mutations were found in any of the
tumour samples or cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides a better understanding of the behaviour
of metastatic NSCLC and identifies the combination of BRCA1 and AEG-1 expression 
as a potential prognostic model.

PMCID: PMC3203857
PMID: 21951562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Nucleus. 2011 Jul-Aug;2(4):277-82. doi: 10.4161/nucl.2.4.16266. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Composition, recruitment and regulation of the PRC2 complex.

Nayak V(1), Xu C, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College St.,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The PRC2 histone methyltransferase complex is an important regulator of gene
expression programs in metazoans. Gene expression regulation by the PRC2 complex 
is critical for development and cell differentiation. Several recent studies have
begun to shed light on the molecular basis for the physiological function of the 
PRC2 complex. Here, we discuss some of these results and how they provide new
insights into the composition, recruitment and regulation of the PRC2 complex.

PMID: 21941108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Oncotarget. 2011 Sep;2(9):669-83.

Myc enforces overexpression of EZH2 in early prostatic neoplasia via
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms.

Koh CM(1), Iwata T, Zheng Q, Bethel C, Yegnasubramanian S, De Marzo AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

EZH2 is part of the PRC2 polycomb repressive complex that is overexpressed in
multiple cancer types and has been implicated in prostate cancer initiation and
progression. Here, we identify EZH2 as a target of the MYC oncogene in prostate
cancer and show that MYC coordinately regulates EZH2 through transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional means. Although prior studies in prostate cancer have
revealed a number of possible mechanisms of EZH2 upregulation, these changes
cannot account for the overexpression EZH2 in many primary prostate cancers, nor 
in most cases of high grade PIN. We report that upregulation of Myc in the mouse 
prostate results in overexpression of EZH2 mRNA and protein which coincides with 
reductions in miR-26a and miR-26b, known regulators of EZH2 in some non-prostate 
cell types, albeit not in others. Further, in human prostate cancer cells, Myc
negatively regulates miR-26a and miR-26b via direct binding to their parental Pol
II gene promoters, and forced overexpression of miR-26a and miR-26b in prostate
cancer cells results in decreased EZH2 levels and suppressed proliferation. In
human clinical samples, miR-26a and miR-26b are downregulated in most primary
prostate cancers. As a separate mechanism of EZH2 mRNA upregulation, we find that
Myc binds directly to and activates the transcription of the EZH2 promoter. These
results link two major pathways in prostate cancer by providing two additional
and complementary Myc-regulated mechanisms by which EZH2 upregulation occurs and 
is enforced during prostatic carcinogenesis. Further, the results implicate
EZH2-driven mechanisms by which Myc may stimulate prostate tumor initiation and
disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3248223
PMID: 21941025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Neural Dev. 2011 Sep 21;6:32. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-32.

The long noncoding RNA Six3OS acts in trans to regulate retinal development by
modulating Six3 activity.

Rapicavoli NA(1), Poth EM, Zhu H, Blackshaw S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurology and Ophthalmology, Center for
High-Throughput Biology and Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

BACKGROUND: Thousands of different long non-coding RNAs are expressed during
embryonic development, but the function of these molecules remains largely
unexplored.
RESULTS: Here we characterize the expression and function of Six3OS, a long
non-coding RNA that is transcribed from the distal promoter region of the gene
encoding the homeodomain transcription factor Six3. Overexpression and knockdown 
analysis of Six3OS reveals that it plays an essential role in regulating retinal 
cell specification. We further observe that Six3OS regulates Six3 activity in
developing retina, but does not do so by modulating Six3 expression. Finally, we 
show that Six3OS binds directly to Ezh2 and Eya family members, indicating that
Six3OS can act as a molecular scaffold to recruit histone modification enzymes to
Six3 target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate a novel mechanism by which
promoter-associated long non-coding RNAs can modulate the activity of their
associated protein coding genes, and highlight the importance of this diverse
class of molecules in the control of neural development.

PMCID: PMC3191369
PMID: 21936910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19 Suppl 3:S565-71. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-2068-6. Epub
2011 Sep 20.

Carcinogenesis of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm of the pancreas: loss
of microRNA-101 promotes overexpression of histone methyltransferase EZH2.

Nakahara O(1), Takamori H, Iwatsuki M, Baba Y, Sakamoto Y, Tanaka H, Chikamoto A,
Horino K, Beppu T, Kanemitsu K, Honda Y, Iyama K, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms of IPMN carcinogenesis are as yet unclear. This study 
aimed to determine whether expression of EZH2 promotes neoplastic progression of 
IPMN and PDCA, and to elucidate regulation of EZH2 expression by miR-101.
METHODS: EZH2 mRNA and protein expression were investigated in 8 human pancreatic
cancer cell lines by PCR and western blotting. Pre-miR-101 and anti-miR-101 were 
transfected into pancreatic cancer cells to elucidate EZH2 regulation by miR-101.
To evaluate whether EZH2 modulates malignant progression of IPMN, EZH2 expression
in IPMN was examined by immunohistochemistry. Next, we collected malignant and
benign cells from FFPE samples of IPMNs using laser capture microdissection and
extracted the RNA. miR-101 expression in IPMN was assessed using real-time PCR.
RESULTS: All pancreatic cancer cell lines expressed EZH2 mRNA and protein. The
induction of miR-101 by transfection of pre-miR-101 in MIA PaCa-2 was closely
related to a reduction in EZH2 protein production compared with control, whereas 
there was little difference in the expression of EZH2 mRNA. Anti-miR-101
transfected pancreatic cancer cells showed an increase in EZH2 protein, while the
level of EZH2 mRNA was not elevated. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the
expression of EZH2 was significantly higher in malignant than benign IPMN.
Expression of miR-101 was significantly lower in malignant IPMN than benign IPMN.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-101 targets EZH2 at the posttranscriptional level, and loss of
miR-101 could be a trigger for the adenomacarcinoma sequence of IPMN by
upregulation of EZH2. This study suggests miR-101-EZH2 blockade as a potential
therapeutic target in IPMN carcinogenesis.

PMID: 21932133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Ann Oncol. 2012 May;23(5):1207-13. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdr387. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

An EZH2 polymorphism is associated with clinical outcome in metastatic colorectal
cancer patients.

Crea F(1), Fornaro L, Paolicchi E, Masi G, Frumento P, Loupakis F, Salvatore L,
Cremolini C, Schirripa M, Graziano F, Ronzoni M, Ricci V, Farrar WL, Falcone A,
Danesi R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pisa,
Pisa, Italy. fr.crea@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Despite therapeutic innovations, metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) 
is still characterized by poor prognosis and few molecular markers predict the
risk of progression. Polycomb group genes (PcGs) are epigenetic modifiers
involved in tumor suppressor gene silencing. PcG member EZH2 mediates gene
silencing through histone-H3 lysine-27 methylation. In colorectal cancer (CRC),
EZH2 overexpression predicts shorter survival. Recently, four EZH2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been described. The present study was
aimed at evaluating the correlation between EZH2 SNPs and outcome parameters in
mCRC patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: DNA was extracted from blood samples of 110 mCRC patients
treated with first-line 5-fluorouracil, folinic acid, irinotecan (FOLFIRI) and
bevacizumab. Genotyping was carried out by real-time PCR. Genotype was used to
predict objective response, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall survival 
(OS). EZH2 messenger RNA levels were evaluated on lymphocytes of a parallel
cohort of 50 CRC patients.
RESULTS: One allelic variant (rs3757441 C/C versus C/T or T/T) was significantly 
associated with shorter PFS and OS (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05, respectively). At
multivariate analysis, the same variant resulted an independent predictor of PFS 
and OS (P < 0.05). The C/C variant was associated with significantly higher EZH2 
expression (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: An EZH2 SNP may be useful to predict clinical outcome in mCRC
patients.

PMID: 21926398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Oct;35(10):1463-72. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318224d2cd.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors express stem cell factors, which relate to the
expression of EZH2 and Id proteins.

Venneti S(1), Le P, Martinez D, Xie SX, Sullivan LM, Rorke-Adams LB, Pawel B,
Judkins AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Malignant rhabdoid tumors (MRTs) are highly aggressive pediatric tumors
associated with loss of expression of SMARCB1, commonly occurring in the central 
nervous system [referred to as atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RTs)] and in
the kidney and soft tissues. Histologically, MRTs are characterized by
immunohistochemical evidence of primitive neuroectodermal, mesenchymal, and
epithelial differentiation. The ability of MRTs to differentiate along multiple
lines, as evidenced by both histologic features and polyphenotypic
immunohistochemical staining, and the proliferative nature of MRT cells are
characteristics shared with the self-renewal and plasticity of embryonic stem
cells (ES). To test the hypothesis that MRTs share similarities with ES, we used 
immunohistochemistry to evaluate the expression of various stem cell markers in a
tissue microarray containing 26 AT/RTs and 16 non-central nervous system MRTs
(NCMRTs). Staining intensity was scored as negative (0), low (1+), moderate (2+),
and strong (3+) and was multiplied by the percentage of positive tumor cells to
establish a semiquantitative measure for each marker. In AT/RT, strong-to-low
expression was noted with glypican-3 (20 of 26, 77%), Sall4 (23 of 26, 88%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (25 of 26, 96%), and undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (19 of 26, 73%). Markers that showed low expression in
AT/RT were Sox2 (8 of 26, 31%), Nanog (7 of 26, 27%), Klf4 (10 of 26, 38%),
Zfp206 (5 of 26, 19%), and musashi-1 (21 of 26, 81%). Similarly, in NCMRT,
expression was noted with glypican-3 (12 of 16, 75%), Sall4 (13 of 16, 81%),
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (16 of 16, 100%), undifferentiated embryonic cell
transcription factor 1 (12 of 16, 75%), Sox2 (5 of 16, 31%), Nanog (8 of 16,
50%), Klf4 (8 of 16, 50%), Zfp206 (13 of 16, 81%), and musashi-1 (11 of 16, 75%).
Placental alkaline phosphatase, Oct4, c-KIT, CD30, a-fetoprotein, and ß- -human
chorionic gonadotrophin were not expressed in all cases. Markers that regulate
the expression of stem cell transcription factors were also expressed in MRT.
AT/RT cases showed expression of Id proteins: Id1 (17 of 26, 65%), Id2 (24 of 26,
92%), Id3 (22 of 26, 85%), and Id4 (22 of 26, 85%). Low expression was observed
with EZH2 (15 of 26, 58%). Similarly, NCMRT cases showed expression of Id1 (15 of
16, 94%), Id2 (16 of 16, 100%), Id3 (16 of 16, 100%), Id4 (13 of 16, 81%), and
EZH2 (13 of 16, 81%). Finally, regression analysis revealed a significant
relationship between the expression of stem cell markers and EZH2 (P<0.0001), Id1
(P=0.0087), Id2 (P=0.0002), Id3 (P=0.0033), and Id4 (P<0.0001). These data
suggest that MRTs express many stem cell-associated transcription factors, which 
may be regulated by the expression of EZH2 and the Id family of proteins. This
study underscores similarities between MRTs and stem cells and may help elucidate
common biologic pathways that could serve in advancing more effective therapeutic
strategies to treat MRTs.

PMID: 21921784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Blood. 2011 Nov 10;118(19):5227-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-363424. Epub 2011 
Sep 14.

EZH2 mutational status predicts poor survival in myelofibrosis.

Guglielmelli P(1), Biamonte F, Score J, Hidalgo-Curtis C, Cervantes F, Maffioli
M, Fanelli T, Ernst T, Winkelman N, Jones AV, Zoi K, Reiter A, Duncombe A,
Villani L, Bosi A, Barosi G, Cross NC, Vannucchi AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Critical Care, Section of Hematology,
University of Florence, Italy.

We genotyped 370 subjects with primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and 148 with
postpolycythemia vera/postessential thrombocythemia (PPV/PET) MF for mutations of
EZH2. Mutational status at diagnosis was correlated with hematologic parameters, 
clinical manifestations, and outcome. A total of 25 different EZH2 mutations were
detected in 5.9% of PMF, 1.2% of PPV-MF, and 9.4% of PET-MF patients; most were
exonic heterozygous missense changes. EZH2 mutation coexisted with JAK2V617F or
ASXL1 mutation in 12 of 29 (41.4%) and 6 of 27 (22.2%) evaluated patients; TET2
and CBL mutations were found in 2 and 1 patients, respectively. EZH2-mutated PMF 
patients had significantly higher leukocyte counts, blast-cell counts, and larger
spleens at diagnosis, and most of them (52.6%) were in the high-risk
International Prognostic Score System (IPSS) category. After a median follow-up
of 39 months, 128 patients (25.9%) died, 81 (63.3%) because of leukemia.
Leukemia-free survival (LFS) and overall survival (OS) were significantly reduced
in EZH2-mutated PMF patients (P = .028 and P < .001, respectively); no such
impact was seen for PPV/PET-MF patients, possibly due to the low number of
mutated cases. In multivariate analysis, survival of PMF patients was predicted
by IPSS high-risk category, a < 25% JAK2V617F allele burden, and EZH2 mutation
status. We conclude that EZH2 mutations are independently associated with shorter
survival in patients with PMF.

PMID: 21921040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):390-2. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.08.025.

Redirecting traffic in the nucleus.

Singh K(1), Dilworth FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, ON K1H 8L6, Canada.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):575-88.

Nuclear spatial organization of genes has emerged as an important determinant of 
their transcriptional activity. In this issue, Wang et al. (2011) show that the
Msx1 homeoprotein induces a dramatic redistribution of Ezh2 and H3K27me3 to the
nuclear periphery of muscle progenitor cells to repress transcription of
developmentally regulated genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21920308  [PubMed]


401. Biosci Rep. 2011 Dec;31(6):449-55. doi: 10.1042/BSR20100114.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer stemness: the Twist1-Bmi1
connection.

Wu KJ(1), Yang MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. kjwu2@ym.edu.tw

EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal transition), a major mechanism of cancer metastasis, 
is a process that generates cells with stem-like properties. These stem-like
cells in tumours are described as cancer stem cells. The link between EMT and
cancer stemness is well documented without detailed mechanistic proof. Bmi1
belongs to the PRC1 (polycomb repressive complex 1) maintaining self-renewal and 
stemness together with EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homologue 2), which is a component
of PRC2. Bmi1 is frequently overexpressed in different types of human cancers.
Recent demonstration of an EMT regulator, Twist1, directly regulating the
expression of Bmi1 provides a mechanistic explanation of the relationship between
EMT and cancer stemness. The functional interdependence between Twist1 and Bmi1
provides a fresh insight into the common mechanism mediating EMT and cancer
stemness. This observation is also confirmed using head and neck cancer patient
samples. These results provide a critical mechanism of Twist1-induced EMT and
cancer stemness in cancer cells through chromatin remodelling. The role of
hypoxia and microRNAs in regulating EMT and cancer stemness is also discussed.

© The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Biochemical Society

PMID: 21919891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;40(6):387-91.

[Expression and relationship of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3 in endometrial
adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo ZL(1), Chen K, Wang XQ, Hu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Affiliated Provincial Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of the expression of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3
proteins and their correlation in the pathogenesis of endometrial carcinoma.
METHODS: Expression of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3 proteins was examined by tissue 
microarray technique and immunohistochemistry (SP method) in 72 cases of
endometrial adenocarcinomas, 60 endometrial hyperplasia and 30 normal endometrial
tissues.
RESULTS: The positive expression rates of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3 proteins in
endometrial adenocarcinomas were 83.3% (60/72), 26.4% (19/72) and 33.3% (24/72), 
respectively. The positive rate of Ezh2 protein in endometrial carcinomas was
higher than that in normal endometrium and endometrial hyperplasia (16.7%, 33.3%,
63.3%;P < 0.05). However, the positive rate of Runx3 in endometrial carcinomas
was lower than that in normal endometrium and endometrial hyperplasia (80.0%,
56.7%; P < 0.01). The positive rate of caspase-3 protein in endometrial
carcinomas was lower than that in normal endometrium and endometrial hyperplasia 
(86.7%, 73.3%, 63.3%; P < 0.01). Positive expression of Ezh2 and Runx3 was
related to the histological grade, FIGO stage, and depth of invasion of
endometrial adenocarcinomas (P < 0.05), but it was not related to the lymph node 
metastasis (P > 0.05). Positive expression of caspase-3 protein was related to
the histological grade (P < 0.05), but it was not related to the FIGO stage,
depth of invasion and the lymph node metastasis of endometrial adenocarcinomas (P
> 0.05). The expression of Ezh2 protein was negatively correlated to that of
Runx3 (r(s) = -0.262, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal expression of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3 proteins is
associated with the development and progression of endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
Combined analysis of Ezh2, Runx3 and caspase-3 may offer prognostic information
for patients with endometrial cancer.

PMID: 21914347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;25(11):1892-903. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1139. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Down-regulation of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 contributes to the
epigenetic programming of decidualizing human endometrial stromal cells.

Grimaldi G(1), Christian M, Steel JH, Henriet P, Poutanen M, Brosens JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Hammersmith Campus,
London, United Kingdom.

Differentiation of human endometrial stromal cells (HESC) into decidual cells
represents a highly coordinated process essential for embryo implantation. We
show that decidualizing HESC down-regulate the histone methyltransferase enhancer
of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), resulting in declining levels of trimethylation of
histone 3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) at the proximal promoters of key decidual
marker genes PRL and IGFBP1. Loss of H3K27me3 was associated with a reciprocal
enrichment in acetylation of the same lysine residue, indicating active
remodeling from repressive to transcriptionally permissive chromatin. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation coupled with DNA microarray analysis demonstrated that
decidualization triggers genome-wide changes in H3K27me3 distribution that only
partly overlap those observed upon EZH2 knockdown in undifferentiated HESC. Gene 
ontology revealed that gain of the repressive H3K27me3 mark in response to
decidualization and upon EZH2 knockdown in undifferentiated cells was enriched at
the promoter regions of genes involved in transcriptional regulation and
growth/cell proliferation, respectively. However, loss of the H3K27me3 mark
(indicating increased chromatin accessibility) in decidualizing cells and upon
EZH2 knockdown occurred at selective loci enriched for genes functionally
implicated in responses to stimulus. In agreement, EZH2 knockdown in
undifferentiated HESC was sufficient to augment the induction of decidual marker 
genes in response to cyclic AMP and progesterone signaling. Thus, loss of
EZH2-dependent methyltransferase activity in the endometrium is integral to the
process of chromatin remodeling that enables the transition from a proliferative 
to a decidual phenotype in response to differentiation cues.

PMCID: PMC3198959
PMID: 21903722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Genes Cancer. 2011 May;2(5):585-92. doi: 10.1177/1947601911416357.

Critical Role of c-Myc in Acute Myeloid Leukemia Involving Direct Regulation of
miR-26a and Histone Methyltransferase EZH2.

Salvatori B(1), Iosue I, Djodji Damas N, Mangiavacchi A, Chiaretti S, Messina M, 
Padula F, Guarini A, Bozzoni I, Fazi F, Fatica A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biotechnology "Charles Darwin", Institute Pasteur
Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Increased expression or aberrant activation of c-Myc plays an important role in
leukemogenesis. Here, we show that in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), c-Myc
directly controls the expression of EZH2, a component of the Polycomb repressive 
complex 2, and miR-26a. miR-26a is downregulated in primary blasts from AML
patients and, during myeloid differentiation of AML cells, is induced together
with a decrease in c-Myc and Ezh2 levels. Previously, EZH2 was shown to be
regulated by miR-26a at the translational levels in lymphomas. However, we
demonstrate that in AML, the variation of EZH2 mainly depends on c-Myc
transcriptional control. We also show that enforced expression of miR-26a in AML 
cells is able to inhibit cell cycle progression by downregulating cyclin E2
expression. In addition, increased levels of miR-26a potentiate the
antiproliferative effects of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) (VitD) and stimulate
myeloid differentiation. Our results identify new molecular targets of c-Myc in
AML and highlight miR-26a attractiveness as a therapeutic target in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3161419
PMID: 21901171  [PubMed]


405. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2011 Sep 5;4:16. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-4-16.

Chromatin regulated interchange between polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-Ezh2
and PRC2-Ezh1 complexes controls myogenin activation in skeletal muscle cells.

Stojic L(1), Jasencakova Z, Prezioso C, Stützer A, Bodega B, Pasini D, Klingberg 
R, Mozzetta C, Margueron R, Puri PL, Schwarzer D, Helin K, Fischle W, Orlando V.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.
vorlando@dti.telethon.it.

BACKGROUND: Polycomb group (PcG) genes code for chromatin multiprotein complexes 
that are responsible for maintaining gene silencing of transcriptional programs
during differentiation and in adult tissues. Despite the large amount of
information on PcG function during development and cell identity homeostasis,
little is known regarding the dynamics of PcG complexes and their role during
terminal differentiation.
RESULTS: We show that two distinct polycomb repressive complex (PRC)2 complexes
contribute to skeletal muscle cell differentiation: the PRC2-Ezh2 complex, which 
is bound to the myogenin (MyoG) promoter and muscle creatine kinase (mCK)
enhancer in proliferating myoblasts, and the PRC2-Ezh1 complex, which replaces
PRC2-Ezh2 on MyoG promoter in post-mitotic myotubes. Interestingly, the opposing 
dynamics of PRC2-Ezh2 and PRC2-Ezh1 at these muscle regulatory regions is
differentially regulated at the chromatin level by Msk1 dependent methyl/phospho 
switch mechanism involving phosphorylation of serine 28 of the H3 histone
(H3S28ph). While Msk1/H3S28ph is critical for the displacement of the PRC2-Ezh2
complex, this pathway does not influence the binding of PRC2-Ezh1 on the
chromatin. Importantly, depletion of Ezh1 impairs muscle differentiation and the 
chromatin recruitment of MyoD to the MyoG promoter in differentiating myotubes.
We propose that PRC2-Ezh1 is necessary for controlling the proper timing of MyoG 
transcriptional activation and thus, in contrast to PRC2-Ezh2, is required for
myogenic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal another important layer of epigenetic control
orchestrating skeletal muscle cell terminal differentiation, and introduce a
novel function of the PRC2-Ezh1 complex in promoter setting.

PMCID: PMC3180244
PMID: 21892963  [PubMed]


406. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 12;31(15):1988-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.387. Epub 2011 Sep 5.

Silencing of Kruppel-like factor 2 by the histone methyltransferase EZH2 in human
cancer.

Taniguchi H(1), Jacinto FV, Villanueva A, Fernandez AF, Yamamoto H, Carmona FJ,
Puertas S, Marquez VE, Shinomura Y, Imai K, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program (PEBC), Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute (IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.

The Kruppel-like factor (KLF) proteins are multitasked transcriptional regulators
with an expanding tumor suppressor function. KLF2 is one of the prominent members
of the family because of its diminished expression in malignancies and its
growth-inhibitory, pro-apoptotic and anti-angiogenic roles. In this study, we
show that epigenetic silencing of KLF2 occurs in cancer cells through direct
transcriptional repression mediated by the Polycomb group protein Enhancer of
Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2). Binding of EZH2 to the 5'-end of KLF2 is also associated 
with a gain of trimethylated lysine 27 histone H3 and a depletion of
phosphorylated serine 2 of RNA polymerase. Upon depletion of EZH2 by RNA
interference, short hairpin RNA or use of the small molecule 3-Deazaneplanocin A,
the expression of KLF2 was restored. The transfection of KLF2 in cells with
EZH2-associated silencing showed a significant anti-tumoral effect, both in
culture and in xenografted nude mice. In this last setting, KLF2 transfection was
also associated with decreased dissemination and lower mortality rate. In
EZH2-depleted cells, which characteristically have lower tumorigenicity, the
induction of KLF2 depletion 'rescued' partially the oncogenic phenotype,
suggesting that KLF2 repression has an important role in EZH2 oncogenesis. Most
importantly, the translation of the described results to human primary samples
demonstrated that patients with prostate or breast tumors with low levels of KLF2
and high expression of EZH2 had a shorter overall survival.

PMCID: PMC3325596
PMID: 21892211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Curr Opin Oncol. 2011 Nov;23(6):665-71. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0b013e32834bb83f.

Advances in the understanding and management of primary myelofibrosis.

Cervantes F(1), Pereira A.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Department, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
fcervan@clinic.ub.es

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Identification of the JAK2V617F mutation in 2005 boosted basic
and clinical research in primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and other
Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloproliferative neoplasms. We herein review the 
recent contributions to the understanding and management of PMF.
RECENT FINDINGS: In addition to the JAK2V617F mutation, different genetic markers
have recently been discovered in PMF, the most relevant ones being the mutations 
in the thrombopoietin (MPL), TET2, and EZH2 genes. From the clinical point of
view, attention has recently been paid to thrombosis as a relevant complication
of PMF and new prognostic models for this disease have been created and refined. 
Regarding therapy, reduced intensity conditioning regimens have allowed the
possibility of performing allogeneic stem cell transplantation in older PMF
patients, whereas the first clinical trials with JAK2 inhibitors have shown their
efficacy in splenomegaly and constitutional symptoms.
SUMMARY: The molecular biology of PMF is more complex than initially believed.
Due to its associated mortality risk, stem cell transplantation should be
restricted to patients with poor prognostic features. The JAK2-inhibitors are
promising as a palliative treatment of PMF. In conclusion, the once neglected PMF
has become a very active field of research, which will hopefully soon translate
into relevant therapeutic advances.

PMID: 21892083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Sep 2;9(3):233-46. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.07.013.

Regulation of human epidermal stem cell proliferation and senescence requires
polycomb- dependent and -independent functions of Cbx4.

Luis NM(1), Morey L, Mejetta S, Pascual G, Janich P, Kuebler B, Cozutto L, Roma
G, Nascimento E, Frye M, Di Croce L, Benitah SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) and UPF, 08003, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Nov 4;9(5):486. Cozutto, Luca [added].

Human epidermal stem cells transit from a slow cycling to an actively
proliferating state to contribute to homeostasis. Both stem cell states differ in
their cell cycle profiles but must remain guarded from differentiation and
senescence. Here we show that Cbx4, a Polycomb Repressive Complex 1
(PRC1)-associated protein, maintains human epidermal stem cells as slow-cycling
and undifferentiated, while protecting them from senescence. Interestingly,
abrogating the polycomb activity of Cbx4 impairs its antisenescent function
without affecting stem cell differentiation, indicating that differentiation and 
senescence are independent processes in human epidermis. Conversely, Cbx4
inhibits stem cell activation and differentiation through its SUMO ligase
activity. Global transcriptome and chromatin occupancy analyses indicate that
Cbx4 regulates modulators of epidermal homeostasis and represses factors such as 
Ezh2, Dnmt1, and Bmi1 to prevent the active stem cell state. Our results suggest 
that distinct Polycomb complexes balance epidermal stem cell dormancy and
activation, while continually preventing senescence and differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21885019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Cell. 2011 Sep 2;43(5):798-810. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.011.

Context-specific regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B target gene expression by EZH2 in breast
cancers.

Lee ST(1), Li Z, Wu Z, Aau M, Guan P, Karuturi RK, Liou YC, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency
for Science, Technology, and Research), Biopolis, Singapore 138672, Republic of
Singapore.

Both EZH2 and NF-<U+03BA>B contribute to aggressive breast cancer, yet whether the two
oncogenic factors have functional crosstalk in breast cancer is unknown. Here, we
uncover an unexpected role of EZH2 in conferring the constitutive activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B target gene expression in ER-negative basal-like breast cancer cells. This 
function of EZH2 is independent of its histone methyltransferase activity but
requires the physical interaction with RelA/RelB to promote the expression of
NF-<U+03BA>B targets. Intriguingly, EZH2 acts oppositely in ER-positive luminal-like
breast cancer cells and represses NF-<U+03BA>B target gene expression by interacting
with ER and directing repressive histone methylation on their promoters. Thus,
EZH2 functions as a double-facet molecule in breast cancers, either as a
transcriptional activator or repressor of NF-<U+03BA>B targets, depending on the
cellular context. These findings reveal an additional mechanism by which EZH2
promotes breast cancer progression and underscore the need for developing
context-specific strategy for therapeutic targeting of EZH2 in breast cancers.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21884980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Pathology. 2011 Oct;43(6):536-46. doi: 10.1097/PAT.0b013e32834a4061.

The epigenomics revolution in myelodysplasia: a clinico-pathological perspective.

Tan PT(1), Wei AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Haematology, The Alfred Hospital, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Rapid advances in molecular technologies are continually re-shaping the way we
view and understand the mechanisms driving oncogenesis. The last decade has
witnessed unparalleled change in the biology and therapy of the myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS), a heterogeneous collection of clonal myeloid disorders
characterised by ineffective haematopoiesis and susceptibility to acute leukaemia
transformation. Pivotal studies demonstrating the positive effects of
hypomethylating agents on clinical outcome have brought an 'epigenomics
revolution' to this disease, emphasising the importance of epigenetic mechanisms 
to the underlying pathogenesis of MDS. One of the most important future
challenges in the MDS field will be to determine whether epigenetic therapies can
be made more 'targeted' through identification of biomarkers which define subsets
of patients most likely to benefit from treatment. A wave of novel mutations have
recently been reported in MDS and other myeloid disorders, several of which
regulate endogenous methylation networks within cells (including TET2, DNMT3A,
IDH and EZH2). The relevance of these lesions in being able to predict response
to epigenetic modulators and their correlation with epigenetic signatures in MDS 
are beginning to emerge.

PMID: 21881538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Leuk Lymphoma. 2012 Apr;53(4):525-36. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2011.618235. Epub
2011 Nov 15.

Update on cytogenetic and molecular changes in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Schlegelberger B(1), Göhring G, Thol F, Heuser M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany. schlegelberger.brigitte@mh-hannover.de

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis
and a high propensity to transform to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In the
pathogenesis of the disease, both gene mutations and cytogenetic changes play an 
important role. The latter have been integrated into prognostic scoring systems
including the IPSS (International Prognostic Scoring System) and WPSS (World
Health Organization [WHO] classification-based Prognostic Scoring System). In
these systems and in multivariate analyses comparing clinical and genetic data,
complex karyotypes are associated with a particularly poor prognosis. del(5q)
plays a distinct role by classifying the only genetically defined WHO subtype.
Also, due to advancement in technology such as whole genome sequencing, the
number of known mutations occurring in MDS is steadily increasing. Important
recent discoveries include mutations in EZH2, DNMT3A, ASXL1 and IDH1/2. Like
TET2, the most commonly mutated gene in MDS, all are involved in epigenetic
regulation. Mutations such as ASXL1, RUNX1, EZH2, ETV6/TEL and TP53 have an
adverse impact on patient overall survival. Early evidence suggests that some
mutations might influence treatment response, necessitating reassessment of the
prognostic effect of genetic alterations in the light of every new treatment.
This review discusses clinical and biological effects of the most common
cytogenetic and molecular aberrations in patients with MDS.

PMID: 21877899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):10999-1006. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00160-11. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Evidence for alteration of EZH2, BMI1, and KDM6A and epigenetic reprogramming in 
human papillomavirus type 16 E6/E7-expressing keratinocytes.

Hyland PL(1), McDade SS, McCloskey R, Dickson GJ, Arthur K, McCance DJ, Patel D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast BT9
7BL, United Kingdom.

A number of epigenetic alterations occur in both the virus and host cellular
genomes during human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated carcinogenesis, and
investigations of such alterations, including changes in chromatin proteins and
histone modifications, have the potential to lead to therapeutic epigenetic
reversion. We report here that transformed HPV16 E6/E7-expressing primary human
foreskin keratinocytes (HFKs) (E6/E7 cells) demonstrate increased expression of
the PRC2 methyltransferase EZH2 at both the mRNA and protein levels but do not
exhibit the expected increase in trimethylated H3K27 (H3K27me3) compared to
normal keratinocytes. In contrast, these cells show a reduction in global
H3K27me3 levels in vitro, as well as upregulation of the KDM6A demethylase. We
further show for the first time that transformation with the HPV16 E6 and E7
oncogenes also results in an increase in phosphorylated EZH2 serine 21
(P-EZH2-Ser21), mediated by active Akt, and in a downregulation of the PRC1
protein BMI1 in these cells. High-grade squamous cervical intraepithelial lesions
also showed a loss of H3K27me3 in the presence of increased expression of EZH2.
Correlating with the loss of H3K27me3, E6/E7 cells exhibited derepression of
specific EZH2-, KMD6A-, and BMI1-targeted HOX genes. These results suggest that
the observed reduction in H3K27me3 may be due to a combination of reduced
activities/levels of specific polycomb proteins and increases in demethylases.
The dysregulation of multiple chromatin proteins resulting in the loss of global 
H3K27me3 and the transcriptional reprogramming in HPV16 E6/E7-infected cells
could provide an epigenetic signature associated with risk and/or progression of 
HPV16-associated cancers, as well as the potential for epigenetic reversion in
the future.

PMCID: PMC3194988
PMID: 21865393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cancer Res. 2011 Oct 15;71(20):6320-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1021. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Long noncoding RNA HOTAIR regulates polycomb-dependent chromatin modification and
is associated with poor prognosis in colorectal cancers.

Kogo R(1), Shimamura T, Mimori K, Kawahara K, Imoto S, Sudo T, Tanaka F, Shibata 
K, Suzuki A, Komune S, Miyano S, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2012 Feb 15;72(4):1039.

The functional impact of recently discovered long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) in
human cancer remains to be clarified. One long ncRNA which has attracted
attention is the Hox transcript antisense intergenic RNA termed HOTAIR, a long
ncRNA expressed from the developmental HOXC locus located on chromosome 12q13.13.
In cooperation with Polycomb complex PRC2, the HOTAIR long ncRNA is reported to
reprogram chromatin organization and promote breast cancer metastasis. In this
study, we examined the status and function of HOTAIR in patients with stage IV
colorectal cancer (CRC) who have liver metastases and a poor prognosis. HOTAIR
expression levels were higher in cancerous tissues than in corresponding
noncancerous tissues and high HOTAIR expression correlated tightly with the
presence of liver metastasis. Moreover, patients with high HOTAIR expression had 
a relatively poorer prognosis. In a subset of 32 CRC specimens, gene set
enrichment analysis using cDNA array data revealed a close correlation between
expression of HOTAIR and members of the PRC2 complex (SUZ12, EZH2, and H3K27me3).
Our findings suggest that HOTAIR expression is associated with a genome-wide
reprogramming of PRC2 function not only in breast cancer but also in CRC, where
upregulation of this long ncRNA may be a critical element in metastatic
progression.

PMID: 21862635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. FEBS Lett. 2011 Oct 3;585(19):3011-4. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.08.018. Epub
2011 Aug 17.

The Y641C mutation of EZH2 alters substrate specificity for histone H3 lysine 27 
methylation states.

Wigle TJ(1), Knutson SK, Jin L, Kuntz KW, Pollock RM, Richon VM, Copeland RA,
Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc., 325 Vassar St., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. twigle@epizyme.com

Mutations at tyrosine 641 (Y641F, Y641N, Y641S and Y641H) in the SET domain of
EZH2 have been identified in patients with certain subtypes of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL). These mutations were shown to change the substrate specificity of
EZH2 for various methylation states of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27). An
additional mutation at EZH2 Y641 to cysteine (Y641C) was also found in one
patient with NHL and in SKM-1 cells derived from a patient with myelodisplastic
syndrome (MDS). The Y641C mutation has been reported to dramatically reduce
enzymatic activity. Here, we demonstrate that while the Y641C mutation ablates
enzymatic activity against unmethylated and monomethylated H3K27, it is superior 
to wild-type in catalyzing the formation of trimethylated H3K27 from the
dimethylated precursor.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. EMBO J. 2011 Aug 12;30(19):3947-61. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.284.

H3K27 demethylation by JMJD3 at a poised enhancer of anti-apoptotic gene BCL2
determines ERa ligand dependency.

Svotelis A(1), Bianco S, Madore J, Huppé G, Nordell-Markovits A, Mes-Masson AM,
Gévry N.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

Chromatin represents a repressive barrier to the process of ligand-dependent
transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors. Here, we show that H3K27
methylation imposes ligand-dependent regulation of the oestrogen receptor a
(ERa)-dependent apoptotic response via Bcl-2 in breast cancer cells. The
activation of BCL2 transcription is dependent on the simultaneous inactivation of
the H3K27 methyltransferase, EZH2, and the demethylation of H3K27 at a poised
enhancer by the ERa-dependent recruitment of JMJD3 in hormone-dependent breast
cancer cells. We also provide evidence that this pathway is modified in cells
resistant to anti-oestrogen (AE), which constitutively express BCL2. We show that
the lack of H3K27 methylation at BCL2 regulatory elements due to the inactivation
of EZH2 by the HER2 pathway leads to this constitutive activation of BCL2 in
these AE-resistant cells. Our results describe a mechanism in which the
epigenetic state of chromatin affects ligand dependency during ERa-regulated gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3209777
PMID: 21841772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Cell. 2011 Aug 16;20(2):187-99. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.06.016.

Coordinated regulation of polycomb group complexes through microRNAs in cancer.

Cao Q(1), Mani RS, Ateeq B, Dhanasekaran SM, Asangani IA, Prensner JR, Kim JH,
Brenner JC, Jing X, Cao X, Wang R, Li Y, Dahiya A, Wang L, Pandhi M, Lonigro RJ, 
Wu YM, Tomlins SA, Palanisamy N, Qin Z, Yu J, Maher CA, Varambally S, Chinnaiyan 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRC1 and PRC2)-mediated epigenetic regulation is
critical for maintaining cellular homeostasis. Members of Polycomb Group (PcG)
proteins including EZH2, a PRC2 component, are upregulated in various cancer
types, implicating their role in tumorigenesis. Here, we have identified several 
microRNAs (miRNAs) that are repressed by EZH2. These miRNAs, in turn, regulate
the expression of PRC1 proteins BMI1 and RING2. We found that ectopic
overexpression of EZH2-regulated miRNAs attenuated cancer cell growth and
invasiveness, and abrogated cancer stem cell properties. Importantly, expression 
analysis revealed an inverse correlation between miRNA and PRC protein levels in 
cell culture and prostate cancer tissues. Taken together, our data have uncovered
a coordinate regulation of PRC1 and PRC2 activities that is mediated by miRNAs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157014
PMID: 21840484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cancer. 2012 Mar 15;118(6):1599-606. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26441. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is a novel prognostic biomarker in nonsmall cell lung
cancer.

Huqun(1), Ishikawa R, Zhang J, Miyazawa H, Goto Y, Shimizu Y, Hagiwara K, Koyama 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Saitama Medical University International
Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) epigenetically silences many genes
through the trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 and is implicated in tumor
growth, invasion, and metastasis. However, its role in lung cancer has not been
well characterized. The objective of the current study was to elucidate the role 
of EZH2 in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) by investigating both clinical
samples and cell lines.
METHODS: An immunohistochemical analysis of EZH2 expression was performed in
samples from patients with stage I NSCLC to investigate the association of EZH2
expression levels with clinicopathologic variables. An in vitro cell growth assay
and a Matrigel invasion assay also were conducted in the EZH2-expressing NSCLC
cell lines A549 and H1299 after knocking down EZH2 expression by using an
EZH2-specific short-hairpin RNA.
RESULTS: The immunohistochemical analysis classified stage I NSCLC samples (n =
106) into a negative EZH2 expression group (n = 40; 37.7%) and a positive EZH2
expression group (n = 66; 62.3%). Positive EZH2 expression was associated
significantly with larger tumor size (P = .014). Kaplan-Meier survival analyses
and log-rank tests demonstrated that patients whose samples were classified into 
the positive EZH2 expression group had a significantly shorter overall survival
(P = .015). Experiments in the NSCLC cell lines revealed that the knockdown of
EZH2 expression reduced the tumor growth rate and invasive activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that EZH2 promotes progression and
invasion of NSCLC, and its expression is a novel prognostic biomarker in NSCLC.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21837672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Blood. 2011 Oct 6;118(14):3932-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-311019. Epub 2011
Aug 9.

Mutational spectrum analysis of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia includes genes
associated with epigenetic regulation: UTX, EZH2, and DNMT3A.

Jankowska AM(1), Makishima H, Tiu RV, Szpurka H, Huang Y, Traina F, Visconte V,
Sugimoto Y, Prince C, O'Keefe C, Hsi ED, List A, Sekeres MA, Rao A, McDevitt MA, 
Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), a myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
neoplasm, is characterized by monocytic proliferation, dysplasia, and progression
to acute myeloid leukemia. CMML has been associated with somatic mutations in
diverse recently identified genes. We analyzed 72 well-characterized patients
with CMML (N = 52) and CMML-derived acute myeloid leukemia (N = 20) for recurrent
chromosomal abnormalities with the use of routine cytogenetics and single
nucleotide polymorphism arrays along with comprehensive mutational screening.
Cytogenetic aberrations were present in 46% of cases, whereas single nucleotide
polymorphism array increased the diagnostic yield to 60%. At least 1 mutation was
found in 86% of all cases; novel UTX, DNMT3A, and EZH2 mutations were found in
8%, 10%, and 5.5% of patients, respectively. TET2 mutations were present in 49%, 
ASXL1 in 43%, CBL in 14%, IDH1/2 in 4%, KRAS in 7%, NRAS in 4%, and JAK2 V617F in
1% of patients. Various mutant genotype combinations were observed, indicating
molecular heterogeneity in CMML. Our results suggest that molecular defects
affecting distinct pathways can lead to similar clinical phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3193268
PMID: 21828135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Nov;32(11):1607-14. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr184. Epub 2011
Aug 8.

Decreased microRNA-214 levels in breast cancer cells coincides with increased
cell proliferation, invasion and accumulation of the Polycomb Ezh2
methyltransferase.

Derfoul A(1), Juan AH, Difilippantonio MJ, Palanisamy N, Ried T, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892-8022, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs, which regulate gene expression by
inhibiting translation or promoting degradation of specific target messenger RNAs
(mRNAs). Alteration of the levels of a number of miRNAs is common in solid and
hematological tumors. We have shown previously that miR-214 regulates Ezh2 in
skeletal muscle and embryonic stem cells. The current study was aimed at
examining the role of miR-214 in breast cancer where miR-214 levels are reduced
but whether this phenomenon bears a functional relevance is unknown. MiR-214
expression was inversely correlated with Ezh2 mRNA and protein levels in breast
cancer cell lines and at least one copy of the miR-214 alleles was found to be
deleted in 24% (6/25) of primary breast tumors. Experimental increase of miR-214 
in breast cancer cell lines correlated with reduction of Ezh2 protein levels, a
known marker of invasion and aggressive breast cancer behavior. Supporting a
direct targeting mechanism, miR-214 decreased luciferase activity from a
construct containing the Ezh2 3' untranslated region. Expression of miR-214
specifically reduced cell proliferation of breast cancer cells and inhibited the 
invasive potential of a highly metastatic breast cancer cell line. These findings
indicate that reduced miR-214 levels may contribute to breast tumorigenesis by
allowing abnormally elevated Ezh2 accumulation and subsequent unchecked cell
proliferation and invasion.

PMCID: PMC3204346
PMID: 21828058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Physiol Behav. 2012 Jan 18;105(2):276-82. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.06.023.
Epub 2011 Jul 29.

Fasting of 3-day-old chicks leads to changes in histone H3 methylation status.

Xu P(1), Denbow CJ, Meiri N, Denbow DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, United States.

Unfavorable nutritional conditions during early developmental periods may cause
neuronal network remodeling in the hypothalamus, which influences subsequent
adaptability to those same stressful conditions. Alterations in hypothalamic
plasticity as a result of neuronal remodeling are achieved by variations in the
repertoire of proteins expressed via gene transcriptional activation or
repression, both of which are modulated by histone methylation status. This study
demonstrates that fasting had a stimulatory effect on dimethylation and
trimethylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27) in preoptic/anterior
hypothalamus (PO/AH) of 3-day-old chicks. The expression of enhancer of zeste 2
(EZH2), a H3K27-specific histone methyltransferase (HMT), was significantly
increased by fasting in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and PO/AH, which is
consistent with the upregulation of H3K27 dimethylation and trimethylation.
Furthermore, in the PVN, corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) mRNA expression
was significantly inhibited, while mRNA expressions of thyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) and type 2 deiodinase (D2) were significantly stimulated by
fasting. These findings highlight the potential role of H3K27 methylation status 
in early feed stress responses in chicks and may be indicative of an epigenetic
mechanism for later adaptation to feed intake stress.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21824486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Pharm Res. 2011 Dec;28(12):3079-90. doi: 10.1007/s11095-011-0547-x. Epub 2011 Aug
5.

MicroRNA-101 inhibits growth of epithelial ovarian cancer by relieving
chromatin-mediated transcriptional repression of p21(waf¹/cip¹).

Semaan A(1), Qazi AM, Seward S, Chamala S, Bryant CS, Kumar S, Morris R, Steffes 
CP, Bouwman DL, Munkarah AR, Weaver DW, Gruber SA, Batchu RB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Surgical Oncology & Developmental Therapeutics Department of
Surgery, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: MicroRNA-101 (miR-101) expression is negatively associated with tumor
growth and proliferation in several solid epithelial cancers. Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EzH2) appears to be a functional target of miR-101. We explore the
role of miR-101 and its interaction with EzH2 in epithelial ovarian carcinoma
(EOC).
METHODS: In situ hybridization (ISH) for miR-101 was performed on EOC patient
tissues and normal controls. EOC cell lines were transfected with miR-101 and
subjected to growth analysis and clonogenic assays. Cell motility was assessed by
Boyden chamber and wound-healing assays. P21(waf1/cip1) and EzH2 interaction was 
assessed by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay in MDAH-2774 cells. SCID
mice were assessed for tumor burden after injection with miR-101 or control
vector-treated MDAH-2774 cells.
RESULTS: ISH analysis revealed a decrease in miR-101 expression in EOC compared
with normal tissue. MiR-101 re-expression in EOC cell lines resulted in increased
apoptosis, decreased cellular proliferation, invasiveness, and reduced growth of 
tumor xenografts. CHIP assays revealed that re-expression of miR-101 inhibited
the interaction of EzH2 with p21(waf1/cip1) promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-101 re-expression appears to have antitumor effects, providing a
better understanding of the role of miR-101 in EOC.

PMID: 21818714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Adv Hematol. 2012;2012:469592. doi: 10.1155/2012/469592. Epub 2011 Jun 26.

Mutations in epigenetic modifiers in myeloid malignancies and the prospect of
novel epigenetic-targeted therapy.

Fathi AT(1), Abdel-Wahab O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

In the recent years, the discovery of a series of mutations in patients with
myeloid malignancies has provided insight into the pathogenesis of
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs), myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), and acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). Among these alterations have been mutations in genes,
such as IDH1/2, TET2, DNMT3A, and EZH2, which appear to affect DNA and/or histone
lysine methylation. Large clinical correlative studies are beginning to decipher 
the clinical importance, prevalence, and potential prognostic significance of
these mutations. Additionally, burgeoning insight into the role of epigenetics in
the pathogenesis of myeloid malignancies has prompted increased interest in
development of novel therapies which target DNA and histone posttranslational
modifications. DNA demethylating agents have been demonstrated to be clinically
active in a subset of patients with MDS and AML and are used extensively.
However, newer, more specific agents which alter DNA and histone modification are
under preclinical study and development and are likely to expand our therapeutic 
options for these diseases in the near future. Here, we review the current
understanding of the clinical importance of these newly discovered mutations in
AML and MDS patients. We also discuss exciting developments in DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor strategies and the prospect of novel histone lysine
methyltransferase inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3145345
PMID: 21811504  [PubMed]


423. Mol Pharmacol. 2011 Nov;80(5):870-8. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.072363. Epub 2011 Aug
1.

Sulforaphane suppresses polycomb group protein level via a proteasome-dependent
mechanism in skin cancer cells.

Balasubramanian S(1), Chew YC, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) genes encode a family of proteins that methylate and
ubiquitinate histones to close chromatin and suppress gene expression. PcG
proteins are present at elevated levels in cancer cells, and this is associated
with reduced tumor suppressor protein level and enhanced cell survival. Agents
that reduce PcG protein level are regarded as potentially cancer-preventative
agents. Sulforaphane (SFN) is a biologically important isothiocyanate found in
cruciferous vegetables that is an important candidate chemopreventive agent.
However, the impact of SFN on the level and function of PcG proteins in skin
cancer cells has not been assessed. We show that SFN treatment causes a
concentration-dependent reduction in PcG protein (Bmi-1, Ezh2) expression in
SCC-13 skin cancer cells and also reduces trimethylation of lysine 27 of histone 
H3. This is associated with accumulation of cells in G(2)/M phase; reduced levels
of cyclin B1, cyclin A, cyclin dependent kinases 1 and 2; and increased p21(Cip1)
expression. Sulforaphane treatment also increases cleavage of procaspase 3, 8,
and 9 and enhances PARP cleavage and apoptosis. Similar results are observed in
other skin-derived cell immortalized and transformed cell lines. Forced
expression of the Bmi-1 polycomb protein in SCC-13 cells reverses these effects. 
The SFN-dependent loss of Bmi-1 and Ezh2 is due to proteasome-associated
degradation. These results suggest that dietary isothiocyanates may suppress
cancer progression by reducing PcG protein level via a proteasome-dependent
mechanism, thereby inhibiting PcG-dependent pro-survival epigenetic events.

PMCID: PMC3198914
PMID: 21807989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Nat Biotechnol. 2011 Jul 31;29(8):742-9. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1914.

Transcriptome sequencing across a prostate cancer cohort identifies PCAT-1, an
unannotated lincRNA implicated in disease progression.

Prensner JR(1), Iyer MK, Balbin OA, Dhanasekaran SM, Cao Q, Brenner JC, Laxman B,
Asangani IA, Grasso CS, Kominsky HD, Cao X, Jing X, Wang X, Siddiqui J, Wei JT,
Robinson D, Iyer HK, Palanisamy N, Maher CA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are emerging as key molecules in human cancer, with the
potential to serve as novel markers of disease and to reveal uncharacterized
aspects of tumor biology. Here we discover 121 unannotated prostate
cancer-associated ncRNA transcripts (PCATs) by ab initio assembly of
high-throughput sequencing of polyA(+) RNA (RNA-Seq) from a cohort of 102
prostate tissues and cells lines. We characterized one ncRNA, PCAT-1, as a
prostate-specific regulator of cell proliferation and show that it is a target of
the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). We further found that patterns of
PCAT-1 and PRC2 expression stratified patient tissues into molecular subtypes
distinguished by expression signatures of PCAT-1-repressed target genes. Taken
together, our findings suggest that PCAT-1 is a transcriptional repressor
implicated in a subset of prostate cancer patients. These findings establish the 
utility of RNA-Seq to identify disease-associated ncRNAs that may improve the
stratification of cancer subtypes.

PMCID: PMC3152676
PMID: 21804560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Oct;32(10):1525-32. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr171. Epub 2011
Jul 27.

(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate and DZNep reduce polycomb protein level via a
proteasome-dependent mechanism in skin cancer cells.

Choudhury SR(1), Balasubramanian S, Chew YC, Han B, Marquez VE, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) protein-dependent histone methylation and ubiquitination
drives chromatin compaction leading to reduced tumor suppressor expression and
increased cancer cell survival. Green tea polyphenols and S-adenosylhomocysteine 
(AdoHcy) hydrolase inhibitors are important candidate chemopreventive agents.
Previous studies indicate that (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a potent
green tea polyphenol, suppresses PcG protein level and skin cancer cell survival.
Inhibition of AdoHcy hydrolase with 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) inhibits
methyltransferases by reducing methyl group availability. In the present study,
we examine the impact of EGCG and DZNep cotreatment on skin cancer cell function.
EGCG and DZNep, independently and in combination, reduce the level of PcG
proteins including Ezh2, eed, Suz12, Mel18 and Bmi-1. This is associated with
reduced H3K27me3 and H2AK119ub formation, histone modifications associated with
closed chromatin. Histone deacetylase 1 level is also reduced and acetylated H3
formation is increased. These changes are associated with increased tumor
suppressor expression and reduced cell survival and are partially reversed by
vector-mediated maintenance of Bmi-1 level. The reduction in PcG protein level is
associated with increased ubiquitination and is reversed by proteasome
inhibitors, suggesting proteasome-associated degradation.

PMCID: PMC3179425
PMID: 21798853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3759-67. doi: 10.1242/dev.063180. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

Ezh2 regulates anteroposterior axis specification and proximodistal axis
elongation in the developing limb.

Wyngaarden LA(1), Delgado-Olguin P, Su IH, Bruneau BG, Hopyan S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program, Research Institute, Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.

Specification and determination (commitment) of positional identities precedes
overt pattern formation during development. In the limb bud, it is clear that the
anteroposterior axis is specified at a very early stage and is prepatterned by
the mutually antagonistic interaction between Gli3 and Hand2. There is also
evidence that the proximodistal axis is specified early and determined
progressively. Little is known about upstream regulators of these processes or
how epigenetic modifiers influence axis formation. Using conditional mutagenesis 
at different time points, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ezh2 is an
upstream regulator of anteroposterior prepattern at an early stage. Mutants
exhibit posteriorised limb bud identity. During later limb bud stages, Ezh2 is
essential for cell survival and proximodistal segment elongation. Ezh2 maintains 
the late phase of Hox gene expression and cell transposition experiments suggest 
that it regulates the plasticity with which cells respond to instructive
positional cues.

PMID: 21795281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2011 Dec;14(4):354-60. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2011.32. 
Epub 2011 Jul 26.

Quadriplex model enhances urine-based detection of prostate cancer.

Jamaspishvili T(1), Kral M, Khomeriki I, Vyhnankova V, Mgebrishvili G, Student V,
Kolar Z, Bouchal J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, Laboratory of Molecular
Pathology, Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Palacky University 
and University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: The major advantages of urine-based assays are their non-invasive
character and ability to monitor prostate cancer (CaP) with heterogeneous foci.
While the test for the prostate cancer antigen 3 (PCA3) is commercially
available, the aim of our research was to test other putative urine markers in
multiplex settings (AMACR (a-methylacyl-CoA racemase), EZH2 (enhancer of zeste
homolog 2), GOLM1 (golgi membrane protein 1), MSMB (microseminoprotein, ß),
SPINK1 (serine peptidase inhibitor) and TRPM8 (transient receptor potential
cation channel, subfamily M, member 8)).
METHODS: Expression of the candidate biomarkers was studied in sedimented urine
using quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in two sets of
patients with and without restriction on serum PSA levels.
RESULTS: We confirmed that PCA3 is an independent predictor of cancer in the
patients without restriction of serum PSA values (set 1, n=176, PSA=0.1-587 ng
ml(-1)). However, AMACR was the only parameter that differentiated CaP from
non-CaP patients with serum PSA between 3 and 15 ng ml(-1) (set 2, n=104). The
area under curve (AUC) for this gene was 0.645 with both sensitivity and
specificity at 65%. Further improvement was achieved by multivariate logistic
regression analysis, which identified novel duplex (TRPM8 and MSMB), triplex
(plus AMACR) and quadriplex (plus PCA3) models for the detection of early CaPs
(AUC=0.665, 0.726 and 0.741, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Novel quadriplex test could be implemented as an adjunct to serum
PSA or urine PCA3 and this could improve decision making for diagnostics in the
case of 'PSA dilemma' patients.

PMID: 21788966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Cell. 2011 Jul 22;43(2):285-98. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.06.020.

FGF-2 regulates cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis through an
NDY1/KDM2B-miR-101-EZH2 pathway.

Kottakis F(1), Polytarchou C, Foltopoulou P, Sanidas I, Kampranis SC, Tsichlis
PN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111,
USA.

The histone H3K27 methyltransferase EZH2 plays an important role in oncogenesis, 
by mechanisms that are incompletely understood. Here, we show that the JmjC
domain histone H3 demethylase NDY1 synergizes with EZH2 to silence the EZH2
inhibitor miR-101. NDY1 and EZH2 repress miR-101 by binding its promoter in
concert, via a process triggered by upregulation of NDY1. Whereas EZH2 binding
depends on NDY1, the latter binds independently of EZH2. However, both are
required to repress transcription. NDY1 and EZH2 acting in concert upregulate
EZH2 and stabilize the repression of miR-101 and its outcome. NDY1 is induced by 
FGF-2 via CREB phosphorylation and activation, downstream of DYRK1A, and mediates
the FGF-2 and EZH2 effects on cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis.
The FGF-2-NDY1/EZH2-miR-101-EZH2 axis described here was found to be active in
bladder cancer. These data delineate an oncogenic pathway that functionally links
FGF-2 with EZH2 via NDY1 and miR-101.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3324394
PMID: 21777817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem J. 2011 Nov 15;440(1):23-31. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111006.

MicroRNA-138 suppresses epithelial-mesenchymal transition in squamous cell
carcinoma cell lines.

Liu X(1), Wang C, Chen Z, Jin Y, Wang Y, Kolokythas A, Dai Y, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Down-regulation of miR-138 (microRNA-138) has been frequently observed in various
cancers, including HNSCC (head and neck squamous cell carcinoma). Our previous
studies suggest that down-regulation of miR-138 is associated with
mesenchymal-like cell morphology and enhanced cell migration and invasion. In the
present study, we demonstrated that these miR-138-induced changes were
accompanied by marked reduction in E-cad (E-cadherin) expression and enhanced Vim
(vimentin) expression, characteristics of EMT (epithelial-mesenchymal
transition). On the basis of a combined experimental and bioinformatics analysis,
we identified a number of miR-138 target genes that are associated with EMT,
including VIM, ZEB2 (zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox 2) and EZH2 (enhancer of 
zeste homologue 2). Direct targeting of miR-138 to specific sequences located in 
the mRNAs of the VIM, ZEB2 and EZH2 genes was confirmed using luciferase reporter
gene assays. Our functional analyses (knock-in and knock-down) demonstrated that 
miR-138 regulates the EMT via three distinct pathways: (i) direct targeting of
VIM mRNA and controlling the expression of VIM at a post-transcriptional level,
(ii) targeting the transcriptional repressors (ZEB2) which in turn regulating the
transcription activity of the E-cad gene, and (iii) targeting the epigenetic
regulator EZH2 which in turn modulates its gene silencing effects on the
downstream genes including E-cad. These results, together with our previously
observed miR-138 effects on cell migration and invasion through targeting RhoC
(Rho-related GTP-binding protein C) and ROCK2 (Rho-associated,
coiled-coil-containing protein kinase 2) concurrently, suggest that miR-138 is a 
multi-functional molecular regulator and plays major roles in EMT and in HNSCC
progression.

PMCID: PMC3331719
PMID: 21770894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Hepatology. 2011 Nov;54(5):1679-89. doi: 10.1002/hep.24563. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Long noncoding RNA high expression in hepatocellular carcinoma facilitates tumor 
growth through enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in humans.

Yang F(1), Zhang L, Huo XS, Yuan JH, Xu D, Yuan SX, Zhu N, Zhou WP, Yang GS, Wang
YZ, Shang JL, Gao CF, Zhang FR, Wang F, Sun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

In recent years, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to have critical
regulatory roles in cancer biology. However, the contributions of lncRNAs to
hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remain largely
unknown. Differentially expressed lncRNAs between HBV-related HCC and paired
peritumoral tissues were identified by microarray and validated using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Liver samples from patients
with HBV-related HCC were analyzed for levels of a specific differentially
expressed lncRNA High Expression In HCC (termed lncRNA-HEIH); data were compared 
with survival data using the Kaplan-Meier method and compared between groups by
the log-rank test. The effects of lncRNA-HEIH were assessed by silencing and
overexpressing the lncRNA in vitro and in vivo. The expression level of
lncRNA-HEIH in HBV-related HCC is significantly associated with recurrence and is
an independent prognostic factor for survival. We also found that lncRNA-HEIH
plays a key role in G(0) /G(1) arrest, and further demonstrated that lncRNA-HEIH 
was associated with enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and that this association 
was required for the repression of EZH2 target genes.CONCLUSIONS: Together, these
results indicate that lncRNA-HEIH is an oncogenic lncRNA that promotes tumor
progression and leads us to propose that lncRNAs may serve as key regulatory hubs
in HCC progression.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21769904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021651. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

EZH2 depletion blocks the proliferation of colon cancer cells.

Fussbroich B(1), Wagener N, Macher-Goeppinger S, Benner A, Fälth M, Sültmann H,
Holzer A, Hoppe-Seyler K, Hoppe-Seyler F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers, German Cancer Research Center, 
DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany.

The Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) protein has been reported to stimulate cell growth
in some cancers and is therefore considered to represent an interesting new
target for therapeutic intervention. Here, we investigated a possible role of
EZH2 for the growth control of colon cancer cells. RNA interference
(RNAi)-mediated intracellular EZH2 depletion led to cell cycle arrest of colon
carcinoma cells at the G1/S transition. This was associated with a reduction of
cell numbers upon transient transfection of synthetic EZH2-targeting siRNAs and
with inhibition of their colony formation capacity upon stable expression of
vector-borne siRNAs. We furthermore tested whether EZH2 may repress the
growth-inhibitory p27 gene, as reported for pancreatic cancer. However,
expression analyses of colon cancer cell lines and colon cancer biopsies did not 
reveal a consistent correlation between EZH2 and p27 levels. Moreover, EZH2
depletion did not re-induce p27 expression in colon cancer cells, indicating that
p27 repression by EZH2 may be cell- or tissue-specific. Whole genome
transcriptome analyses identified cellular genes affected by EZH2 depletion in
colon cancer cell lines. They included several cancer-associated genes linked to 
cellular proliferation or invasion, such as Dag1, MageD1, SDC1, Timp2, and Tob1. 
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that EZH2 depletion blocks the growth of
colon cancer cells. These findings might provide benefits for the treatment of
colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC3135584
PMID: 21765901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Horm Cancer. 2010 Jun;1(3):146-55. doi: 10.1007/s12672-010-0015-9.

In utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES) or bisphenol-A (BPA) increases EZH2
expression in the mammary gland: an epigenetic mechanism linking endocrine
disruptors to breast cancer.

Doherty LF(1), Bromer JG, Zhou Y, Aldad TS, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) and bisphenol-A (BPA) are estrogen-like
endocrine-disrupting chemicals that induce persistent epigenetic changes in the
developing uterus. However, DES exposure in utero is also associated with an
increased risk of breast cancer in adult women. Similarly, fetal exposure to BPA 
induces neoplastic changes in mammary tissue of mice. We hypothesized that
epigenetic alterations would precede the increased risk of breast neoplasia after
in utero exposure to endocrine disruptors. Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) is 
a histone methyltransferase that has been linked to breast cancer risk and
epigenetic regulation of tumorigenesis. We examined the effect of BPA and DES on 
EZH2 expression and function in MCF-7 cells and in mammary glands of mice exposed
in utero. DES and BPA treatment approximated human exposure. EZH2 functional
activity was assessed by measuring histone H3 trimethylation. Treatment of MCF-7 
cells with DES or BPA led to a 3- and 2-fold increase in EZH2 mRNA expression,
respectively (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) as well as increased EZH2 protein expression. Mice
exposed to DES in utero showed a >2-fold increase in EZH2 expression in adult
mammary tissue compared with controls (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). EZH2 protein was elevated in
mammary tissue of mice exposed to DES or BPA. Histone H3 trimethylation was
increased in MCF-7 cells treated with BPA or DES. Similarly, mice exposed to BPA 
or DES in utero showed increased mammary histone H3 trimethylation. Developmental
programming of EZH2 is a novel mechanism by which in utero exposure to endocrine 
disruptors leads to epigenetic regulation of the mammary gland.

PMCID: PMC3140020
PMID: 21761357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Methods Mol Biol. 2011;755:245-56. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-163-5_20.

Laser capture microdissection of pancreatic ductal adeno-carcinoma cells to
analyze EzH2 by Western Blot analysis.

Qazi AM(1), Aggarwal S, Steffer CS, Bouwman DL, Weaver DW, Gruber SA, Batchu RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, John D Dingell VA Medical Center, Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI, USA.

Pure populations of tumor cells are essential for the identification of
tumor-associated proteins for the development of targeted therapy. In recent
years, laser capture microdissection (LCM) has been used successfully to obtain
distinct populations of cells for subsequent molecular analysis. The polycomb
group (PcG) protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EzH2), a methyl-transferase
that plays a key role in -transcriptional gene repression, is frequently
overexpressed in several malignant tumors. High levels of EzH2 are often
associated with advanced disease stage in many solid tumors; however, its role in
the pathogenesis of pancreatic ductal adeno-carcinoma (PDAC) is poorly
understood. Because of the limited sample availability and the absence of in
vitro amplification steps for proteins, the use of LCM for proteomics studies
largely depends on highly sensitive protein detection methods. Here, we developed
a faster and sensitive Western blot protocol and validated it for the detection
of EzH2 in ~2,000 cells. Initially, cultured PANC-1 cells were used to optimize
protein electrophoresis and western blotting conditions. Gradient gel
electrophoresis in combination with optimized antibody concentrations, and a
sensitive chemiluminescent assay provided a strong signal. In order to further
confirm the role of EzH2 in PDAC, employing siRNA-mediated gene silencing via
long lasting plasmid vectors containing shRNA, we investigated the potential role
of EzH2 gene silencing in pancreatic cancer regression. Positive correlation of
EzH2 expression was observed with advanced stage, serous histology, and
increasing grade in pancreatic cancer patient tissues. Further EzH2 knockdown
resulted in decreased cell growth and invasiveness. The findings of this study
emphasize that western blotting of a LCM-generated pure population of cancer
cells may be a valuable technique for the study of tumor-specific proteins.

PMID: 21761309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 23;286(38):33061-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.257667. Epub 2011
Jul 11.

Lysine-specific demethylase 2B (KDM2B)-let-7-enhancer of zester homolog 2 (EZH2) 
pathway regulates cell cycle progression and senescence in primary cells.

Tzatsos A(1), Paskaleva P, Lymperi S, Contino G, Stoykova S, Chen Z, Wong KK,
Bardeesy N.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. atzatsos@partners.org

Sustained expression of the histone demethylase, KDM2B (Ndy1/FBXL10/JHDM1B),
bypasses cellular senescence in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). Here,
we show that KDM2B is a conserved regulator of lifespan in multiple primary cell 
types and defines a program in which this chromatin-modifying enzyme counteracts 
the senescence-associated down-regulation of the EZH2 histone methyltransferase. 
Senescence in MEFs epigenetically silences KDM2B and induces the tumor suppressor
miRNAs let-7b and miR-101, which target EZH2. Forced expression of KDM2B promotes
immortalization by silencing these miRNAs through locus-specific histone H3
K36me2 demethylation, leading to EZH2 up-regulation. Overexpression of let-7b
down-regulates EZH2, induces premature senescence, and counteracts
immortalization of MEFs driven by KDM2B. The KDM2B-let-7-EZH2 pathway also
contributes to the proliferation of immortal Ink4a/Arf null fibroblasts
suggesting that, beyond its anti-senescence role in primary cells, this
histone-modifying enzyme functions more broadly in the regulation of cellular
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3190920
PMID: 21757686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Blood. 2011 Sep 8;118(10):2830-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-294827. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

The histone methyltransferase inhibitor, DZNep, up-regulates TXNIP, increases ROS
production, and targets leukemia cells in AML.

Zhou J(1), Bi C, Cheong LL, Mahara S, Liu SC, Tay KG, Koh TL, Yu Q, Chng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

Recent studies have shown that 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), a histone
methyltransferase inhibitor, disrupts polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), and
preferentially induces apoptosis in cancer cells, including acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not well
understood. The present study demonstrates that DZNep induces robust apoptosis in
AML cell lines, primary cells, and targets CD34(+)CD38(-) leukemia stem cell
(LSC)-enriched subpopulations. Using RNA interference (RNAi), gene expression
profiling, and ChIP, we identified that TXNIP, a major redox control molecule,
plays a crucial role in DZNep-induced apoptosis. We show that disruption of PRC2,
either by DZNep treatment or EZH2 knockdown, reactivates TXNIP, inhibits
thioredoxin activity, and increases reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to
apoptosis. Furthermore, we show that TXNIP is down-regulated in AML and is a
direct target of PRC2-mediated gene silencing. Consistent with the ROS
accumulation on DZNep treatment, we also see a signature of endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress-regulated genes, commonly associated with cell survival,
down-regulated by DZNep. Taken together, we uncover a novel molecular mechanism
of DZNep-mediated apoptosis and propose that EZH2 may be a potential new target
for epigenetic treatment in AML.

PMID: 21734239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21583. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021583. Epub 2011 Jun 24.

Determinants of sensitivity to DZNep induced apoptosis in multiple myeloma cells.

Xie Z(1), Bi C, Cheong LL, Liu SC, Huang G, Zhou J, Yu Q, Chen CS, Chng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

The 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), one of S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) hydrolase
inhibitors, has shown antitumor activities in a broad range of solid tumors and
acute myeloid leukemia. Here, we examined its effects on multiple myeloma (MM)
cells and found that, at 500 nM, it potently inhibited growth and induced
apoptosis in 2 of 8 MM cell lines. RNA from un-treated and DZNep treated cells
was profiled by Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 microarray and genes with a
significant change in gene expression were determined by significance analysis of
microarray (SAM) testing. ALOX5 was the most down-regulated gene (5.8-fold) in
sensitive cells and was expressed at low level in resistant cells. The results
were corroborated by quantitative RT-PCR. Western-blot analysis indicated ALOX5
was highly expressed only in sensitive cell line H929 and greatly decreased upon 
DZNep treatment. Ectopic expression of ALOX5 reduced sensitivity to DZNep in H929
cells. Furthermore, down-regulation of ALOX5 by RNA interference could also
induce apoptosis in H929. Gene expression analysis on MM patient dataset
indicated ALOX5 expression was significantly higher in MM patients compared to
normal plasma cells. We also found that Bcl-2 was overexpressed in DZNep
insensitive cells, and cotreatment with DZNep and ABT-737, a Bcl-2 family
inhibitor, synergistically inhibited growth and induced apoptosis of DZNep
insensitive MM cells. Taken together, this study shows one of mechanisms of the
DZNep efficacy on MM correlates with its ability to down-regulate the ALOX5
levels. In addition, DZNep insensitivity might be associated with overexpression 
of Bcl-2, and the combination of ABT-737 and DZNep could synergistically induced 
apoptosis. These results suggest that DZNep may be exploited therapeutically for 
a subset of MM.

PMCID: PMC3123372
PMID: 21720561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 Aug 15;207(8):472-8. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.05.010. Epub 
2011 Jun 29.

Overexpression of EZH2 and loss of expression of PTEN is associated with
invasion, metastasis, and poor progression of gallbladder adenocarcinoma.

Liu DC(1), Yang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

Overexpression of EZH2 and inactivation or loss of PTEN expression was observed
in invasive and metastatic tumors. However, their expressions and clinical
significances in gallbladder cancer (GBC) have rarely been reported. In this
study, we investigated EZH2 and PTEN expression in an extensive collection of
human gallbladder cancer samples and benign lesions of gallbladder using
immunohistochemistry. Overexpression of EZH2 was detected in 53.7% of gallbladder
adenocarcinomas associated with poor differentiation, lymph node metastasis, and 
invasion, while loss of PTEN expression was identified in 51.8% of
adenocarcinomas with high grade, metastatic, and invasive tumors. Univariate
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that overexpression of EZH2 (p=0.013) and loss of
PTEN expression (p=0.008) were significantly associated with decreased overall
survival. Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that overexpression of
EZH2 (p=0.011) or loss of PTEN expression (p=0.009) is a predictor of poor
prognosis in gallbladder adenocarcinoma. Our study suggests that overexpression
of EZH2 and loss of PTEN expression might be closely related to the
carcinogenesis, progression, clinical biological behavior, and prognosis of
gallbladder adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21719208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int J Cancer. 2012 Jun 1;130(11):2557-67. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26264. Epub 2011 Aug
20.

3-Deazaneplanocin A is a promising therapeutic agent for the eradication of
tumor-initiating hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Chiba T(1), Suzuki E, Negishi M, Saraya A, Miyagi S, Konuma T, Tanaka S, Tada M, 
Kanai F, Imazeki F, Iwama A, Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Recent advances in stem cell biology have identified tumor-initiating cells
(TICs) in a variety of cancers including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Polycomb
group gene products such as BMI1 and EZH2 have been characterized as general
self-renewal regulators in a wide range of normal stem cells and TICs. We
previously reported that Ezh2 tightly regulates the self-renewal and
differentiation of murine hepatic stem/progenitor cells. However, the role of
EZH2 in tumor-initiating HCC cells remains unclear. In this study, we conducted
loss-of-function assay of EZH2 using short-hairpin RNA and pharmacological
inhibition of EZH2 by an S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor,
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep). Both EZH2-knockdown and DZNep treatment impaired
cell growth and anchorage-independent sphere formation of HCC cells in culture.
Flow cytometric analyses revealed that the two approaches decreased the number of
epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)(+) tumor-initiating cells.
Administration of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) or DZNep suppressed the tumors by
implanted HCC cells in non-obese diabetic/severe combined immunodeficient mice.
Of note, however, DZNep but not 5-FU predominantly reduced the number of EpCAM(+)
cells and diminished the self-renewal capability of these cells as judged by
sphere formation assays. Our findings reveal that tumor-initiating HCC cells are 
highly dependent on EZH2 for their tumorigenic activity. Although further
analyses of TICs from primary HCC would be necessary, pharmacological
interference with EZH2 might be a promising therapeutic approach to targeting
tumor-initiating HCC cells.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21717453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):9078-89. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00836-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Epigenetic silencing of HIV-1 by the histone H3 lysine 27 methyltransferase
enhancer of Zeste 2.

Friedman J(1), Cho WK, Chu CK, Keedy KS, Archin NM, Margolis DM, Karn J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4960,
USA.

Latent HIV proviruses are silenced as the result of deacetylation and methylation
of histones located at the viral long terminal repeat (LTR). Inhibition of
histone deacetylases (HDACs) leads to the reemergence of HIV-1 from latency, but 
the contribution of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs) to maintaining HIV 
latency remains uncertain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments using
latently infected Jurkat T-cell lines demonstrated that the HKMT enhancer of
Zeste 2 (EZH2) was present at high levels at the LTR of silenced HIV proviruses
and was rapidly displaced following proviral reactivation. Knockdown of EZH2, a
key component of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) silencing machinery,
and the enzyme which is required for trimethyl histone lysine 27 (H3K27me3)
synthesis induced up to 40% of the latent HIV proviruses. In contrast, there was 
less than 5% induction of latent proviruses following knockdown of SUV39H1, which
is required for H3K9me3 synthesis. Knockdown of EZH2 also sensitized latent
proviruses to external stimuli, such as T-cell receptor stimulation, and slowed
the reversion of reactivated proviruses to latency. Similarly, cell populations
that responded poorly to external stimuli carried HIV proviruses that were
enriched in H3K27me3 and relatively depleted in H3K9me3. Treating latently
infected cells with the HKMT inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A, which targets EZH2,
led to the reactivation of silenced proviruses, whereas chaetocin and BIX01294
showed only minimal reactivation activities. These findings suggest that
PRC2-mediated silencing is an important feature of HIV latency and that
inhibitors of histone methylation may play a useful role in induction strategies 
designed to eradicate latent HIV pools.

PMCID: PMC3165831
PMID: 21715480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Dermatol. 2011 Jul-Aug;21(4):552-7. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2011.1383.

Abnormal histone modifications in PBMCs from patients with psoriasis vulgaris.

Zhang P(1), Su Y, Zhao M, Huang W, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenomics, Second
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

Excessive keratinocyte proliferation is thought to be responsible for the
formation and development of psoriasis vulgaris. Evidence indicates that
epigenetic modifications are associated with aberrant gene expression, however,
nothing is known about the status of histone modifications in psoriasis vulgaris.
We investigated alterations in histone modifications in patients with psoriasis
vulgaris. Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 30 psoriatic patients and 20 healthy
control subjects were quanti<U+FB01>ed by the EpiQuik(TM) global histone H3/H4
acetylation and H3K4/H3K27 methylation assay kit. The mRNA levels of 12 members
of 3 classes of chromatin modifier genes were measured by real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction. Compared with normal controls, global histone H4
hypoacetylation was observed in PBMCs from psoriasis vulgaris patients. There was
a negative correlation between the degree of histone H4 acetylation and disease
activity in patients as measured by PASI. Global levels of H3 acetylation,
H3K4/H3K27 methylation did not significantly differ between psoriatic patients
and controls. mRNA levels of P300, CBP and SIRT1 were significantly reduced in
PBMCs from patients with psoriasis vulgaris compared with healthy controls, while
mRNA expression levels of HDAC1, SUV39H1 and EZH2 was significantly increased in 
psoriatic patients.We conclude that histone modifications are aberrant in the
PBMCs of psoriasis vulgaris patients.

PMID: 21715244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2496-506. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1013343.

Clinical effect of point mutations in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Bejar R(1), Stevenson K, Abdel-Wahab O, Galili N, Nilsson B, Garcia-Manero G,
Kantarjian H, Raza A, Levine RL, Neuberg D, Ebert BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 22;365(12):1154; author reply 155.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Sep 22;365(12):1154-5; author reply 155.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Jun 30;364(26):2545-6.

BACKGROUND: Myelodysplastic syndromes are clinically heterogeneous disorders
characterized by clonal hematopoiesis, impaired differentiation, peripheral-blood
cytopenias, and a risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia. Somatic
mutations may influence the clinical phenotype but are not included in current
prognostic scoring systems.
METHODS: We used a combination of genomic approaches, including next-generation
sequencing and mass spectrometry-based genotyping, to identify mutations in
samples of bone marrow aspirate from 439 patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.
We then examined whether the mutation status for each gene was associated with
clinical variables, including specific cytopenias, the proportion of blasts, and 
overall survival.
RESULTS: We identified somatic mutations in 18 genes, including two, ETV6 and
GNAS, that have not been reported to be mutated in patients with myelodysplastic 
syndromes. A total of 51% of all patients had at least one point mutation,
including 52% of the patients with normal cytogenetics. Mutations in RUNX1, TP53,
and NRAS were most strongly associated with severe thrombocytopenia (P<0.001 for 
all comparisons) and an increased proportion of bone marrow blasts (P<0.006 for
all comparisons). In a multivariable Cox regression model, the presence of
mutations in five genes retained independent prognostic significance: TP53
(hazard ratio for death from any cause, 2.48; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.60 
to 3.84), EZH2 (hazard ratio, 2.13; 95% CI, 1.36 to 3.33), ETV6 (hazard ratio,
2.04; 95% CI, 1.08 to 3.86), RUNX1 (hazard ratio, 1.47; 95% CI, 1.01 to 2.15),
and ASXL1 (hazard ratio, 1.38; 95% CI, 1.00 to 1.89).
CONCLUSIONS: Somatic point mutations are common in myelodysplastic syndromes and 
are associated with specific clinical features. Mutations in TP53, EZH2, ETV6,
RUNX1, and ASXL1 are predictors of poor overall survival in patients with
myelodysplastic syndromes, independently of established risk factors. (Funded by 
the National Institutes of Health and others.).

PMCID: PMC3159042
PMID: 21714648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer. 2011 Dec 15;117(24):5476-84. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26179. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

Polycomb group protein EZH2 is frequently expressed in inflammatory breast cancer
and is predictive of worse clinical outcome.

Gong Y(1), Huo L, Liu P, Sneige N, Sun X, Ueno NT, Lucci A, Buchholz TA, Valero
V, Cristofanilli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. yungong@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a member of polycomb group
proteins, is involved in the regulation of cell cycle progression and has been
implicated in various human malignancies, including breast cancer, and also has
been associated with aggressive tumor behavior. However, the clinical
significance of EZH2 expression in inflammatory breast cancer (IBC), a rare but
aggressive type of breast carcinoma, has not been explored. In this retrospective
study, the authors examined EZH2 expression in IBC tumors and evaluated the
relation between EZH2 expression and patient survival.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays of 88 surgically resected IBC tumors were stained
immunohistochemically for EZH2, and the authors evaluated the association of EZH2
expression status with clinicopathologic factors and clinical outcome.
RESULTS: The median follow-up for the entire cohort was 45.7 months, and the
5-year overall survival (OS) rate was 45%. EZH2 was expressed frequently in IBC
tumors (75.7%) and was associated significantly with unfavorable prognostic
factors, such as higher tumor grade, negative estrogen receptor status, and
triple-negative status (ie, negative for the estrogen, progesterone, and human
epidermal growth factor 2 receptors). Univariate survival analysis indicated that
patients who had EZH2-positive IBC had a significantly lower 5-year OS rate than 
patients who had EZH2-negative IBC (P = .01). In multivariate analysis, only
positive EZH2 status remained an independent predictor of worse OS.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 was expressed frequently in IBC tumors. The current results
indicated that EZH2 expression status may be used to identify a subset of
patients with IBC who have a relatively worse prognosis. Targeting EZH2 also may 
provide a novel strategy for improving the clinical outcome of patients with IBC.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 21713757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Chin Med Sci J. 2011 Jun;26(2):77-84.

Inhibition of SIRT1 increases EZH2 protein level and enhances the repression of
EZH2 on target gene expression.

Lu L(1), Li L, Lü X, Wu XS, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College ,
Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the regulatory rolesof SIRT1 on EZH2 expression and the
further effects on EZH 2 s repression of target gene expression.
METHODS: The stable SIRT1 RNAi and Control RNAi HeLa cells were established by
infection with retroviruses expressing shSIRT1 and shLuc respectively followed by
puromycin selection. EZH2 protein level was detected by Western blot in either
whole cell lysate or the fractional cell extract. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed to detect the mRNA level of
EZH2. Cycloheximide was used to treat SIRT1 RNAi and Control RNAi cells for
protein stability assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation(ChIP) assay was applied to
measure enrichment of SIRT1, EZH2, and trimethylated H3K27 (H3K27me3) at SATB1
promoter in SIRT1 RNAi and Control RNAi cells.
RESULTS: Western blot results showed that EZH2 protein level increased upon SIRT1
depletion. Fractional extraction results showed unchanged cytoplasmic fraction
and increased chromatin fraction of EZH2 protein in SIRT1 RNAi cells. The mRNA
level of EZH2 was not affected by knockdown of SIRT1. SIRT1 recruitment was not
detected at the promoter regionof EZH2 gene locus. The protein stability assay
showed that the protein stability of EZH2 increases upon SIRT1 knockdown. Upon
SIRT1 depletion, EZH2 and H3K27me3 recruitment at SATB1 promoter increases and
the mRNA level of SATB1 decreases.
CONCLUSIONS: Depletion of SIRT1 increases the protein stability of EZH2. The
regulation of EZH2 protein level by SIRT1 affects the repressive effects of EZH2 
on the target gene expression.

PMID: 21703114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Nov;4(11):1816-24. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0130. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

EZH2 promotes malignant phenotypes and is a predictor of oral cancer development 
in patients with oral leukoplakia.

Cao W(1), Younis RH, Li J, Chen H, Xia R, Mao L, Chen W, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, School 
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai,
China.

Oral leukoplakia (OL) is the most common premalignancy in the oral cavity. A
small proportion of OLs progresses to oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC). To
assess OSCC risk of OLs, we investigated the role of the transcriptional
repressor enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in oral tumorigenesis and its
clinical implication as an OSCC risk predictor. Immunohistochemistry was used to 
measure EZH2 expression in OLs from 76 patients, including 37 who later developed
OSCC and 39 who did not. EZH2 expression was associated with clinicopathologic
parameters and clinical outcomes. To determine the biological role of EZH2 in OL,
EZH2 level was reduced using EZH2 siRNAs in Leuk-1 cells, its impact on cell
cycle, anchorage-dependent/independent growth, and invasion was assessed. We
observed strong EZH2 expression in 34 (45%), moderate expression in 26 (34%), and
weak/no expression in 16 (21%) of the OLs. The higher EZH2 levels were strongly
associated with dysplasia (P < 0.001) and OSCC development (P < 0.0001).
Multivariate analysis indicated that EZH2 expression was the only independent
factor for OSCC development (P < 0.0001). At 5 years after diagnosis, 80% of
patients whose OLs expressed strong EZH2 developed OSCC whereas only 24% patients
with moderate and none with weak/no EZH2 expression did so (P < 0.0001). In
Leuk-1 cells, EZH2 downregulation resulted in G(1) arrest; decreased invasion
capability, decreased anchorage-independent growth; downregulation of cyclin D1
and upregulation of p15(INK4B). Our data suggest that EZH2 plays an important
role in OL malignant transformation and may be a biomarker in predicting OSCC
development in patients with OLs.

PMCID: PMC3677701
PMID: 21697275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Jun;31(6):1029-33.

[Expressions of p53 pathway genes and EZH2 in undifferentiated nasopharyngeal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XD(1), Ji MF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou 510080, China. sdlxdlxd@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between the expressions of p53 pathway
genes and EZH2 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS: The expression levels of p53, mdm2, p63 and EZH2 proteins were detected 
by immunohistochemistry in 47 cases of undifferentiated NPC and 12 cases of
chronic nasopharyngitis, and their correlation to the clinical parameters and
prognosis were analyzed.
RESULTS: The protein expressions of p53, mdm2, p63 and EZH2 in NPC were 31.9%,
85.1%, and 95.7%, respectively. mdm2 and EZH2 was not correlated to p53 protein
expression (P>0.05); positive correlations was found between EZH2 and p63
expressions and between p53 and p63. The high expression of EZH2 and p63 proteins
was correlated to advanced T stage and clinical stage of NPC (P<0.05). The
five-year disease-free survival rate in patients with high EZH2 protein
expression was significantly lower than that in patients with low EZH2
expression.
CONCLUSION: mdm2 does not show an obvious correlation to p53 protein inactivation
in NPC. p63 protein overexpression may be associated with p53 protein
inactivation. The overexpression of EZH2 is correlated to NPC progression and
poor prognosis.

PMID: 21690062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Oncogene. 2012 Feb 2;31(5):583-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.254. Epub 2011 Jun 20.

EZH2 supports nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell aggressiveness by forming a
co-repressor complex with HDAC1/HDAC2 and Snail to inhibit E-cadherin.

Tong ZT(1), Cai MY, Wang XG, Kong LL, Mai SJ, Liu YH, Zhang HB, Liao YJ, Zheng F,
Zhu W, Liu TH, Bian XW, Guan XY, Lin MC, Zeng MS, Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is upregulated and has an oncogenic role
in several types of human cancer. However, the abnormalities of EZH2 and its
underlying mechanisms in the pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC)
remain unknown. In this study, we found that high expression of EZH2 in NPC was
associated closely with an aggressive and/or poor prognostic phenotype (P<0.05). 
In NPC cell lines, knockdown of EZH2 by short hairpin RNA was sufficient to
inhibit cell invasiveness/metastasis both in vitro and in vivo, whereas ectopic
overexpression of EZH2 supported NPC cell invasive capacity with a decreased
expression of E-cadherin. In addition, ablation of endogenous Snail in NPC cells 
virtually totally prevented the repressive activity of EZH2 to E-cadherin,
indicating that Snail might be a predominant mediator of EZH2 to suppress
E-cadherin. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation (IP), chromatin IP and luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that in NPC cells, (1) EZH2 interacted with
HDAC1/HDAC2 and Snail to form a repressive complex; (2) these components interact
in a linear fashion, not in a triangular fashion, that is, HDAC1 or HDAC2 bridge 
the interaction between EZH2 and Snail; and (3) the EZH2/HDAC1/2/Snail complex
could closely bind to the E-cadherin promoter by Snail, but not YY1, to repress
E-cadherin. The data provided in this report suggest a critical role of EZH2 in
the control of cell invasion and/or metastasis by forming a co-repressor complex 
with HDAC1/HDAC2/Snail to repress E-cadherin, an activity that might be
responsible, at least in part, for the development and/or progression of human
NPCs.

PMID: 21685935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Aug;41(8):2424-35. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141620. Epub 2011 Jul 
4.

The binding activity of Mel-18 at the Il17a promoter is regulated by the
integrated signals of the TCR and polarizing cytokines.

Hod-Dvorai R(1), Jacob E, Boyko Y, Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel.

We have previously shown that in differentiated T-helper (Th)1 and Th2 cells,
polycomb group (PcG) proteins are associated differentially with the promoters of
the signature cytokine genes. The correlation of the binding activity of PcG
proteins with gene expression is unusual, since they are well known as epigenetic
regulators that maintain transcriptional silencing. Here we show that in Th17
cells, the more phenotypically flexible Th lineage, the PcG proteins Mel-18 and
less strikingly Ezh2 are associated differentially with the Il17a promoter. Using
the RNAi approach, we found that Mel-18 and Ezh2 positively regulate the
expression of Il17a and Il17f. The inducible binding of Mel-18 and Ezh2 at the
Il17a promoter was dependent on signaling pathways downstream of the TCR.
However, a continuous presence of TGF-ß, the cytokine that is necessary to
maintain Il17a expression, was required to preserve the binding activity of
Mel-18, but not of Ezh2, following restimulation. The binding of Mel-18 at the
Il17a promoter was correlated with the recruitment of the lineage-specifying
transcription factor ROR<U+03B3>t. Altogether, our results suggest that in Th17 cells
the TCR and polarizing cytokines synergize to modulate the binding activity of
Mel-18 at the Il17a promoter, and consequently to facilitate Il17a expression.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21674483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Gut. 2012 Feb;61(2):278-89. doi: 10.1136/gut.2011.239145. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

The putative tumour suppressor microRNA-124 modulates hepatocellular carcinoma
cell aggressiveness by repressing ROCK2 and EZH2.

Zheng F(1), Liao YJ, Cai MY, Liu YH, Liu TH, Chen SP, Bian XW, Guan XY, Lin MC,
Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent profile studies of microRNA (miRNA) expression have documented
a deregulation of miRNA (miR-124) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
OBJECTIVE: To determine the status of miR-124 expression and its underlying
mechanisms in the pathogenesis of HCC.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-124 were first examined in HCC cell lines
and tumour tissues by real-time PCR. The in vitro and in vivo functional effect
of miR-124 was examined further. A luciferase reporter assay was conducted to
confirm target associations.
RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-124 were frequently reduced in HCC cells
and tissues, and low-level expression of miR-124 was significantly associated
with a more aggressive and/or poor prognostic phenotype of patients with HCC
(p<0.05). In HCC cell lines, stable overexpression of miR-124 was sufficient to
inhibit cell motility and invasion in vitro, and suppress intrahepatic and
pulmonary metastasis in vivo. In addition, ectopic overexpression of miR-124 in
HCC cells inhibited epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition, formation of stress
fibres, filopodia and lamellipodia. Further studies showed that miR-124 could
directly target the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of both ROCK2 and EZH2 mRNAs,
and suppress their mRNA and protein expressions. These findings suggest that
miR-124 plays a critical role in regulating cytoskeletal events and
epithelial-mesenchymal cell transition and, ultimately, inhibits the invasive
and/or metastatic potential of HCC, probably by its direct target on ROCK2 and
EZH2 genes. These results provide functional and mechanistic links between the
tumour suppressor miRNA-124 and the two oncogenes ROCK2 and EZH2 on the
aggressive nature of HCC.
CONCLUSION: These data highlight an important role for miR-124 in the regulation 
of invasion and metastasis in the molecular aetiology of HCC, and suggest a
potential application of miR-124 in prognosis prediction and cancer treatment.

PMID: 21672940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 May 25;13(3):309. doi: 10.1186/bcr2871.

EZH2-mediated epigenetic repression of DNA repair in promoting breast tumor
initiating cells.

Stefansson OA(1), Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Biology Program, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Institute, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Members of the Polycomb-group (PcG) family of proteins, including EZH2 (enhancer 
of zeste homolog 2), are involved in establishing epigenetic silencing of
developmental genes in adult and embryonic stem cells, and their deregulation has
been implicated in cancer. In a recent report, EZH2-mediated epigenetic
repression of DNA damage repair in breast tumor initiating cells (BTICs) was
identified as a mechanism that could promote expansion of BTICs, and may
contribute to cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3218929
PMID: 21672285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):28511-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.240515. Epub 2011
Jun 9.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1)-mediated phosphorylation of enhancer of zeste 2 
(Ezh2) regulates its stability.

Wu SC(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The H3K27 histone methyltransferase, Ezh2 (enhancer of zeste 2), is a Polycomb
group protein that plays important roles in many biological processes including
cellular differentiation, stem cell biology, and cancer development.
Up-regulation of Ezh2 is observed in various human cancers consistent with its
role in cell proliferation. Thus, understanding the regulation of Ezh2 may reveal
how it contributes to the cellular proliferation process. Here, we demonstrate
that Ezh2 can be regulated by the cyclin-dependent kinase, CDK1, which
phosphorylates Ezh2 at threonines 345 and 487. Consistent with the cell cycle
phase during which CDK1 exhibits peak activity, Ezh2 phosphorylation is enriched 
in cells arrested in mitosis when compared with S-phase. Phosphorylation of
Thr-345 and Thr-487 promotes Ezh2 ubiquitination and subsequent degradation by
the proteasome. Furthermore, expression of T345A/T487A confers a proliferative
disadvantage when compared with cells expressing wild-type Ezh2, which suggests
that phosphorylation of Ezh2 is important for cell proliferation. Collectively,
these results establish a novel function for CDK1-mediated Ezh2 phosphorylation
and provide a mechanism by which Ezh2 protein levels can be regulated in cells.

PMCID: PMC3151093
PMID: 21659531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Aug;91(8):666-71. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20827. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Epigenomic reprogramming of the developing reproductive tract and disease
susceptibility in adulthood.

Walker CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Smithville, TX 78957, USA. chwalker@mdanderson.org

During development, epigenetic programs are "installed" on the genome that direct
differentiation and normal tissue and organ function in adulthood. Consequently, 
development is also a period of susceptibility to reprogramming of the epigenome.
Developmental reprogramming occurs when an adverse stimulus or insult interrupts 
the proper "install" of epigenetic programs during development, reprogramming
normal physiologic responses in such a way as to promote disease later in life.
Some of the best examples of developmental reprogramming involve the reproductive
tract, where early life exposures to environmental estrogens can increase
susceptibility to benign and malignant tumors in adulthood including leiomyoma
(fibroids), endometrial, and prostate cancer. Although specific mechanism(s) by
which environmental estrogens reprogram the developing epigenome were unknown,
both DNA and histone methylation were considered likely targets for epigenetic
reprogramming. We have now identified a mechanism by which developmental
exposures to environmental estrogens reprogram the epigenome by inducing
inappropriate activation of nongenomic estrogen receptor (ER) signaling.
Activation of nongenomic ER signaling via the phosphotidylinositol-3-kinase
(PI3K) pathway activates the kinase AKT/PKB in the developing reproductive tract,
which phosphorylates the histone lysine methyltransferase (HKMT) EZH2, the key
"installer" of epigenetic histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). AKT
phosphorylation inactivates EZH2, decreasing levels of H3K27 methylation, a
repressive mark that inhibits gene expression, in the developing uterus. As a
result of this developmental reprogramming, many estrogen-responsive genes become
hypersensitive to estrogen in adulthood, exhibiting elevated expression
throughout the estrus cycle, and resulting in a "hyper-estrogenized" phenotype in
the adult uterus that promotes development of hormone-dependent tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4266586
PMID: 21656660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Am J Transl Res. 2011 May 15;3(3):243-50. Epub 2011 Apr 21.

The roles of EZH2 in cell lineage commitment.

Chou RH, Yu YL, Hung MC.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a catalytic component of polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), epigenetically regulates chromatin structure and gene
expressions through tri-methylation at histone H3K27 and recruitment of DNA
methyltransferases for gene silencing. Despite extensive studies of the role of
EZH2 in cancer progression and malignancy, increasing evidence also suggest that 
EZH2 plays a critical role in stem cells renewal, maintenance, and
differentiation into specific cell lineages. Here, we review the updated
information regarding how EZH2 contributes to stem cell maintenance, cell lineage
determination, including myogenesis, adipogenesis, osteogenesis, neurogenesis,
hematopoiesis, lymphopoiesis, epidermal differentiation and hepatogenesis, and
how EZH2 is regulated by phosphorylation and microRNAs in these processes.

PMCID: PMC3102568
PMID: 21654879  [PubMed]


453. Blood. 2011 Aug 18;118(7):1723-35. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-292102. Epub 2011
Jun 7.

New mutations and pathogenesis of myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Vainchenker W(1), Delhommeau F, Constantinescu SN, Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR1009, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. verpre@igr.fr

Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal disorders characterized by
excessive production of mature blood cells. In the majority of classic
MPN--polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia, and primitive
myelofibrosis--driver oncogenic mutations affecting Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) or MPL 
lead to constitutive activation of cytokine-regulated intracellular signaling
pathways. LNK, c-CBL, or SOCSs (all negative regulators of signaling pathways),
although infrequently targeted, may either drive the disease or synergize with
JAK2 and MPL mutations. IZF1 deletions or TP53 mutations are mainly found at
transformation phases and are present at greater frequency than in de novo acute 
myeloid leukemias. Loss-of-function mutations in 3 genes involved in epigenetic
regulation, TET2, ASXL1, and EZH2, may be early events preceding JAK2V617F but
may also occur late during disease progression. They are more frequently observed
in PMF than PV and ET and are also present in other types of malignant myeloid
diseases. A likely hypothesis is that they facilitate clonal selection, allowing 
the dominance of the JAK2V617F subclone during the chronic phase and, together
with cooperating mutations, promote blast crisis. Their precise roles in
hematopoiesis and in the pathogenesis of MPN, as well as their prognostic impact 
and potential as a therapeutic target, are currently under investigation.

PMID: 21653328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Oncotarget. 2011 Jun;2(6):485-90.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms: from JAK2 mutations discovery to JAK2 inhibitor
therapies.

Passamonti F(1), Maffioli M, Caramazza D, Cazzola M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ospedale di Circolo e
Fondazione Macchi, Varese, Italy. francesco.passamonti@ospedale.varese.it

Most BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) carry an activating
JAK2 mutation. Approximately 96% of patients with polycythemia vera (PV) harbors 
the V617F mutation in JAK2 exon 14, whereas the minority of JAK2 (V617F)-negative
subjects shows several mutations in exon 12. Other mutation events as MPL, TET2, 
LNK, EZH2 have been described in chronic phase, while NF1, IDH1, IDH2, ASX1, CBL 
and Ikaros in blast phase of MPN. The specific pathogenic implication of these
mutations is under investigation, but they may have a role in refinement of
diagnostic criteria and in development of new prognostic models. Several trials
with targeted therapy (JAK inhibitors) are ongoing mostly involving patients with
PMF, post-PV MF and post-essential thrombocythemia (ET) MF. Treatment with
ruxolitinib and TG101348 has shown clinically significant benefits, particularly 
in improvement of splenomegaly and constitutional symptoms in MF patients. On the
other hand, JAK inhibitors have not thus far shown disease-modifying activity
therefore any other deduction on these new drugs seems premature.

PMCID: PMC3248205
PMID: 21646683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2011 Jul;294(7):1150-7. doi: 10.1002/ar.21416. Epub 2011 May 
31.

The expression pattern of polycomb group protein Ezh2 during mouse embryogenesis.

Ningxia Z(1), Shuyan L, Zhongjing S, Ling C, Tianzhong M, Lifeng W, Yan Y, Leili 
L, Xiancai C, Haibin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical College of Shantou University,
Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China.

The Polycomb group (PcG) family proteins are required for the stability of
homeotic selector genes and other genes related to the regulation of mammalian
development through their roles in the modulation of chromatin domains. Among
them, the mammalian enhancer zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) contributes to the
transcriptional repression of these genes. Previous studies tracked the Ezh2
expression at cDNA and mRNA levels during mouse development. However, little
information is known about the expression patterns of Ezh2 at the protein levels.
In this study, the embryos (E6.5-E18.5) obtained through timed matings of strain 
Kunming mice were inserted into paraffin blocks. Tissue microarrays were
constructed and followed by subsequent immunohistochemical staining. The positive
cells were identified and scored based on both the percentage of stained cells
and their staining intensities. Ezh2 protein expression was found throughout the 
embryonic tissues including the nerves, intestine epithelial, liver, pancreas,
renal tubule, and lungs. Its expression level was higher at early embryonic
developmental stages. However, the nerve fibers and myocardium showed weak or no 
immunostaining reactivities. Ezh2 protein was moderately expressed in the nuclei 
of renal tubule epithelial cells at E14.5. In contrast, it was weakly expressed
in the fetal kidneys at E18.5 and the protein was localized in the cytoplasm of
the renal tubule epithelial cells. Our data confirmed that Ezh2 protein was
expressed in mouse embryos and its expression exhibited tissue specificity and
dependence on the stages of embryo development. thus providing new information
helpful for understanding the possible roles of Ezh2 in embryogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21630475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Am J Med Sci. 2011 Sep;342(3):198-204. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e31821335a9.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression is associated with tumor cell
proliferation and invasion in cervical cancer.

Fang J(1), Zhang M, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, First Affiliated Hospital, Medical 
School, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Shaanxi Province, China. fangjing88993@126.com

INTRODUCTION: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been reported to be
associated with biological malignancy in several cancers. High expression of EZH2
is associated with tumor cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis and has
important clinicopathologic significance. However, little is known about the
function and mechanisms of EZH2 in cervical cancer.
METHODS: This study was conducted to investigate the clinical value of EZH2
expression in cervical cancer and the association between EZH2 and possible
downstream proteins using EZH2-targeted interfering RNA.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression rate was significantly greater in cervical cancer tissue
than in normal cervical tissue both in mRNA and protein level. High EZH2
expression was significantly associated with differentiation, depth and lymphatic
invasion. EZH2 gene RNAi resulted in inhibition of cell growth, cell cycle arrest
and decreased ability of invasion in C33A cells. PCNA and MMP-2 expressions were 
downregulated, whereas p21 was upregulated after inhibition of EZH2.
CONCLUSIONS: High EZH2 expression may be associated with tumor cell proliferation
and invasion in cervical cancer, and that EZH2 may be one of the candidates for
new molecular therapeutic targets for the treatment of cervical cancer.

PMID: 21629038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Mol Signal. 2011 May 30;6:5. doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-6-5.

Dual function of polycomb group proteins in differentiated murine T helper (CD4+)
cells.

Jacob E(1), Hod-Dvorai R, Ben-Mordechai OL, Boyko Y, Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel. oavni@tx.technion.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Following antigen recognition, naive T helper (Th; CD4+) cells can
differentiate toward one of several effector lineages such as Th1 and Th2; each
expressing distinctive transcriptional profiles of cytokine genes. These
cytokines eventually instruct the strategy of the immune response. In our search 
for factors that propagate the transcriptional programs of differentiated Th
cells, we previously found that Polycomb group (PcG) proteins, which are known as
epigenetic regulators that maintain repressive chromatin states, bind
differentially the signature cytokine genes. Unexpectedly, their binding to the
Ifng (Interferon-g) in Th1 cells and Il4 (Interleukin-4) in Th2 cells, was
correlated with transcriptional activation. Therefore, in this study we aimed to 
determine the functional role of PcG proteins in the regulation of the expression
of the signature cytokine genes.
METHODS: PcG proteins were knocked down in primary and established murine Th
cells using transduction of lentiviruses encoding short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
directed to Mel-18, Ezh2, Eed and Ring1A, representative of two different PcG
complexes. The chromatin structure and the binding activity of PcG proteins and
transcription factors at the Ifng promoter were assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays.
RESULTS: Downregulation of PcG proteins was consistent with their function as
positive regulators of the signature cytokine genes in primary and established
Th1 and Th2 cells. Moreover, the PcG protein Mel-18 was necessary to recruit the 
Th1-lineage specifying transcription factor T-bet, and the T cell receptor
(TCR)-inducible transcription factor NFAT1 to the Ifng promoter in Th1 cells.
Nevertheless, our results suggest that PcG proteins can function also as
conventional transcriptional repressors in Th cells of their known target the
Hoxa7 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support a model whereby the non-differentially expressed
PcG proteins are recruited in a Th-lineage specific manner to their target genes 
to enforce the maintenance of specific transcriptional programs as
transcriptional repressors or activators. Although our results suggest a direct
effect of PcG proteins in the regulation of cytokine gene expression, indirect
functions cannot be excluded.

PMCID: PMC3127800
PMID: 21624129  [PubMed]


458. Cancer Cell. 2011 Jun 14;19(6):792-804. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.05.006. Epub 2011
May 27.

Cell autonomous role of PTEN in regulating castration-resistant prostate cancer
growth.

Mulholland DJ(1), Tran LM, Li Y, Cai H, Morim A, Wang S, Plaisier S, Garraway IP,
Huang J, Graeber TG, Wu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology and Institute for Molecular
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1735, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2011 Aug;8(8):412.

Alteration of the PTEN/PI3K pathway is associated with late-stage and
castrate-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, how PTEN loss is involved in 
CRPC development is not clear. Here, we show that castration-resistant growth is 
an intrinsic property of Pten null prostate cancer (CaP) cells, independent of
cancer development stage. PTEN loss suppresses androgen-responsive gene
expressions by modulating androgen receptor (AR) transcription factor activity.
Conditional deletion of Ar in the epithelium promotes the proliferation of Pten
null cancer cells, at least in part, by downregulating the androgen-responsive
gene Fkbp5 and preventing PHLPP-mediated AKT inhibition. Our findings identify
PI3K and AR pathway crosstalk as a mechanism of CRPC development, with
potentially important implications for CaP etiology and therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157296
PMID: 21620777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. BMC Genet. 2011 May 30;12:52. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-12-52.

Characterisation of a novel paralog of scavenger receptor class B member I
(SCARB1) in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar).

Sundvold H(1), Helgeland H, Baranski M, Omholt SW, Våge DI.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Genetics, Dept. of Animal and Aquacultural Sciences,
Norwegian University of Life Sciences, 1432 Aas, Norway.
Hilde.Sundvold@oslo-universitetssykehus.no

BACKGROUND: Red flesh colour is a unique trait found in some salmonid genera.
Carotenoid pigments are not synthesized de novo in the fish, but are provided by 
dietary uptake. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the
cellular uptake and deposition of carotenoids could potentially be used to
improve the low muscle deposition rate that is typically found in farmed Atlantic
salmon. In addition, from an evolutionary point of view, the establishment and
maintenance of this trait is still poorly understood. It has been demonstrated in
several species that scavenger receptor class B, member 1 (SCARB1) is involved in
intestinal absorption of carotenoids, which makes this gene a possible source of 
genetic variation in salmonid flesh pigmentation.
RESULTS: In this study, a novel paralog of SCARB1 (SCARB1-2) was detected through
screening for genetic variation in Atlantic salmon SCARB1. Full length SCARB1-2
encodes a protein with 89% identity to Atlantic salmon SCARB1, except for the
C-terminal cytoplasmic tail that shows only 12% identity. The most prominent site
of SCARB1 mRNA expression was in the mid gut, while a five-fold lower level was
detected in Atlantic salmon skeletal muscle and liver. The SCARB1-2 mRNA was
equally expressed in liver, muscle and mid gut, and at a lower level than SCARB1 
mRNA. A total of seven different SCARB1-2 alleles comprising repetitive enhancer 
of zeste motifs (EZH2) were identified in the founding parents of a resource
Atlantic salmon population. We mapped the SCARB1-2 paralog to a region on
Atlantic salmon chromosome 1, containing a putative QTL for flesh colour.
Addition of the SCARB1-2 marker increased the significance of this QTL, however
the large confidence interval surrounding the QTL precludes confirmation of
SCARB1-2 as a causative gene underlying variation in this trait.
CONCLUSION: We have characterised a novel paralog of SCARB1 (SCARB1-2), have
mapped it to Atlantic salmon chromosome 1 and have described its expression in
various tissues. Mapping with SCARB1-2 alleles added further evidence for a QTL
affecting flesh colour on this chromosome, however further studies are needed to 
confirm a functional role for this gene in flesh colour pigmentation.

PMCID: PMC3118963
PMID: 21619714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2011;32(2):156-9.

The value of TOP2A, EZH2 and paxillin expression as markers of aggressive breast 
cancer: relationship with other prognostic factors.

Panousis D(1), Patsouris E, Lagoudianakis E, Pappas A, Kyriakidou V, Voulgaris Z,
Xepapadakis G, Manouras A, Athanassiadou AM, Athanassiadou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Iaso General Hospital, Athens, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: The immunocytochemical expression of topoisomerase II alpha
(TOP2A), enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and paxillin has recently gained
increasing attention. Although previous studies have commented on the clinical
usefulness of these markers, their role remains controversial.
AIM: The purpose of the study was to investigate the expression of TOP2A, EZH2
and paxillin in relation to classic prognostic parameters and their significance 
as prognostic markers in imprints of resected breast carcinomas.
METHODS: Imprint smears from 55 patients who underwent surgical treatment for
primary carcinoma in our department between 2005 and 2006 were studied
immunocytochemically with the use of TOP2A, EZH2 and paxillin antibodies.
RESULTS: The expression of TOP2A correlated with higher histologic grade, tumor
size and negative PR expression. High intensity staining for EZH2 expression was 
associated with higher histologic grade, negative ER and PR expression and
positive Ki-67 expression. The expression of paxillin showed no correlation with 
estrogen/progesterone and HER2 expression nor with tumor grade and stage.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicate that TOP2A and EZH2 expression are related to a
more aggressive tumor phenotype. The expression of paxillin failed to correlate
with any of the studied clinicopathologic factors. Further studies are needed to 
verify these results.

PMID: 21614903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Apr;132(2):429-37. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1591-2. 
Epub 2011 May 26.

Increased risk for distant metastasis in patients with familial early-stage
breast cancer and high EZH2 expression.

Alford SH(1), Toy K, Merajver SD, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI, USA.

The identification of women with early-stage breast cancer who will develop
distant metastasis may improve clinical management. The transcriptional regulator
Enhancer of Zeste-2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in invasive breast carcinoma compared
with benign breast tissues, with maximal expression in breast cancer metastasis. 
In this article, our purpose was to investigate the performance of EZH2 protein
detection as a predictor of metastasis in women with early-stage breast cancer,
which is unknown. We developed a cohort of 480 women with stage I-IIA breast
cancer diagnosed between 1996 and 2002 and recorded detailed sociodemographic,
clinical, and pathological information. Tumors were histologically characterized 
and arrayed in tissue microarrays containing 1,443 samples. The nuclear EZH2
expression was investigated by immunohistochemistry and was scored as 1-2
(negative and weak) or 3-4 (moderate and strong) using a validated scoring
schema. Scores 1-2 were considered low EZH2; scores 3-4 were considered high
EZH2. In this study, we found that after a median follow up of 9 years (range
0.04-14.5 years) 46 of 480 patients (9.6%) developed distant metastasis. High
EZH2 was associated with larger size, high histological grade, negative hormone
receptors, and first degree family history of breast and/or ovarian carcinoma.
While EZH2 could not predict survival in the entire cohort, high EZH2 was a
predictor of disease-specific survival in patients with early-stage disease and
first degree family history (log rank P value 0.05). Importantly, in this group
of patients, high EZH2 was an independent predictor of distant metastasis up to
15 years after primary carcinoma diagnosis (hazard ratio 6.58, 95% CI:
1.40-30.89, P = 0.016) providing survival information above and beyond currently 
used prognosticators. In conclusion, EZH2 may be a useful biomarker of long-term 
metastatic risk in women with familial early-stage breast cancer, and warrant
further validation studies.

PMCID: PMC3311223
PMID: 21614565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Cancer Treat Rev. 2011;37 Suppl 1:S13-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2011.04.013. Epub
2011 May 25.

DNA methylation as a pathogenic event and as a therapeutic target in AML.

Schoofs T(1), Müller-Tidow C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, University of Muenster, 48129 Muenster, Germany.

DNA methylation and its influence on gene expression are key in understanding
cancer pathogenesis. Even though it is becoming clear that DNA methylation
strongly interacts with other components of the epigenetic machinery such as
histone modifications, aberrant DNA methylation can still be regarded as a
crucial hallmark of cancer by itself. In Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML),
aberrations of DNA methylation also rank among the most frequent alterations
observed. Recent studies revealed that specific patterns of DNA methylation
characterize AML and help to distinguish AML subtypes. The contribution of this
epigenetic dysregulation to leukemogenesis in AML is currently unclear. However, 
interactions between mutated transcription factors and epigenetic networks have
already been shown to be partially responsible for leukemic transformation, for
e.g. in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Also, direct mutations in the
epigenetic master regulators EZH2 and DNMT3A were recently identified in AML and 
in diseases leading to secondary leukemia. These findings strengthen the view
that dysregulated epigenetic networks can induce AML. Correspondingly, epigenetic
therapies e.g. hypomethylating drugs show significant activity in AML. While
benefit is observed in many patients, DNA hypomethylating therapy by itself is
not curative. Furthermore, it is not clear whether the drugs' effects are solely 
epigenetic in nature since in vitro studies suggest different mechanisms of
action. Current clinical trials aim to improve efficacy of DNA hypomethylating
drugs for e.g. by combination with standard AML chemotherapy. Taken together,
targeting the epigenetic machinery seems to be the way towards more effective
therapies in AML.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21612874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Epigenetics. 2011 Jun;6(6):703-9. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

Polycomb group genes are targets of aberrant DNA methylation in renal cell
carcinoma.

Avissar-Whiting M(1), Koestler DC, Houseman EA, Christensen BC, Kelsey KT, Marsit
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

The combined effects of genetic and epigenetic aberrations are well recognized as
causal in tumorigenesis. Here, we defined profiles of DNA methylation in primary 
renal cell carcinomas (RCC) and assessed the association of these profiles with
the expression of genes required for the establishment and maintenance of
epigenetic marks. A bead-based methylation array platform was used to measure
methylation of 1,413 CpG loci in ~800 cancer-associated genes and three
methylation classes were derived by unsupervised clustering of tumors using
recursively partitioned mixture modeling (RPMM). Quantitative RT-PCR was
performed on all tumor samples to determine the expression of DNMT1, DNMT3B,
VEZF1 and EZH2. Additionally, methylation at LINE-1 and AluYb8 repetitive
elements was measured using bisulfite pyrosequencing. Associations between
methylation class and tumor stage (p = 0.05), LINE-1 (p < 0.0001) and AluYb8 (p <
0.0001) methylation, as well as EZH2 expression (p < 0.0001) were noted following
univariate analyses. A multinomial logistic regression model controlling for
potential confounders revealed that AluYb8 (p < 0.003) methylation and EZH2
expression (p < 0.008) were significantly associated with methylation class
membership. Because EZH2 is a member of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2),
we next analyzed the distribution of Polycomb group (PcG) targets among
methylation classes derived by clustering the 1,413 array CpG loci using RPMM.
PcG target genes were significantly enriched (p < 0.0001) in methylation classes 
with greater differential methylation between RCC and non-diseased kidney tissue.
This work contributes to our understanding of how repressive marks on DNA and
chromatin are dysregulated in carcinogenesis, knowledge that might aid the
development of therapies or preventive strategies for human malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3230543
PMID: 21610323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. BMC Med. 2011 May 25;9:63. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-63.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) in pediatric soft tissue sarcomas: first
implications.

Ciarapica R(1), Miele L, Giordano A, Locatelli F, Rota R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncohematology, IRCCS, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma,
Italy. roberta.ciarapica@yahoo.com

Soft tissue sarcomas of childhood are a group of heterogeneous tumors thought to 
be derived from mesenchymal stem cells. Surgical resection is effective only in
about 50% of cases and resistance to conventional chemotherapy is often
responsible for treatment failure. Therefore, investigations on novel therapeutic
targets are of fundamental importance. Deregulation of epigenetic mechanisms
underlying chromatin modifications during stem cell differentiation has been
suggested to contribute to soft tissue sarcoma pathogenesis. One of the main
elements in this scenario is enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a
methyltransferase belonging to the Polycomb group proteins. EZH2 catalyzes
histone H3 methylation on gene promoters, thus repressing genes that induce stem 
cell differentiation to maintain an embryonic stem cell signature. EZH2
deregulated expression/function in soft tissue sarcomas has been recently
reported. In this review, an overview of the recently reported functions of EZH2 
in soft tissue sarcomas is given and the hypothesis that its expression might be 
involved in soft tissue sarcomagenesis is discussed. Finally, the therapeutic
potential of epigenetic therapies modulating EZH2-mediated gene repression is
considered.

PMCID: PMC3126730
PMID: 21609503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Science. 2011 May 20;332(6032):963-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1202845.

Chromatin "prepattern" and histone modifiers in a fate choice for liver and
pancreas.

Xu CR(1), Cole PA, Meyers DJ, Kormish J, Dent S, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Transcriptionally silent genes can be marked by histone modifications and
regulatory proteins that indicate the genes' potential to be activated. Such
marks have been identified in pluripotent cells, but it is unknown how such marks
occur in descendant, multipotent embryonic cells that have restricted cell fate
choices. We isolated mouse embryonic endoderm cells and assessed histone
modifications at regulatory elements of silent genes that are activated upon
liver or pancreas fate choices. We found that the liver and pancreas elements
have distinct chromatin patterns. Furthermore, the histone acetyltransferase
P300, recruited via bone morphogenetic protein signaling, and the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2 have modulatory roles in the fate choice. These studies
reveal a functional "prepattern" of chromatin states within multipotent
progenitors and potential targets to modulate cell fate induction.

PMCID: PMC3128430
PMID: 21596989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. BJU Int. 2011 Nov;108(9):1430-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10253.x. Epub 2011
May 18.

Histopathological variables and biomarkers enhancer of zeste homologue 2, Ki-67
and minichromosome maintenance protein 7 as prognosticators in primarily
endocrine-treated prostate cancer.

Tolonen TT(1), Tammela TL, Kujala PM, Tuominen VJ, Isola JJ, Visakorpi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vaasa Central Hospital, Vaasa, Finland.
tapio.visakorpi@uta.fi

OBJECTIVE:  To evaluate the prognostic value of histopathological variables and 
immunostainings of biomarkers enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), Ki-67 and
minichromosome maintenance protein 7 (MCM7) from core biopsies of hormonally
treated patients with prostate cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS:  Biopsies of 247 primarily endocrine-treated patients were
analysed for histopathological characteristics and Gleason scores (GS) according 
to the revised guidelines of International Society of Urologic Pathology (ISUP)
consensus conference 2005.  Immunohistochemical stainings were analysed with the
aid of digital image analysis.  The prognostic value of the histopathological
variables and the biomarkers was analysed with univariate and multivariate Cox
regression analysis, with biochemical recurrence as an endpoint.
RESULTS:  Biomarkers EZH2 (relative risk [RR] 2.0, 95% confidence interval
1.2-3.3), Ki-67 (3.4, 2.1-5.5) and MCM7 (2.4, 1.5-3.9) were significantly
associated with progression-free survival in a univariate analysis.  Ki-67
immunostaining index detected high-risk patients with GS of 7 (9.1, 8.0-10.3).  
In a multivariate analysis with non-conventional GS groups 5-7 (3 + 4), 7(4 +
3)-8, and 9-10, the independent prognostic markers were pretreatment GS (2.2,
1.5-3.2), prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level (2.1, 1.1-4.2), perineural
invasion (PNI) (1.6, 1.2-2.2), and clinical T-stage (cT) (1.9, 1.0-3.7). 
Combination of the independent markers (PSA level > 20 ng/mL or GS >3 + 4 or PNI 
>3 or cT >2) yielded best risk stratification (RR 11.6, 10.4-12.7).
CONCLUSIONS:  GS remains one of the most important prognostic factors in
prostate cancer. However, the refined guidelines by ISUP 2005 might have shifted 
the threshold between low-grade and high-grade cancers from GS 6 vs 7 to GS 3 + 4
vs 4 + 3.  PNI is an independent prognostic marker superior to cT.  Ki-67 is
the most useful biomarker in detecting patients with GS = 7 at high risk for
progression.

© 2011 THE AUTHORS. BJU INTERNATIONAL © 2011 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

PMID: 21592298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Genes Dev. 2011 May 15;25(10):997-1003. doi: 10.1101/gad.2054311.

Polycomb-mediated repression during terminal differentiation: what don't you want
to be when you grow up?

Conerly ML(1), MacQuarrie KL, Fong AP, Yao Z, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Human Biology Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109, USA.

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2011 Apr 15;25(8):789-94.

Chromatin-modifying enzymes are known to be critical components for the correct
differentiation of embryonic stem cells into specific lineages, such as neurons. 
Recently, the role of Polycomb group proteins has been studied in the
specification and differentiation of muscle stem cells. In this perspective, we
review a recent study by Juan and colleagues (pp. 789-794) in Genes & Development
of the role of the polycomb group protein Ezh2 in muscle stem cells, and discuss 
the implications for general lineage restriction.

PMCID: PMC3093125
PMID: 21576260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. PLoS One. 2011 May 10;6(5):e19503. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019503.

DNA methyltransferase controls stem cell aging by regulating BMI1 and EZH2
through microRNAs.

So AY(1), Jung JW, Lee S, Kim HS, Kang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Adult Stem Cell Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is well known mechanism that regulates
cellular senescence of cancer cells. Here we show that inhibition of DNA
methyltransferases (DNMTs) with 5-azacytidine (5-AzaC) or with specific small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against DNMT1 and 3b induced the cellular senescence of
human umbilical cord blood-derived multipotent stem cells (hUCB-MSCs) and
increased p16(INK4A) and p21(CIP1/WAF1) expression. DNMT inhibition changed
histone marks into the active forms and decreased the methylation of CpG islands 
in the p16(INK4A) and p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter regions. Enrichment of EZH2, the
key factor that methylates histone H3 lysine 9 and 27 residues, was decreased on 
the p16(INK4A) and p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter regions. We found that DNMT inhibition
decreased expression levels of Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins and increased
expression of microRNAs (miRNAs), which target PcG proteins. Decreased CpG island
methylation and increased levels of active histone marks at genomic regions
encoding miRNAs were observed after 5-AzaC treatment. Taken together, DNMTs have 
a critical role in regulating the cellular senescence of hUCB-MSCs through
controlling not only the DNA methylation status but also active/inactive histone 
marks at genomic regions of PcG-targeting miRNAs and p16(INK4A) and
p21(CIP1/WAF1) promoter regions.

PMCID: PMC3091856
PMID: 21572997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. BMC Genomics. 2011 May 11;12:230. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-230.

Detecting copy number status and uncovering subclonal markers in heterogeneous
tumor biopsies.

Parisi F(1), Ariyan S, Narayan D, Bacchiocchi A, Hoyt K, Cheng E, Xu F, Li P,
Halaban R, Kluger Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Yale Cancer Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomic aberrations can be used to determine cancer diagnosis and
prognosis. Clinically relevant novel aberrations can be discovered using
high-throughput assays such as Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) arrays and
next-generation sequencing, which typically provide aggregate signals of many
cells at once. However, heterogeneity of tumor subclones dramatically complicates
the task of detecting aberrations.
RESULTS: The aggregate signal of a population of subclones can be described as a 
linear system of equations. We employed a measure of allelic imbalance and total 
amount of DNA to characterize each locus by the copy number status (gain, loss or
neither) of the strongest subclonal component. We designed simulated data to
compare our measure to existing approaches and we analyzed SNP-arrays from 30
melanoma samples and transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) from one melanoma
sample.We showed that any system describing aggregate subclonal signals is
underdetermined, leading to non-unique solutions for the exact copy number
profile of subclones. For this reason, our illustrative measure was more robust
than existing Hidden Markov Model (HMM) based tools in inferring the aberration
status, as indicated by tests on simulated data. This higher robustness
contributed in identifying numerous aberrations in several loci of melanoma
samples. We validated the heterogeneity and aberration status within single
biopsies by fluorescent in situ hybridization of four affected and
transcriptionally up-regulated genes E2F8, ETV4, EZH2 and FAM84B in 11 melanoma
cell lines. Heterogeneity was further demonstrated in the analysis of allelic
imbalance changes along single exons from melanoma RNA-Seq.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate how subclonal heterogeneity, prevalent in 
tumor samples, is reflected in aggregate signals measured by high-throughput
techniques. Our proposed approach yields high robustness in detecting copy number
alterations using high-throughput technologies and has the potential to identify 
specific subclonal markers from next-generation sequencing data.

PMCID: PMC3114747
PMID: 21569352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019305.

Modeling initiation of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells.

von Levetzow C(1), Jiang X, Gwye Y, von Levetzow G, Hung L, Cooper A, Hsu JH,
Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are aggressive bone and soft tissue tumors
that express EWS-ETS fusion genes as driver mutations. Although the histogenesis 
of ESFT is controversial, mesenchymal (MSC) and/or neural crest (NCSC) stem cells
have been implicated as cells of origin. For the current study we evaluated the
consequences of EWS-FLI1 expression in human embryonic stem cell-derived NCSC
(hNCSC). Ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 in undifferentiated hNCSC and their
neuro-mesenchymal stem cell (hNC-MSC) progeny was readily tolerated and led to
altered expression of both well established as well as novel EWS-FLI1 target
genes. Importantly, whole genome expression profiling studies revealed that the
molecular signature of established ESFT is more similar to hNCSC than any other
normal tissue, including MSC, indicating that maintenance or reactivation of the 
NCSC program is a feature of ESFT pathogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, 
EWS-FLI1 induced hNCSC genes as well as the polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 in
hNC-MSC. In addition, up-regulation of BMI-1 was associated with avoidance of
cellular senescence and reversible silencing of p16. Together these studies
confirm that, unlike terminally differentiated cells but consistent with bone
marrow-derived MSC, NCSC tolerate expression of EWS-FLI1 and ectopic expression
of the oncogene initiates transition to an ESFT-like state. In addition, to our
knowledge this is the first demonstration that EWS-FLI1-mediated induction of
BMI-1 and epigenetic silencing of p16 might be critical early initiating events
in ESFT tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3084816
PMID: 21559395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 31;108(22):E149-58. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1102223108. Epub 2011 May 5.

Genome-wide remodeling of the epigenetic landscape during myogenic
differentiation.

Asp P(1), Blum R, Vethantham V, Parisi F, Micsinai M, Cheng J, Bowman C, Kluger
Y, Dynlacht BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cancer Institute, New York University School of
Medicine, 522 First Avenue, Smilow Research Building 1104, New York, NY 10016,
USA.

We have examined changes in the chromatin landscape during muscle differentiation
by mapping the genome-wide location of ten key histone marks and transcription
factors in mouse myoblasts and terminally differentiated myotubes, providing an
exceptionally rich dataset that has enabled discovery of key epigenetic changes
underlying myogenesis. Using this compendium, we focused on a well-known
repressive mark, histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation, and identified novel
regulatory elements flanking the myogenin gene that function as a key
differentiation-dependent switch during myogenesis. Next, we examined the role of
Polycomb-mediated H3K27 methylation in gene repression by systematically ablating
components of both PRC1 and PRC2 complexes. Surprisingly, we found mechanistic
differences between transient and permanent repression of muscle differentiation 
and lineage commitment genes and observed that the loss of PRC1 and PRC2
components produced opposing differentiation defects. These phenotypes illustrate
striking differences as compared to embryonic stem cell differentiation and
suggest that PRC1 and PRC2 do not operate sequentially in muscle cells. Our
studies of PRC1 occupancy also suggested a "fail-safe" mechanism, whereby
PRC1/Bmi1 concentrates at genes specifying nonmuscle lineages, helping to retain 
H3K27me3 in the face of declining Ezh2-mediated methyltransferase activity in
differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC3107312
PMID: 21551099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Cell Death Differ. 2011 Nov;18(11):1771-9. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.48. Epub 2011
May 6.

Polycomb protein EZH2 regulates cancer cell fate decision in response to DNA
damage.

Wu Z(1), Lee ST, Qiao Y, Li Z, Lee PL, Lee YJ, Jiang X, Tan J, Aau M, Lim CZ, Yu 
Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Biopolis, Singapore.

Polycomb protein histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste homologe 2 (EZH2) is
frequently overexpressed in human malignancy and is implicated in cancer cell
proliferation and invasion. However, it is largely unknown whether EZH2 has a
role in modulating DNA damage response. Here, we show that EZH2 is an important
determinant of cell fate decision in response to genotoxic stress. EZH2 depletion
results in abrogation of both cell cycle G1 and G2/M checkpoints, directing DNA
damage response toward predominant apoptosis in both p53-proficient and
p53-deficient cancer cells, but not in normal cells. Mechanistically, EZH2
regulates DNA damage response in p53 wild-type cells mainly through
transcriptional repression of FBXO32, which binds to and directs p21 for
proteasome-mediated degradation, whereas it affects p53-deficient cells through
regulating Chk1 activation by a distinct mechanism. Furthermore, pharmacological 
depletion of EZH2 phenocopies the effects of EZH2 knockdown on cell cycle
checkpoints and apoptosis. These data unravel a crucial role of EZH2 in
determining the cancer cell outcome following DNA damage and suggest that
therapeutic targeting oncogenic EZH2 might serve as a strategy for improving
conventional chemotherapy in a given malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3190113
PMID: 21546904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cancer Sci. 2011 Jul;102(7):1298-305. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2011.01958.x. Epub
2011 May 26.

Validation of the histone methyltransferase EZH2 as a therapeutic target for
various types of human cancer and as a prognostic marker.

Takawa M(1), Masuda K, Kunizaki M, Daigo Y, Takagi K, Iwai Y, Cho HS, Toyokawa G,
Yamane Y, Maejima K, Field HI, Kobayashi T, Akasu T, Sugiyama M, Tsuchiya E,
Atomi Y, Ponder BA, Nakamura Y, Hamamoto R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Technology, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

The emphasis in anticancer drug discovery has always been on finding a drug with 
great antitumor potential but few side-effects. This can be achieved if the drug 
is specific for a molecular site found only in tumor cells. Here, we find the
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) to be highly overexpressed in lung and other
cancers, and show that EZH2 is integral to proliferation in cancer cells.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis revealed higher expression of EZH2 in
clinical bladder cancer tissues than in corresponding non-neoplastic tissues (P <
0.0001), and we confirmed that a wide range of cancers also overexpress EZH2,
using cDNA microarray analysis. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive
staining for EZH2 in 14 of 29 cases of bladder cancer, 135 of 292 cases of
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and 214 of 245 cases of colorectal cancer,
whereas no significant staining was observed in various normal tissues. We found 
elevated expression of EZH2 to be associated with poor prognosis for patients
with NSCLC (P = 0.0239). In lung and bladder cancer cells overexpressing EZH2,
suppression of EZH2 using specific siRNAs inhibited incorporation of BrdU and
resulted in significant suppression of cell growth, even though no significant
effect was observed in the normal cell strain CCD-18Co, which has undetectable
EZH2. Because EZH2 expression was scarcely detectable in all normal tissues we
examined, EZH2 shows promise as a tumor-specific therapeutic target. Furthermore,
as elevated levels of EZH2 are associated with poor prognosis of patients with
NSCLC, its overexpression in resected specimens could prove a useful molecular
marker, indicating the necessity for a more extensive follow-up in some lung
cancer patients after surgical treatment.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21539681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Cell Biol. 2011 May 2;193(3):475-87. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201101021.

Interruption of intrachromosomal looping by CCCTC binding factor decoy proteins
abrogates genomic imprinting of human insulin-like growth factor II.

Zhang H(1), Niu B, Hu JF, Ge S, Wang H, Li T, Ling J, Steelman BN, Qian G,
Hoffman AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ninth People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Monoallelic expression of IGF2 is regulated by CCCTC binding factor (CTCF)
binding to the imprinting control region (ICR) on the maternal allele, with
subsequent formation of an intrachromosomal loop to the promoter region. The
N-terminal domain of CTCF interacts with SUZ12, part of the polycomb repressive
complex-2 (PRC2), to silence the maternal allele. We synthesized decoy CTCF
proteins, fusing the CTCF deoxyribonucleic acid-binding zinc finger domain to CpG
methyltransferase Sss1 or to enhanced green fluorescent protein. In normal human 
fibroblasts and breast cancer MCF7 cell lines, the CTCF decoy proteins bound to
the unmethylated ICR and to the IGF2 promoter region but did not interact with
SUZ12. EZH2, another part of PRC2, was unable to methylate histone H3-K27 in the 
IGF2 promoter region, resulting in reactivation of the imprinted allele. The
intrachromosomal loop between the maternal ICR and the IGF2 promoters was not
observed when IGF2 imprinting was lost. CTCF epigenetically governs allelic gene 
expression of IGF2 by orchestrating chromatin loop structures involving PRC2.

PMCID: PMC3087012
PMID: 21536749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Oncogene. 2011 Oct 20;30(42):4339-49. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.141. Epub 2011 May 2.

The tumor suppressor gene rap1GAP is silenced by miR-101-mediated EZH2
overexpression in invasive squamous cell carcinoma.

Banerjee R(1), Mani RS, Russo N, Scanlon CS, Tsodikov A, Jing X, Cao Q,
Palanisamy N, Metwally T, Inglehart RC, Tomlins S, Bradford C, Carey T, Wolf G,
Kalyana-Sundaram S, Chinnaiyan AM, Varambally S, D'Silva NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, Medical School, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1078, USA.

Rap1GAP is a critical tumor suppressor gene that is downregulated in multiple
aggressive cancers, such as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma and
pancreatic cancer. However, the mechanistic basis of rap1GAP downregulation in
cancers is poorly understood. By employing an integrative approach, we
demonstrate polycomb-mediated repression of rap1GAP that involves Enhancer of
Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2), a histone methyltransferase in head and neck cancers. We 
further demonstrate that the loss of miR-101 expression correlates with EZH2
upregulation, and the concomitant downregulation of rap1GAP in head and neck
cancers. EZH2 represses rap1GAP by facilitating the trimethylation of histone 3
at lysine 27, a mark of gene repression, and also hypermethylation of rap1GAP
promoter. These results provide a conceptual framework involving a
microRNA-oncogene-tumor suppressor axis to understand head and neck cancer
progression.

PMCID: PMC3154567
PMID: 21532618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Genome Res. 2011 Jul;21(7):1017-27. doi: 10.1101/gr.119487.110. Epub 2011 Apr 26.

DNA methylation profiling reveals novel biomarkers and important roles for DNA
methyltransferases in prostate cancer.

Kobayashi Y(1), Absher DM, Gulzar ZG, Young SR, McKenney JK, Peehl DM, Brooks JD,
Myers RM, Sherlock G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Candidate gene-based studies have identified a handful of aberrant CpG DNA
methylation events in prostate cancer. However, DNA methylation profiles have not
been compared on a large scale between prostate tumor and normal prostate, and
the mechanisms behind these alterations are unknown. In this study, we
quantitatively profiled 95 primary prostate tumors and 86 benign adjacent
prostate tissue samples for their DNA methylation levels at 26,333 CpGs
representing 14,104 gene promoters by using the Illumina HumanMethylation27
platform. A 2-class Significance Analysis of this data set revealed 5912 CpG
sites with increased DNA methylation and 2151 CpG sites with decreased DNA
methylation in tumors (FDR < 0.8%). Prediction Analysis of this data set
identified 87 CpGs that are the most predictive diagnostic methylation biomarkers
of prostate cancer. By integrating available clinical follow-up data, we also
identified 69 prognostic DNA methylation alterations that correlate with
biochemical recurrence of the tumor. To identify the mechanisms responsible for
these genome-wide DNA methylation alterations, we measured the gene expression
levels of several DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and their interacting proteins
by TaqMan qPCR and observed increased expression of DNMT3A2, DNMT3B, and EZH2 in 
tumors. Subsequent transient transfection assays in cultured primary prostate
cells revealed that DNMT3B1 and DNMT3B2 overexpression resulted in increased
methylation of a substantial subset of CpG sites that showed tumor-specific
increased methylation.

PMCID: PMC3129245
PMID: 21521786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Aug;70(8):1482-8. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.143040. Epub 2011 Apr
22.

Expression and function of EZH2 in synovial fibroblasts: epigenetic repression of
the Wnt inhibitor SFRP1 in rheumatoid arthritis.

Trenkmann M(1), Brock M, Gay RE, Kolling C, Speich R, Michel BA, Gay S, Huber LC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich and Zurich
Center of Integrative Human Physiology, Zurich, Switzerland.
michelle.trenkmann@usz.ch

OBJECTIVES: To study the expression, regulation and function of the histone
methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) in synovial fibroblasts
(SF) from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA).
METHODS: SF were obtained from RA and OA patients undergoing joint surgery.
Expression levels were assessed by quantitative real-time PCR and western blot.
Kinase inhibitors and reporter gene assays were employed to study signalling
pathways. Functional analyses included EZH2 overexpression by plasmid
transfection and gene silencing by small interfering RNA. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay was used to analyse histone methylation within distinct
promoter regions.
RESULTS: By studying the expression and function of EZH2 in SF the authors found 
that EZH2 is overexpressed in rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASF)
and further induced by tumour necrosis factor alpha through the nuclear factor
kappa B and Jun kinase pathways. As a target gene of EZH2 the authors identified 
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), an inhibitor of Wnt signalling,
which is associated with the activation of RASF, and show that SFRP1 expression
correlates with the occupation of its promoter with activating and silencing
histone marks.
CONCLUSIONS: These data strongly suggest that the chronic inflammatory
environment of the RA joint induces EZH2 and thus might cause changes in the
epigenetic programmes of SF.

PMID: 21515604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 May 13;408(3):393-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.025. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

PRAJA1 is a ubiquitin ligase for the polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins.

Zoabi M(1), Sadeh R, de Bie P, Marquez VE, Ciechanover A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular and Tumor Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and
Research Institute, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 8;410(3):705. Marquez, Victor E [added].

Methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 by the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) leads to transcriptional repression of genes which are critical to
development. PRC2 core complex is composed of the histone methyltransferase EZH2,
EED, and SUZ12. Knockdown of any of the PRC2 core subunits results in a
concomitant loss of the other subunits which is mediated by the ubiquitin
(Ub)-proteasome system (UPS). Inhibition of cellular methyltransferases by
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) also leads to dissociation of the PRC2 complex and
rapid degradation of its subunits. Interestingly, the expression of several Ub
ligases was induced following DZNep treatment, suggesting that PRC2 might repress
the Ub ligase(s) that target its subunits for degradation. Here we confirm that
individual PRC2 subunits are ubiquitinated and rapidly degraded by the
proteasome. One of the DZNep-induced Ub ligases, PRAJA1, can target PRC2 subunits
for proteasomal degradation. PRAJA1 directly ubiquitinates individual PRC2
subunits in a cell free system, which leads to their proteasomal degradation.
Expression of PRAJA1 but not of an inactive RING finger mutant of the protein,
enhanced the degradation of individual PRC2 subunits in cells. Taken together,
our results suggest a role for PRAJA1 in regulating the level of PRC2 by
targeting its free subunits for Ub-mediated proteasomal degradation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21513699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;71(11):4028-39. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3342. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

EZH2-mediated concordant repression of Wnt antagonists promotes
ß-catenin-dependent hepatocarcinogenesis.

Cheng AS(1), Lau SS, Chen Y, Kondo Y, Li MS, Feng H, Ching AK, Cheung KF, Wong
HK, Tong JH, Jin H, Choy KW, Yu J, To KF, Wong N, Huang TH, Sung JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
SAR, China. alfredcheng@cuhk.edu.hk

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the
Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that represses gene transcription through
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). Although EZH2 is abundantly
present in various cancers, the molecular consequences leading to oncogenesis
remain unclear. Here, we show that EZH2 concordantly silences the Wnt pathway
antagonists operating at several subcellular compartments, which in turn activate
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation promoter array and gene expression analyses in HCCs revealed 
EZH2 occupancy and reduced expression of Wnt antagonists, including the
growth-suppressive AXIN2, NKD1, PPP2R2B, PRICKLE1, and SFRP5. Knockdown of EZH2
reduced the promoter occupancy of PRC2, histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), and
H3K27me3, whereas the activating histone marks were increased, leading to the
transcriptional upregulation of the Wnt antagonists. Combinatorial EZH2 and HDAC 
inhibition dramatically reduced the levels of nuclear ß-catenin, T-cell
factor-dependent transcriptional activity, and downstream pro-proliferative
targets CCND1 and EGFR. Functional analysis revealed that downregulation of EZH2 
reduced HCC cell growth, partially through the inhibition of ß-catenin signaling.
Conversely, ectopic overexpression of EZH2 in immortalized hepatocytes activated 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to promote cellular proliferation. In human HCCs,
concomitant overexpression of EZH2 and ß-catenin was observed in one-third
(61/179) of cases and significantly correlated with tumor progression. Our data
indicate that EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing contributes to constitutive
activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and consequential proliferation of HCC
cells, thus representing a novel therapeutic target for this highly malignant
tumor.

PMID: 21512140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Cancer. 2011 Apr 18;10:40. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-40.

Pharmacologic disruption of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 inhibits tumorigenicity
and tumor progression in prostate cancer.

Crea F(1), Hurt EM, Mathews LA, Cabarcas SM, Sun L, Marquez VE, Danesi R, Farrar 
WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates gene silencing through 
histone H3K27 methylation. PRC2 components are over-expressed in metastatic
prostate cancer (PC), and are required for cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal.
3-Dezaneplanocin-A (DZNeP) is an inhibitor of PRC2 with broad anticancer
activity.
METHOD: we investigated the effects of DZNeP on cell proliferation,
tumorigenicity and invasive potential of PC cell lines (LNCaP and DU145).
RESULTS: Exploring GEO and Oncomine databases, we found that specific PRC2 genes 
(EED, EZH2, SUZ12) predict poor prognosis in PC. Non-toxic DZNeP concentrations
completely eradicated LNCaP and DU145 prostatosphere formation, and significantly
reduced the expression of CSC markers. At comparable doses, other epigenetic
drugs were not able to eradicate CSCs. DZNeP was also able to reduce PC cell
invasion. Cells pre-treated with DZNeP were significantly less tumorigenic
(LNCaP) and formed smaller tumors (DU145) in immunocompromised mice.
CONCLUSION: DZNeP is effective both in vitro and in vivo against PC cells. DZNeP 
antitumor activity is in part mediated by inhibition of CSC tumorigenic
potential.

PMCID: PMC3100246
PMID: 21501485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 29;30(39):4118-28. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.118. Epub 2011 Apr
18.

MEK-ERK pathway regulates EZH2 overexpression in association with aggressive
breast cancer subtypes.

Fujii S(1), Tokita K, Wada N, Ito K, Yamauchi C, Ito Y, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer
Center at Kashiwa, Chiba, Japan.

EZH2 overexpression occurs in various malignancies and is associated with a poor 
outcome. We have so far demonstrated that EZH2 downregulates the important genes 
such as E-cadherin and RUNX3 by increasing histone H3K27 trimethylation. However,
the mechanism of EZH2 overexpression in various cancer cells remains unclear. In 
this study we carried out a promoter analysis of the EZH2 gene and investigated
whether a survival signal that is upregulated in cancer cells is related to
overexpression at the transcription level. We also explored the clinical
relevance of the signaling pathway that leads to EZH2 overexpression in breast
cancer and demonstrated that MEK-ERK1/2-Elk-1 pathway leads to EZH2
overexpression. The triple-negative and ERBB2-overexpressing subtypes of breast
cancer are known to contain more rapidly proliferating breast cancer cells. The
signaling pathway connected to EZH2 overexpression was associated with both
aggressive subtypes of breast cancer. We show the significance that
overexpression of histone modifier protein EZH2 in cancer cells and our study
could pave the way for EZH2 inhibition to become an efficient treatment for more 
aggressive breast cancers.

PMID: 21499305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Genes Dev. 2011 Apr 15;25(8):789-94. doi: 10.1101/gad.2027911.

Polycomb EZH2 controls self-renewal and safeguards the transcriptional identity
of skeletal muscle stem cells.

Juan AH(1), Derfoul A, Feng X, Ryall JG, Dell'Orso S, Pasut A, Zare H, Simone JM,
Rudnicki MA, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis, Musculoskeletal, and Skin Diseases (NIAMS), National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2011 May 15;25(10):997-1003.

Satellite cells (SCs) sustain muscle growth and empower adult skeletal muscle
with vigorous regenerative abilities. Here, we report that EZH2, the enzymatic
subunit of the Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), is expressed in both
Pax7+/Myf5<U+207B> stem cells and Pax7+/Myf5+ committed myogenic precursors and is
required for homeostasis of the adult SC pool. Mice with conditional ablation of 
Ezh2 in SCs have fewer muscle postnatal Pax7+ cells and reduced muscle mass and
fail to appropriately regenerate. These defects are associated with impaired SC
proliferation and derepression of genes expressed in nonmuscle cell lineages.
Thus, EZH2 controls self-renewal and proliferation, and maintains an appropriate 
transcriptional program in SCs.

PMCID: PMC3078704
PMID: 21498568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Cell Cycle. 2011 May 1;10(9):1488-98. Epub 2011 May 1.

Epigenetic regulation of Nanog expression by Ezh2 in pluripotent stem cells.

Villasante A(1), Piazzolla D, Li H, Gomez-Lopez G, Djabali M, Serrano M.

Author information: 
(1)Tumour Suppression Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jul 15;10(14):2253-4.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jul 15;10(14):2252-3.

Nanog levels in pluripotent stem cells are heterogeneous and this is thought to
reflect two different and interchangeable cell states, respectively poised to
self-renew (Nanog-high subpopulation) or to differentiate (Nanog-low
subpopulation). However, little is known about the mechanisms responsible for
this pattern of Nanog expression. Here, we have examined the impact of the
histone methyltransferase Ezh2 on pluripotent stem cells and on Nanog expression.
Interestingly, induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells lacking Ezh2 presented higher
levels of Nanog due to a relative expansion of the Nanog-high subpopulation, and 
this was associated to severe defects in differentiation. Moreover, we found that
the Nanog promoter in embryonic stem (ES) cells and iPS cells coexists in two
alternative univalent chromatin configurations, either H3K4me3 or H3K27me3, the
latter being dependent on the presence of functional Ezh2. Finally, the levels of
expression of Ezh2, as well as the amount of H3K27me3 present at the Nanog
promoter, were higher in the Nanog-low subpopulation of ES/iPS cells. Together,
these data indicate that Ezh2 directly regulates the epigenetic status of the
Nanog promoter affecting the balance of Nanog expression in pluripotent stem
cells and, therefore, the equilibrium between self-renewal and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3615336
PMID: 21490431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jan;131(1):65-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1396-3.
Epub 2011 Apr 5.

FOXC1, a target of polycomb, inhibits metastasis of breast cancer cells.

Du J(1), Li L, Ou Z, Kong C, Zhang Y, Dong Z, Zhu S, Jiang H, Shao Z, Huang B, Lu
J.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, 5268
Renmin Street, Changchun 130024, China.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins have recently been shown related to cancer
development. The PcG protein EZH2 is involved in progression of prostate and
breast cancers, and has been identified as a molecular marker in breast cancer.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism by which PcG proteins regulate cancer
progression and malignant metastasis is still unclear. PcG proteins methylate
H3K27 in undifferentiated epithelial cells, resulting in the repression of
differentiation genes such as HOX. FOXC1 is a member of the Forkhead box
transcription factor family, which plays an important role in differentiation,
and is involved in eye development. We discovered in this study that the
expression of FOXC1 gene was negatively correlated to that of PcG genes, i.e.,
Bmi1, EZH2, and SUZ12, in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. To investigate the
regulatory effects of PcG proteins on FOXC1 gene, the two cell lines were
transfected with either expression plasmids or siRNA plasmids of Bmi1, EZH2, and 
SUZ12, and we found that PcGs, especially EZH2, could repress the transcription
of FOXC1 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that histone
methylation and acetylation modifications played critical roles in this
regulatory process. When FOXC1 was stably transfected into MDA-MB-231 cells, the 
migration and invasion of the cells were repressed. Moreover, the tumorigenicity 
and the spontaneous metastatic capability regulated by FOXC1 were determined by
using an orthotropic xenograft tumor model of athymic mice with the
FOXC1-MDA-MB-231HM and the GFP-MDA-MB-231HM cells, and the results showed that
FOXC1 in MDA-MB-231HM cells inhibited migration and invasion in vitro and reduced
the pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Data presented in this report contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms by which EZH2 participates in tumor development.

PMID: 21465172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Leukemia. 2011 Jul;25(7):1200-2. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.58. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Concomitant analysis of EZH2 and ASXL1 mutations in myelofibrosis, chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia and blast-phase myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Abdel-Wahab O, Pardanani A, Patel J, Wadleigh M, Lasho T, Heguy A, Beran M,
Gilliland DG, Levine RL, Tefferi A.

PMCID: PMC4641450
PMID: 21455215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Chin J Cancer. 2011 Apr;30(4):273-9.

Hepatitis B virus X protein regulates the mEZH2 promoter via the E2F1-binding
site in AML12 cells.

Shi XY(1), Zhang YY, Zhou XW, Lu JS, Guo ZK, Huang PT.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing 100071, P. R. China.

Histone lysine methyltransferase EZH2 has been reported to be frequently
overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and associated with
hepatocarcinogenesis. However, the exact mechanism of EZH2 up-regulation in HCC
has not been determined. In this study, we used murine hepatocyte AML12 cells to 
investigate the role of hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) in regulating the
expression of mEZH2. Western blot analysis demonstrated that the expression level
of mEZH2 protein in AML12 cells was up-regulated by HBx in a dose-dependent
manner. To further investigate the mechanism of mEZH2 overexpression, the 2500 bp
regulatory sequence upstream from the first exon of the mEZH2 gene was amplified 
from AML12 genomic DNA and constructed into a luciferase reporter plasmid. The
luciferase activity of the mEZH2 promoter significantly increased in AML12 cells 
co-transfected with HBx plasmid, and deleting the -486/-214 promoter region
decreased HBx-induced mEZH2 promoter activation by nearly 50%. The -486/-214
region was then analyzed in the TRANSFAC 6.0 database and a typical E2F1-binding 
site was found. Mutation of this E2F1-binding site or knockdown of E2F1
expression by RNAi led to a dramatic decrease in HBx-induced activation of the
mEZH2 promoter and mEZH2 overexpression in AML12 cells. These results provide
evidence that HBx up-regulates mEZH2 expression by transactivating the mEZH2
promoter through E2F1 transcription factor, thereby providing new epigenetic
evidence for the carcinogenic effect of HBx.

PMCID: PMC4013354
PMID: 21439249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 15;6(3):e17617. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017617.

Comparison of expression profiles in ovarian epithelium in vivo and ovarian
cancer identifies novel candidate genes involved in disease pathogenesis.

Emmanuel C(1), Gava N, Kennedy C, Balleine RL, Sharma R, Wain G, Brand A, Hogg R,
Etemadmoghadam D, George J; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group, Birrer MJ,
Clarke CL, Chenevix-Trench G, Bowtell DD, Harnett PR, deFazio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead, New South 
Wales, Australia. catherine_emmanuel@wmi.usyd.edu.au

Molecular events leading to epithelial ovarian cancer are poorly understood but
ovulatory hormones and a high number of life-time ovulations with concomitant
proliferation, apoptosis, and inflammation, increases risk. We identified genes
that are regulated during the estrous cycle in murine ovarian surface epithelium 
and analysed these profiles to identify genes dysregulated in human ovarian
cancer, using publically available datasets. We identified 338 genes that are
regulated in murine ovarian surface epithelium during the estrous cycle and
dysregulated in ovarian cancer. Six of seven candidates selected for
immunohistochemical validation were expressed in serous ovarian cancer, inclusion
cysts, ovarian surface epithelium and in fallopian tube epithelium. Most were
overexpressed in ovarian cancer compared with ovarian surface epithelium and/or
inclusion cysts (EpCAM, EZH2, BIRC5) although BIRC5 and EZH2 were expressed as
highly in fallopian tube epithelium as in ovarian cancer. We prioritised the 338 
genes for those likely to be important for ovarian cancer development by in
silico analyses of copy number aberration and mutation using publically available
datasets and identified genes with established roles in ovarian cancer as well as
novel genes for which we have evidence for involvement in ovarian cancer.
Chromosome segregation emerged as an important process in which genes from our
list of 338 were over-represented including two (BUB1, NCAPD2) for which there is
evidence of amplification and mutation. NUAK2, upregulated in ovarian surface
epithelium in proestrus and predicted to have a driver mutation in ovarian
cancer, was examined in a larger cohort of serous ovarian cancer where patients
with lower NUAK2 expression had shorter overall survival. In conclusion, defining
genes that are activated in normal epithelium in the course of ovulation that are
also dysregulated in cancer has identified a number of pathways and novel
candidate genes that may contribute to the development of ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3057977
PMID: 21423607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):948-56. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.54.

Specific recognition and inhibition of Ewing tumour growth by antigen-specific
allo-restricted cytotoxic T cells.

Thiel U(1), Pirson S, Müller-Spahn C, Conrad H, Busch DH, Bernhard H, Burdach S, 
Richter GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Children's
Cancer Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, 81664 München, Germany.

Erratum in
    Br J Cancer. 2011 Aug 9;105(4):596.

BACKGROUND: The development of a successful immunotherapy is hampered by an
ineffective T-cell repertoire against tumour antigens and the inability of the
patient's immune system to overcome tolerance-inducing mechanisms. Here, we test 
the specific recognition and lytical potential of allo-restricted CD8(+) T cells 
against Ewing tumour (ET) associated antigens Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila
Homolog 2 (EZH2), and Chondromodulin-I (CHM1) identified through previous
microarray analysis.
METHODS: Following repetitive CHM1(319) (VIMPCSWWV) and EZH2(666) (YMCSFLFNL)
peptide-driven stimulations with HLA-A 0201(+) dendritic cells (DC),
allo-restricted HLA-A 0201(-) CD8(+) T cells were stained with HLA-A 0201/peptide
multimers, sorted and expanded by limiting dilution.
RESULTS: Expanded T cells specifically recognised peptide-pulsed target cells or 
antigen-transfected cells in the context of HLA-A 0201 and killed HLA-A 0201(+)
ET lines expressing the antigen while HLA-A 0201(-) ET lines were not affected.
Furthermore, adoptively transferred T cells caused significant ET growth delay in
Rag2(-/-)<U+03B3>(C)(-/-) mice. Within this context, we identified the CHM1(319) peptide
as a new candidate target antigen for ET immunotherapy.
CONCLUSION: These results clearly identify the ET-derived antigens, EZH2(666) and
CHM1(319), as suitable targets for protective allo-restricted human CD8(+) T-cell
responses against non-immunogenic ET and may benefit new therapeutic strategies
in ET patients treated with allogeneic stem cell transplantation.

PMCID: PMC3065285
PMID: 21407224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 15;71(6):2360-70. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1933.

Histone methyltransferase EZH2 induces Akt-dependent genomic instability and
BRCA1 inhibition in breast cancer.

Gonzalez ME(1), DuPrie ML, Krueger H, Merajver SD, Ventura AC, Toy KA, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Increased levels of EZH2, a critical regulator of cellular memory, signal the
presence of metastasis and poor outcome in breast cancer patients. High levels of
EZH2 are associated with nuclear pleomorphism, lack of estrogen receptor
expression, and decreased nuclear levels of BRCA1 tumor suppressor protein in
invasive breast carcinomas. The mechanism by which EZH2 overexpression promotes
the growth of poorly differentiated invasive carcinomas remains to be defined.
Here, we show that EZH2 controls the intracellular localization of BRCA1 protein.
Conditional doxycycline-induced upregulation of EZH2 in benign mammary epithelial
cells results in nuclear export of BRCA1 protein, aberrant mitoses with extra
centrosomes, and genomic instability. EZH2 inhibition in CAL51 breast cancer
cells induces BRCA1 nuclear localization and rescues defects in ploidy and
mitosis. Mechanistically, EZH2 overexpression is sufficient for activation of the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) pathway specifically through activation 
of Akt isoform 1. EZH2-induced BRCA1 nuclear export, aneuploidy, and mitotic
defects were prevented by treatment with the PI3K inhibitors LY294002 or
wortmannin. Targeted inhibition of Akt-1, Akt-2, and Akt-3 isoforms revealed that
the EZH2-induced phenotype requires specific activation of Akt-1. The relevance
of our studies to human breast cancer is highlighted by the finding that high
EZH2 protein levels are associated with upregulated expression of phospho-Akt-1
(Ser473) and decreased nuclear expression of phospho-BRCA1 (Ser1423) in 39% of
invasive breast carcinomas. These results enable us to pinpoint one mechanism by 
which EZH2 regulates BRCA1 expression and genomic stability mediated by the
PI3K/Akt-1 pathway.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3071296
PMID: 21406404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 9;30(23):2670-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.635. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

p53-paralog DNp73 oncogene is repressed by IFNa/STAT2 through the recruitment of 
the Ezh2 polycomb group transcriptional repressor.

Testoni B(1), Schinzari V, Guerrieri F, Gerbal-Chaloin S, Blandino G, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione A. Cesalpino, Rome, Italy.
barbara.testoni@uniroma1.it

The DNp73 proteins act as trans-repressors of p53 and p73-dependent transcription
and exert both anti-apoptotic activity and pro-proliferative activity. DNp73s are
frequently up-regulated in a variety of human cancers, including human
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Increased levels of DNp73 proteins confer to
HCC cells resistance to apoptosis and, irrespective to p53 status, a
chemoresistant phenotype. Here, we show that interferon (IFN)a down-regulates
DNp73 expression in primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and HCC cell lines. IFNa has
been used as pro-apoptotic agent in the treatment of malignancies and there is
increasing evidence of IFNa effectiveness in HCC treatment and prevention of
recurrence. The precise mechanisms by which class I IFNs exert their
anti-proliferative and anti-tumor activity remain unclear. IFNa binding to its
receptor activates multiple intracellular signaling cascades regulating the
transcription of numerous direct target genes through the recruitment of a
complex comprising of STAT1, STAT2 and IFN regulatory factor (IRF)9 to their
promoters. We found that, in response to IFNa, the P2p73 promoter undergoes
substantial chromatin remodeling. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) replace histone
acetyl transferases. STAT2 is recruited onto the endogenous P2p73 promoter
together with the polycomb group protein Ezh2, leading to increased H3K27
methylation and transcriptional repression. The reduction of DNp73 levels by IFNa
is paralleled by an increased susceptibility to IFNa-triggered apoptosis of Huh7 
hepatoma cells. Our results show, for the first time, that IFN-stimulated gene
factor 3 recruitment may serve both in activating and repressing gene expression 
and identify the down-regulation of DNp73 as an additional mechanism to
counteract the chemoresistance of liver cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3114186
PMID: 21399658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mod Pathol. 2011 Jun;24(6):786-93. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.8. Epub 2011 Mar
11.

EZH2 and ALDH-1 mark breast epithelium at risk for breast cancer development.

Kunju LP(1), Cookingham C, Toy KA, Chen W, Sabel MS, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA.

It is well established that benign proliferative lesions and atypical hyperplasia
increase the risk of breast cancer, which can develop in either breast. At
present, there is no radiological, pathological, or molecular marker capable of
distinguishing which proliferative or atypical lesions will progress to
carcinoma. EZH2, a protein involved in stem cell renewal and carcinogenesis is
upregulated in the morphologically normal breast epithelium from BRCA1 mutation
carriers. Here, we tested the hypothesis that EZH2 expression alone or in
combination with the breast stem cell marker aldehyde dehydrogenase-1 (ALDH-1)
may identify benign breast biopsies that progress to breast cancer in the future.
Benign breast biopsy samples obtained from 59 women who subsequently developed
(study group, n=29) or who did not develop (control group, n=30) breast cancer in
the same time period were subjected to immunohistochemical analyses of EZH2 and
ALDH-1 proteins. When present, EZH2 was expressed in the nuclei of benign
epithelial cells, whereas ALDH-1 was expressed in the cytoplasm of epithelial
cells and/or in the stroma. EZH2, epithelial ALDH-1, and expanded stromal
ALDH-1-positive cells were present in 95, 43, and 69%, respectively, of study
group biopsies, compared with 16, 13, and 37%, respectively, of control biopsies 
(P <0.05 for all). The mean percentage of EZH2-positive cells was higher in the
study group than in the control group (34 and 6%, respectively). EZH2 expression 
was associated with breast cancer development (P=8.2 × 10(-6)) and with younger
age at cancer diagnosis (P=0.0086). Both stromal and epithelial ALDH-1 were
associated with development of breast cancer (P=0.001 and P=0.049, respectively).
Our study provides first evidence that EZH2 and epithelial and stromal ALDH-1
detection in benign breast biopsies may predict increased risk for breast cancer,
with implications for breast cancer prevention.

PMCID: PMC3106137
PMID: 21399615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Urol Oncol. 2012 Jul-Aug;30(4):428-33. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2010.09.005. Epub
2011 Mar 10.

Increased EZH2 protein expression is associated with invasive urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder.

Wang H(1), Albadine R, Magheli A, Guzzo TJ, Ball MW, Hinz S, Schoenberg MP, Netto
GJ, Gonzalgo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Baltimore,
MD 21287, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Elevated polycomb group protein Enhancer of Zest Homolog 2 (EZH2)
expression has been associated with progression to more advanced disease in a
variety of malignancies. We examined EZH2 protein expression levels in bladder
tissue specimens from patients with urothelial carcinoma (UC) and investigated
the relationship between EZH2 protein expression and clinical outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed using bladder
tissue specimens from radical cystectomies performed for UC at our institution
between 1994 and 2002. EZH2 expression was measured by immunohistochemistry and
scoring was based on percentage and intensity of positive nuclear staining. A
receiver operating curve (ROC) was generated to differentiate cancerous from
benign lesions using EZH2 protein scores. Recurrence-free survival was estimated 
using the Kaplan-Meier approach with log-rank test. A multivariate Cox
proportional hazards model was used to assess independent contributions.
RESULTS: A total of 454 TMA specimen spots from 81 patients were evaluated. EZH2 
protein levels in invasive high grade UC were significantly elevated compared
with adjacent benign urothelium, noninvasive low grade UC, and CIS. EZH2 protein 
levels were also significantly increased in CIS and noninvasive low grade UC
compared with adjacent benign urothelium. We found no association between EZH2
protein expression and clinical outcomes following radical cystectomy in our
cohort of patients.
CONCLUSION: EZH2 overexpression is a common event in UC of the bladder. Elevated 
EZH2 protein levels are associated with more aggressive bladder cancer, including
invasive UC. EZH2 may therefore serve as a useful biomarker for UC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Apr;9(4):418-29. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0511. Epub
2011 Mar 7.

EZH2-dependent suppression of a cellular senescence phenotype in melanoma cells
by inhibition of p21/CDKN1A expression.

Fan T(1), Jiang S, Chung N, Alikhan A, Ni C, Lee CC, Hornyak TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins such as Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) are
epigenetic transcriptional repressors that function through recognition and
modification of histone methylation and chromatin structure. Targets of PcG
include cell cycle regulatory proteins which govern cell cycle progression and
cellular senescence. Senescence is a characteristic of melanocytic nevi, benign
melanocytic proliferations that can be precursors of malignant melanoma. In this 
study, we report that EZH2, which we find absent in melanocytic nevi but
expressed in many or most metastatic melanoma cells, functionally suppresses the 
senescent state in human melanoma cells. EZH2 depletion in melanoma cells
inhibits cell proliferation, restores features of a cellular senescence
phenotype, and inhibits growth of melanoma xenografts in vivo. p21/CDKN1A is
activated upon EZH2 knockdown in a p53-independent manner and contributes
substantially to cell cycle arrest and induction of a senescence phenotype. EZH2 
depletion removes histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) from the CDKN1A transcriptional
start site and downstream region, enhancing histone 3 acetylation globally and at
CDKN1A. This results in recruitment of RNA polymerase II, leading to p21/CDKN1A
activation. Depletion of EZH2 synergistically activates p21/CDKN1A expression in 
combination with the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A. Since melanomas often retain 
wild-type p53 function activating p21, our findings describe a novel mechanism
whereby EZH2 activation during tumor progression represses p21, leading to
suppression of cellular senescence and enhanced tumorigenicity.

PMCID: PMC3078218
PMID: 21383005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Cell Death Dis. 2010 Oct 21;1:e85. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.64.

Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in recurrent nasopharyngeal
carcinoma and is regulated by miR-26a, miR-101, and miR-98.

Alajez NM(1), Shi W, Hui AB, Bruce J, Lenarduzzi M, Ito E, Yue S, O'Sullivan B,
Liu FF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Molecular Oncology, Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto,
Canada.

There is increasing evidence supporting the role of members of the polycomb group
(PcG) gene family in tumor development and progression. However, their precise
role in tumorigenesis and mechanisms of their regulation remain to be elucidated.
Using nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) as a disease model, a comprehensive analysis
was undertaken on the clinical significance of EZH2 expression, identification of
the cellular processes regulated by EZH2, and the mechanisms of its deregulated
expression. Herein, we report EZH2 as being associated with a higher risk of
relapse in NPC patients (P = 0.002). Genome-wide microarray and bioinformatics
identified several vital cellular processes (such as differentiation,
development, and apoptosis) to be regulated by EZH2, corroborated by in vitro
lethality, and delayed tumor formation in vivo upon EZH2 depletion. The
combination of global microRNA (miR) profiling in primary NPC specimens, and in
silico analyses provided several candidate miRs that could regulate EZH2. Using a
luciferase-based assay, miR-26a, miR-101, and miR-98 were validated as bona fide 
regulators of EZH2 expression. In particular, miR-98 was underexpressed in
relapsed patient samples, strongly suggesting an important role for the miR-98
and EZH2 axis in NPC biology.

PMCID: PMC3035896
PMID: 21368858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 May 1;17(9):2613-8. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2156.
Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Aberrations of EZH2 in cancer.

Chase A(1), Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, and Human Genetics Division,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Control of gene expression is exerted at a number of different levels, one of
which is the accessibility of genes and their controlling elements to the
transcriptional machinery. Accessibility is dictated broadly by the degree of
chromatin compaction, which is influenced in part by polycomb group proteins.
EZH2, together with SUZ12 and EED, forms the polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), which catalyzes trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). PRC2
may recruit other polycomb complexes, DNA methyltransferases, and histone
deacetylases, resulting in additional transcriptional repressive marks and
chromatin compaction at key developmental loci. Overexpression of EZH2 is a
marker of advanced and metastatic disease in many solid tumors, including
prostate and breast cancer. Mutation of EZH2 Y641 is described in lymphoma and
results in enhanced activity, whereas inactivating mutations are seen in poor
prognosis myeloid neoplasms. No histone demethylating agents are currently
available for treatment of patients, but 3-deazaneplanocin (DZNep) reduces EZH2
levels and H3K27 trimethylation, resulting in reduced cell proliferation in
breast and prostate cancer cells in vitro. Furthermore, synergistic effects are
seen for combined treatment with DNA demethylating agents and histone
deacetylation inhibitors, opening up the possibility of refined epigenetic
treatments in the future.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21367748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Physiol Genomics. 2011 May 13;43(9):488-98. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00248.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Effects of in vivo transfection with anti-miR-214 on gene expression in murine
molar tooth germ.

Sehic A(1), Risnes S, Khuu C, Khan QE, Osmundsen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
amer.sehic@odont.uio.no

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an abundant class of noncoding RNAs that are believed to
be important in many biological processes through regulation of gene expression. 
Little is known of their function in tooth morphogenesis and differentiation.
MicroRNA-214 (miR-214), encoded by the polycistronic Dnm30os gene, is highly
expressed during development of molar tooth germ and was selected as a target for
silencing with anti-miR-214. Mandibular injection of 1-100 pmol of anti-miR-214
close to the developing first molar in newborn mice resulted in significant
decrease in expression of miR-214, miR-466h, and miR-574-5p in the tooth germ.
Furthermore, levels of miR-199a-3p, miR-199a-5p, miR-690, miR-720, and miR-1224
were significantly increased. Additionally, the expression of 863 genes was
significantly increased and the expression of 305 genes was significantly
decreased. Among the genes with increased expression was Twist-1 and Ezh2,
suggested to regulate expression of miR-214. Microarray results were validated
using real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting. Among genes with decreased
expression were Amelx, Calb1, Enam, and Prnp; these changes also being reflected 
in levels of corresponding encoded proteins in the tooth germ. In the
anti-miR-214-treated molars the enamel exhibited evidence of hypomineralization
with remnants of organic material and reduced surface roughness after acid
etching, possibly due to the transiently decreased expression of Amelx and Enam. 
In contrast, several genes encoding contractile proteins exhibited significantly 
increased expression. mRNAs involved in amelogenesis (Ambn, Amelx, Enam) were not
found among targets of miRNAs that were differentially expressed following
treatment with anti-miR-214. It is therefore suggested that effects of miR-214 on
amelogenesis are indirect, perhaps mediated by the observed miR-214-dependent
changes in levels of expression of numerous transcription factors.

PMID: 21363966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Mar 4;8(3):262-5. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.02.012.

Phosphoryl-EZH-ion.

Caretti G(1), Palacios D, Sartorelli V, Puri PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Milan,
20133 Milan, Italy.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins regulate gene expression in embryonic and adult
stem cells, but the mechanisms responsible for PcG gene targeting and regulation 
remain largely unknown. Recent evidence shows that EZH2, the enzymatic subunit of
Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), is a nuclear phosphoprotein linking
cell-cycle-intrinsic or extracellular signals to specific epigenetic signatures.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3166223
PMID: 21362566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Curr Hematol Malig Rep. 2011 Jun;6(2):126-35. doi: 10.1007/s11899-011-0081-2.

Updates in cytogenetics and molecular markers in MDS.

Tiu RV(1), Visconte V, Traina F, Schwandt A, Maciejewski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 9500 Euclid Avenue, R40, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
tiur@ccf.org

Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal hematologic neoplasms that can result 
in cytopenias and increase the risk of leukemic transformation. The disease is
characterized by several recurrent cytogenetic defects, which can affect
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. Metaphase cytogenetics (MC) is the gold
standard in karyotypic analysis in hematology. Progress in molecular analysis,
including additional karyotypic tools exemplified by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, comparative genomic hybridization, and more importantly, single
nucleotide polymorphism array (SNP-A) analysis, has led to increased detection of
chromosomal abnormalities in myeloid malignancies and improved prognostic risk
stratification. SNP-A, together with MC, has also been instrumental in the
discovery of genes that have improved our understanding of the biology of MDS.
Newly elucidated molecular abnormalities in MDS include mutations in CBL, TET2,
ASXL1, IDH1/IDH2, EZH2, DNMT3A, and UTX. This review provides an update on the
changing landscape of molecular and cytogenetic characterization in MDS and its
significance in disease biology and clinical practice.

PMID: 21340513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Leukemia. 2011 May;25(5):877-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.10. Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Molecular profiling of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia reveals diverse mutations 
in >80% of patients with TET2 and EZH2 being of high prognostic relevance.

Grossmann V, Kohlmann A, Eder C, Haferlach C, Kern W, Cross NC, Haferlach T,
Schnittger S.

PMID: 21339759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Neuro Oncol. 2011 Mar;13(3):280-9. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq190.

DNA hypermethylation profiles associated with glioma subtypes and EZH2 and IGFBP2
mRNA expression.

Zheng S(1), Houseman EA, Morrison Z, Wrensch MR, Patoka JS, Ramos C, Haas-Kogan
DA, McBride S, Marsit CJ, Christensen BC, Nelson HH, Stokoe D, Wiemels JL, Chang 
SM, Prados MD, Tihan T, Vandenberg SR, Kelsey KT, Berger MS, Wiencke JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California-San Francisco,
Helen Diller Family Cancer Center, 1450 3rd Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

We explored the associations of aberrant DNA methylation patterns in 12 candidate
genes with adult glioma subtype, patient survival, and gene expression of
enhancer of zeste human homolog 2 (EZH2) and insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein 2 (IGFBP2). We analyzed 154 primary glioma tumors (37 astrocytoma II and 
III, 52 primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), 11 secondary GBM, 54
oligodendroglioma/oligoastrocytoma II and III) and 13 nonmalignant brain tissues 
for aberrant methylation with quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMS-PCR) and
for EZH2 and IGFBP2 expression with quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(qRT-PCR). Global methylation was assessed by measuring long interspersed nuclear
element-1 (LINE1) methylation. Unsupervised clustering analyses yielded 3
methylation patterns (classes). Class 1 (MGMT, PTEN, RASSF1A, TMS1, ZNF342, EMP3,
SOCS1, RFX1) was highly methylated in 82% (75/91) of lower-grade astrocytic and
oligodendroglial tumors, 73% (8/11) of secondary GBMs, and 12% (6/52) of primary 
GBMs. The primary GBMs in this class were early onset (median age 37 years).
Class 2 (HOXA9 and SLIT2) was highly methylated in 37% (19/52) of primary GBMs.
None of the 10 genes for class 3 that were differentially methylated in classes 1
and 2 were hypermethylated in 92% (12/13) of nonmalignant brain tissues and 52%
(27/52) of primary GBMs. Class 1 tumors had elevated EZH2 expression but not
elevated IGFBP2; class 2 tumors had both high IGFBP2 and high EZH2 expressions.
The gene-specific hypermethylation class correlated with higher levels of global 
LINE1 methylation and longer patient survival times. These findings indicate a
generalized hypermethylation phenotype in glioma linked to improved survival and 
low IGFBP2. DNA methylation markers are useful in characterizing distinct glioma 
subtypes and may hold promise for clinical applications.

PMCID: PMC3064601
PMID: 21339190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Gut. 2011 Jul;60(7):967-76. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.231993. Epub 2011 Feb 17.

EZH2 protein: a promising immunomarker for the detection of hepatocellular
carcinomas in liver needle biopsies.

Cai MY(1), Tong ZT, Zheng F, Liao YJ, Wang Y, Rao HL, Chen YC, Wu QL, Liu YH,
Guan XY, Lin MC, Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)State key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Comment in
    Gut. 2011 Jul;60(7):881-2.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: A previous study of ours indicated that enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 (EZH2) plays an important role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
tumorigenesis. The aim of the present study was to investigate the potential
diagnostic utility of EZH2 in HCC.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed to examine the expression dynamics of
EZH2 in two independent surgical cohorts of HCC and non-malignant liver tissues
to develop a diagnostic yield of EZH2, HSP70 and GPC3 for HCC detection. The
diagnostic performances of EZH2 and a three-marker panel in HCC were re-evaluated
by using an additional biopsy cohort.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry analysis demonstrated that the sensitivity and
specificity of EZH2 for HCC detection was 95.8% and 97.8% in the testing cohort. 
Similar results were confirmed in the validation cohort. For diagnosis of
well-differentiated HCCs, the sensitivity and specificity were 68.9% and 91.5%
for EZH2, 62.5% and 98.5% for HSP70, 50.0% and 92.1% for GPC3, and 75.0% and 100%
for a three-marker panel. In biopsies, positive cases for at least one marker
increased from large regenerative nodule and hepatocellular adenoma (0/12) to
focal nodular hyperplasia (2/20), dysplastic nodule (7/25), well-differentiated
HCC (16/18) and moderately and poorly differentiated HCC (54/54). When at least
two positive markers were considered, regardless of their identity, the positive 
cases were detected in 0/12 large regenerative nodules and hepatocellular
adenomas, 0/20 focal nodular hyperplasias, 0/25 dysplastic nodules, 11/18
well-differentiated HCCs, 32/37 moderately differentiated HCCs and 15/17 poorly
differentiated HCCs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that EZH2 protein, as examined by
immunohistochemistry, may serve as a promising diagnostic biomarker of HCCs, and 
the use of a three-marker panel (EZH2, HSP70 and GPC3) can improve the rate of
detection of HCCs in liver biopsy tissues.

PMID: 21330577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Acta Cytol. 2011;55(2):180-6. doi: 10.1159/000320790. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 expression in breast carcinoma smears in
relationship with p53, Ki-67 and other prognostic parameters.

Athanassiadou AM(1), Tsipis A, Patsouris E, Gonidi M, Nicolopoulou-Stamati P,
Chelidonis G, Athanassiadou P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytology, First Department of Pathology, University of Athens
Medical School, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH 2) has 
been reported as a marker of aggressive breast cancer. The aim of this study was 
to investigate the correlation between the expression of EZH 2 with p53 and Ki-67
expression and other clinicopathological parameters in primary breast carcinomas 
in order to determine the role of the above marker as a prognosticator of tumor
aggressiveness and patient outcome.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: One hundred primary operable breast cancer patients were
investigated in order to identify the expression of EZH 2, Ki-67 and p53 in
imprint smears immunocytochemically. The prevalence of expression of these
markers was then correlated with clinicopathological parameters. Follow-up was
available for all patients.
RESULTS: EZH 2 was expressed in 64% of the cases and correlated with higher
levels of p53 (relative risk = 3.00, p < 0.0001) and Ki-67 (relative risk = 3.25,
p < 0.0001). Malignant cells showed immunoreactivity for all markers in the
nucleus. Univariate analysis revealed a strong association between EZH 2 protein 
expression and tumor grade and size, lymph node metastasis, and HER-2 and
estrogen and progesterone receptor status. Multivariable statistical analysis
revealed that lymph node metastasis was the main predictor for EZH 2 expression. 
Decreased patient survival was also significantly associated with EZH 2
expression (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH 2 expression may be a marker of poor prognosis in breast
carcinoma patients and has been suggested as a candidate for targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21325804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Oncotarget. 2010 Dec;1(8):710-20.

miR-101 is down-regulated in glioblastoma resulting in EZH2-induced
proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis.

Smits M(1), Nilsson J, Mir SE, van der Stoop PM, Hulleman E, Niers JM, de Witt
Hamer PC, Marquez VE, Cloos J, Krichevsky AM, Noske DP, Tannous BA, Würdinger T.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-oncology Research Group, Departments of Neurosurgery and Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Glioblastoma (GBM) is a malignant brain tumor with dismal prognosis. 
GBM patients have a median survival of less than 2 years. GBM is characterized by
fast cell proliferation, infiltrative migration, and by the induction of
angiogenesis. MicroRNAs and polycomb group (PcG) proteins have emerged as
important regulators of gene expression.
METHODS: Here we determined that miR-101 is down-regulated in GBM, resulting in
overexpression of the miR-101 target PcG protein EZH2, a histone
methyltransferase affecting gene expression profiles in an epigenetic manner.
RESULTS: Inhibition of EZH2 in vitro by pre-miR-101, EZH2 siRNA, or small
molecule DZNep, attenuated GBM cell growth, migration/invasion, and GBM-induced
endothelial tubule formation. In addition, for each biological process we
identified ontology-associated transcripts that significantly correlate with EZH2
expression. Inhibition of EZH2 in vivo by systemic DZNep administration in a
U87-Fluc-mCherry GBM xenograft mouse imaging model resulted in reduced tumor
growth.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that EZH2 has a versatile function in GBM
progression and that its overexpression is at least partly due to decreased
miR-101 expression. Inhibition of EZH2 may be a potential therapeutic strategy to
target GBM proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3124376
PMID: 21321380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Genes Dev. 2011 Mar 1;25(5):485-98. doi: 10.1101/gad.2019811. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

EZH1 and EZH2 cogovern histone H3K27 trimethylation and are essential for hair
follicle homeostasis and wound repair.

Ezhkova E(1), Lien WH, Stokes N, Pasolli HA, Silva JM, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA;

Polycomb protein group (PcG)-dependent trimethylation on H3K27 (H3K27me3)
regulates identity of embryonic stem cells (ESCs). How H3K27me3 governs adult SCs
and tissue development is unclear. Here, we conditionally target H3K27
methyltransferases Ezh2 and Ezh1 to address their roles in mouse skin
homeostasis. Postnatal phenotypes appear only in doubly targeted skin, where
H3K27me3 is abolished, revealing functional redundancy in EZH1/2 proteins.
Surprisingly, while Ezh1/2-null hair follicles (HFs) arrest morphogenesis and
degenerate due to defective proliferation and increased apoptosis, epidermis
hyperproliferates and survives engraftment. mRNA microarray studies reveal that, 
despite these striking phenotypic differences, similar genes are up-regulated in 
HF and epidermal Ezh1/2-null progenitors. Featured prominently are (1)
PcG-controlled nonskin lineage genes, whose expression is still significantly
lower than in native tissues, and (2) the PcG-regulated Ink4a/Inkb/Arf locus.
Interestingly, when EZH1/2 are absent, even though Ink4a/Arf/Ink4b genes are
fully activated in HF cells, they are only partially so in epidermal progenitors.
Importantly, transduction of Ink4b/Ink4a/Arf shRNAs restores
proliferation/survival of Ezh1/2-null HF progenitors in vitro, pointing toward
the relevance of this locus to the observed HF phenotypes. Our findings reveal
new insights into Polycomb-dependent tissue control, and provide a new twist to
how different progenitors within one tissue respond to loss of H3K27me3.

PMCID: PMC3049289
PMID: 21317239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Jun;131(6):1216-25. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.11. Epub 2011
Feb 10.

Radioprotective effects of Bmi-1 involve epigenetic silencing of oxidase genes
and enhanced DNA repair in normal human keratinocytes.

Dong Q(1), Oh JE, Chen W, Kim R, Kim RH, Shin KH, McBride WH, Park NH, Kang MK.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA School of Dentistry, Center for the Health Sciences, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Normal human keratinocytes (NHKs) undergo premature senescence following exposure
to ionizing radiation (IR). This study investigates the effect of Bmi-1, a
polycomb group protein, on radiation-induced senescence response. When exposed to
IR, NHK transduced with Bmi-1 (NHK/Bmi-1) showed reduced senescent phenotype and 
enhanced proliferation compared with control cells (NHK/B0). To investigate the
underlying mechanism, we determined the production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), expression of ROS-generating enzymes, and DNA repair activities in cells. 
ROS level was increased upon irradiation but notably reduced by Bmi-1
transduction. Irradiation led to strong induction of oxidase genes, e.g., Lpo
(lactoperoxidase), p22-phox, p47-phox, and Gp91, in NHK/B0 but their expression
was almost completely silenced in NHK/Bmi-1. Induction of oxidase genes upon
irradiation was linked with loss of trimethylated histone 3 at lysine 27
(H3K27Me3), but NHK/Bmi-1 expressed a higher level of H3K27Me3 compared with
NHK/B0. Bmi-1 transduction suppressed IR-associated induction of jumanji domain
containing 3 while enhancing the expression of EZH2, thereby preventing the loss 
of H3K27Me3 in the irradiated cells. Furthermore, NHK/Bmi-1 demonstrated
increased repair of IR-induced DNA damage compared with NHK/B0. These results
indicate that Bmi-1 elicits radioprotective effects on NHK by mitigating the
genotoxicity of IR through epigenetic mechanisms.

PMID: 21307872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Curr Opin Hematol. 2011 Mar;18(2):117-23. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0b013e328343998e.

Genetics of the myeloproliferative neoplasms.

Abdel-Wahab O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program and Leukemia Service, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA. abdelwao@mskcc.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Since the discovery of the JAK2V617F mutation in 2005, an
increasing number of somatic and germline genetic events responsible for
myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) pathogenesis have been uncovered. The purpose
of this review is to outline the most recent discoveries of the genetic
alterations found in patients with MPNs.
RECENT FINDINGS: In addition to the JAK2V617F mutation, additional mutations in
the JAKSTAT pathway have been discovered including a series of mutations in exon
12 of JAK2, the thrombopoietic receptor gene MPL, and in the gene encoding the
JAKSTAT inhibitory adaptor protein LNK. Additionally, mutations in genes which
appear to affect the epigenome of MPN patients have been discovered including
mutations in TET2, IDH1/ 2, EZH2, and ASXL1. Lastly, some insights into the
genetic events which contribute to transformation of a chronic MPN phenotype to
acute myeloid leukemia have been elucidated, including deletion of the
transcription factor Ikaros.
SUMMARY: The spectrum of genetic abnormalities found in the classic MPNs has
increased over the last 6 years and somatic mutations in JAK2, MPL, LNK, TET2,
EZH2, ASXL1, and IDH1/2 have all been described. Despite this, the initiating
genetic events responsible for the development of MPNs is still not totally
understood.

PMID: 21307773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012 Feb 1;82(2):597-604. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2010.11.062. Epub 2011 Feb 6.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 overexpression in nasopharyngeal carcinoma: an
independent poor prognosticator that enhances cell growth.

Hwang CF(1), Huang HY, Chen CH, Chien CY, Hsu YC, Li CF, Fang FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: As a key component of polycomb-repressive complex 2, enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) represses target genes through histone methylation and is
frequently overexpressed and associated with poor prognosis in common carcinomas.
For the first time, we reported EZH2 expression and its biological and clinical
significance in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC).
METHODS AND MATERIALS: In NPC cell lines and specimens, endogenous expression of 
EZH2 mRNA and protein was determined by semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblotting, respectively. To
analyze the effect on cell growth, stable silencing of EZH2 was established in
EZH2-expressing TW02 NPC cells with RNA interference. EZH2 immunolabeling was
assessable for 89 primary NPC biopsy samples and correlated with
clinicopathological variables, disease-specific survival (DSS), and overall
survival (OS).
RESULTS: Growth activity of TW02 cells was significantly suppressed (p < 0.001)
with stable EZH2 silencing. Compared with normal nasopharyngeal tissue,
expression levels of EZH2 transcript and protein were apparently upregulated in
NPC specimens. As a continuous variable, higher EZH2 expression preferentially
occurred in NPCs of T3 to T4 stages (p = 0.03) and significantly predicted
inferior DSS (p = 0.0010) and OS (p = 0.004). The prognostic implications for DSS
(p = 0.010) and OS (p = 0.006) still remained valid when using the median (= 60%)
of EZH2 immunolabeling index to dichotomize the cohort. In the multivariate
model, higher EZH2 expression was an independent adverse factor of both DSS (p = 
0.012) and OS (p = 0.011), along with American Joint Committee on Cancer Stages
III to IV (p = 0.024 for DSS, p = 0.017 for OS).
CONCLUSION: At least partly through promoting cell growth, EZH2 implicates
disease progression, confers tumor aggressiveness, and represents an independent 
adverse prognosticator in patients with NPC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21300475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 28;6(1):e16282. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016282.

Down-regulation of miR-101 in endothelial cells promotes blood vessel formation
through reduced repression of EZH2.

Smits M(1), Mir SE, Nilsson RJ, van der Stoop PM, Niers JM, Marquez VE, Cloos J, 
Breakefield XO, Krichevsky AM, Noske DP, Tannous BA, Würdinger T.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-oncology Research Group, Department of Neurosurgery, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Angiogenesis is a balanced process controlled by pro- and anti-angiogenic
molecules of which the regulation is not fully understood. Besides classical gene
regulation, miRNAs have emerged as post-transcriptional regulators of
angiogenesis. Furthermore, epigenetic changes caused by histone-modifying enzymes
were shown to modulate angiogenesis as well. However, a possible interplay
between miRNAs and histone-modulating enzymes during angiogenesis has not been
described. Here we show that VEGF-mediated down-regulation of miR-101 caused
pro-angiogenic effects. We found that the pro-angiogenic effects are partly
mediated through reduced repression by miR-101 of the histone-methyltransferase
EZH2, a member of the Polycomb group family, thereby increasing methylation of
histone H3 at lysine 27 and transcriptome alterations. In vitro, the sprouting
and migratory properties of primary endothelial cell cultures were reduced by
inhibiting EZH2 through up-regulation of miR-101, siRNA-mediated knockdown of
EZH2, or treatment with 3-Deazaneplanocin-A (DZNep), a small molecule inhibitor
of EZH2 methyltransferase activity. In addition, we found that systemic DZNep
administration reduced the number of blood vessels in a subcutaneous glioblastoma
mouse model, without showing adverse toxicities. Altogether, by identifying a
pro-angiogenic VEGF/miR-101/EZH2 axis in endothelial cells we provide evidence
for a functional link between growth factor-mediated signaling,
post-transcriptional silencing, and histone-methylation in the angiogenesis
process. Inhibition of EZH2 may prove therapeutic in diseases in which aberrant
vascularization plays a role.

PMCID: PMC3030563
PMID: 21297974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Hum Pathol. 2011 Jun;42(6):867-72. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.09.019. Epub 2011 
Feb 2.

High-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas of the lung highly express enhancer of zeste
homolog 2, but carcinoids do not.

Findeis-Hosey JJ(1), Huang J, Li F, Yang Q, McMahon LA, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2, the catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex
2, is a histone methyltransferase and plays an important role in cell
proliferation and cell cycle regulation. It has been shown to be overexpressed in
a number of malignant neoplasms. This study aimed to determine the expression
pattern of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in neuroendocrine tumors of the lung and
the potential of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 to serve as a biomarker to segregate
carcinoids from high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas. Fifty-four cases, including
25 typical carcinoids, 7 atypical carcinoids, 9 large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas, and 13 small-cell lung carcinomas, were immunohistochemically studied
using a monoclonal antibody against enhancer of zeste homolog 2. All 13
small-cell lung carcinomas demonstrated moderate to strong nuclear staining with 
12 exhibiting more than 90% of tumor cells staining. All 9 large-cell
neuroendocrine carcinomas were moderately to strongly positive for enhancer of
zeste homolog 2, with 6 cases having staining in more than 80% of tumor cells. In
contrast, all 25 typical carcinoids and 6 atypical carcinoids showed only rare
scattered enhancer of zeste homolog 2-positive tumor cells, with 1 case of
atypical carcinoid exhibiting moderate staining in 40% of tumor cells. A
subsequent validation study of the 14 specimens of lung or mediastinal lymph node
biopsy and fine-needle aspiration, including 6 small-cell lung carcinomas, 2
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinomas, 5 typical carcinoids, and 1 atypical
carcinoid, was performed. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 was diffusely and strongly 
positive in all small-cell lung carcinomas and large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinomas, even with severe crush artifact, whereas it was only positive in rare
tumor cells in carcinoids. These findings support the formulation that enhancer
of zeste homolog 2 may play an important role in the regulation of biologic
behavior of high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas and as a diagnostically useful
marker in distinguishing high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas from carcinoids.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21292308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Apr;96(4):1029-38. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1784. Epub 
2011 Feb 2.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 overexpression has a role in the development of
anaplastic thyroid carcinomas.

Borbone E(1), Troncone G, Ferraro A, Jasencakova Z, Stojic L, Esposito F, Hornig 
N, Fusco A, Orlando V.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale-Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Università di Napoli Federico II,80131 Naples, Italy.

CONTEXT: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone lysine methyltransferase
belonging to the polycomb group protein family. Overexpression of EZH2 has been
found in several human malignancies including hematological and solid tumors.
OBJECTIVES: In this study we investigated the expression levels of EZH2 and its
polycomb group protein partners in thyroid carcinoma tissues with different
degrees of malignancy to identify potential new therapeutic targets for
anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC).
RESULTS: We show that high EZH2 expression levels are characteristic of
undifferentiated ATC, whereas no significant changes were observed in
well-differentiated papillary and follicular thyroid carcinomas as compared with 
normal thyroid. Knockdown of EZH2 in ATC cell lines results in cell growth
inhibition, loss of anchorage-independent growth, migration, and invasion
properties. Moreover, we demonstrate that EZH2 directly controls differentiation 
of ATC cells by silencing the thyroid specific transcription factor paired-box
gene 8 (PAX8).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 is specifically overexpressed in ATC, and it directly
contributes to transcriptional silencing of PAX8 gene and ATC differentiation.

PMID: 21289264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 15;10(4):579-83. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Phosphorylation of EZH2 by CDK1 and CDK2: a possible regulatory mechanism of
transmission of the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark through cell divisions.

Zeng X(1), Chen S, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology; Stony Brook University Medical Center; Stony Brook,
NY USA.

Histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) catalyzed by the enzymatic subunit
EZH2 in the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is essential for cells to
'memorize' gene expression patterns through cell divisions and plays an important
role in establishing and maintaining cell identity during development. However,
how the epigenetic mark is inherited through cell generations remains poorly
understood. Recently, we and others demonstrate that CDK1 and CDK2 phosphorylate 
EZH2 at threonine 350 (T350) and that T350 phosphorylation is important for the
binding of EZH2 to PRC2 recruiters, such as noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) HOTAIR and
XIST, and for the effective recruitment of PRC2 to EZH2 target loci in cells.
These findings imply that phosphorylation of EZH2 by CDK1 and CDK2 may provide
cells a mechanism that enhances EZH2 function during S and G2 phases of the cell 
cycle, thereby ensuring K27me3 on de novo synthesized H3 incorporated in nascent 
nucleosomes before sister chromosomes are divided into two daughter cells.
Additionally, a potential role of T350 phosphorylation of EZH2 in differing EZH2 
from its homolog EZH1 in catalyzing H3K27me3 as well as the interplay between
phosphorylation at T350 and other residues (e.g. phosphorylation by p38 at
threonine 372 (T372)) in governing EZH2 activity in proliferating versus
non-dividing cells are also discussed. Together, CDK phosphorylation of EZH2 at
T350 may represent a key regulatory mechanism of EZH2 function that is essential 
for the maintenance of H3K27me3 marks through cell divisions.

PMCID: PMC3174000
PMID: 21278485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Br J Haematol. 2011 Mar;152(6):777-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08445.x.
Epub 2011 Jan 30.

Mutations of CD79A, CD79B and EZH2 genes in immunodeficiency-related non-Hodgkin 
lymphomas.

Capello D, Gloghini A, Martini M, Spina M, Tirelli U, Bertoni F, Rinaldi A, Morra
E, Rambaldi A, Sinigaglia F, Larocca LM, Carbone A.

PMID: 21275949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Thorac Oncol. 2011 Apr;6(4):671-8. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e318208eb35.

MicroRNA-101 exerts tumor-suppressive functions in non-small cell lung cancer
through directly targeting enhancer of zeste homolog 2.

Zhang JG(1), Guo JF, Liu DL, Liu Q, Wang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) protein
has been found in broad range of cancer types, including non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Nevertheless, the mechanisms by which EZH2 becomes overexpressed 
in NSCLC remain unclear. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can regulate target gene expression
through translational control. In this study, we investigate whether miRNA
(miR-101) regulates EZH2 expression in NSCLC.
METHODS: We evaluated the expression of miR-101 and EZH2 in 20 matched NSCLC and 
adjacent nontumor lung tissues by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
and immunohistochemistry, respectively. Luciferase reporter assay was used to
determine whether miR-101 directly targets EZH2. To assess the effect of miR-101 
on NSCLC biological behavior, cell proliferation, invasion, and response to
chemotherapy were analyzed using NSCLC cells transfected with miR-101 mimics or
transfected with specific small interfering RNA to deplete EZH2 (small
interfering RNA-EZH2).
RESULTS: Reduced expression of miR-101 was associated with overexpression of EZH2
in NSCLC tumor tissues. Transfection of miR-101 mimics significantly suppressed
the activity of the luciferase reporter containing wild type but not mutant EZH2 
3'-UTR and decreased EZH2 expression in NSCLC cell lines. Furthermore, enforced
expression of miR-101 or knockdown of EZH2 led to reduced NSCLC cell
proliferation and invasion and sensitized cancer cells to paclitaxel-mediated
apoptosis through inducing expression of the proapoptotic protein Bim.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-101 inhibits cell proliferation and invasion and enhances
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis in NSCLC cells, at least in part, by directly
repressing EZH2 expression. Therapeutic strategies to rescue miR-101 expression
or silence EZH2 may be beneficial to patients with NSCLC in the future.

PMID: 21270667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 1;10(3):413-24. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Selective targeting of histone methylation.

Islam AB(1), Richter WF, Lopez-Bigas N, Benevolenskaya EV.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit on Biomedical Informatics, Department of Experimental Health and
Sciences, PRBB, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Histones are post-translationally modified by multiple histone-modifying enzymes,
which in turn influences gene expression. Much of the work in the field to date
has focused on genetic, biochemical and structural characterization of these
enzymes. The most recent genome-wide methods provide insights into specific
recruitment of histone-modifying enzymes in vivo and, therefore, onto mechanisms 
of establishing a differential expression pattern. Here we focus on the
recruitment mechanisms of the enzymes involved in the placement of two
contrasting histone marks, histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) methylation and histone H3 
lysine 27 (H3K27) methylation. We describe distribution of their binding sites
and show that recruitment of different histone-modifying proteins can be
coordinated, opposed, or alternating. Specifically, genomic sites of the H3K4
histone demethylase KDM5A become accessible to its homolog KDM5B in cells with a 
lowered KDM5A level. The currently available data on recruitment of H3K4/H3K27
modifying enzymes suggests that the formed protein complexes are targeted in a
sequential and temporal manner, but that additional, still unknown, interactions 
contribute to targeting specificity.

PMCID: PMC3115016
PMID: 21270517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Epigenetics. 2011 Apr;6(4):516-25.

Early epigenetic events regulate the adaptive immune response gene CIITA.

Mehta NT(1), Truax AD, Boyd NH, Greer SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Physiology, Department of
Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA, USA. sgreer@gsu.edu

Precise regulation of Major Histocompatibility class II (MHC II) genes plays
important roles in initiation, propagation and termination of adaptive immune
responses by controlling antigen presentation to CD4+ T cells. MHC II genes are
constitutively expressed in only a few cell types and are inducibly expressed by 
the inflammatory response cytokine interferon gamma (IFN<U+03B3>) in all nucleated
cells. The regulation of MHC II is tightly controlled by a Master Regulator, the 
class II transactivator (CIITA), which is a general regulator of both
constitutive and inducible MHC II expression. Although much is known about the
transcription factors necessary for CIITA expression, less is known about the
epigenetic modifications and the requisite enzymes needed to provide these
transcription factors access to DNA. We show here that multiple epigenetic
changes occur at the IFN<U+03B3> inducible CIITA promoter within 20' of IFN<U+03B3> stimulation
and that these changes correlate with the opening of the promoter and the
initiation of transcription. Our study links these rapidly occurring epigenetic
events at the inducible CIITA promoter to decreased promoter binding of the
histone methyltransferase EZH2, and shows that decreased promoter binding of EZH2
transforms this previously tightly regulated and cytokine inducible promoter into
a constitutively active and dysregulated gene.

PMID: 21266852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Leukemia. 2011 Apr;25(4):629-37. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.325. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Improved outcome following allogeneic stem cell transplantation in chronic
myeloid leukemia is associated with higher expression of BMI-1 and immune
responses to BMI-1 protein.

Yong AS(1), Stephens N, Weber G, Li Y, Savani BN, Eniafe R, Keyvanfar K,
Kurlander R, Rezvani K, Barrett AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1202, USA. yonga@nhlbi.nih.gov

BMI-1 and EZH2 are polycomb group (PcG) proteins that maintain self-renewal of
stem cells, and are overexpressed in leukemia. To investigate the potential of
PcG proteins as leukemia-associated antigens, and as targets for
graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effects, we studied cells obtained from 86 patients
with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and 25 human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-A*0201(+) sibling donors collected before allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (SCT). Although BMI-1 overexpression in CD34(+) cells of CML
patients treated with pharmacotherapy is associated with poor prognosis, we
found, conversely, that in CML patients treated with SCT, a higher expression of 
BMI-1, and correspondingly a lower expression of its target for repression,
CDKN2A, is associated with improved leukemia-free survival. Cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses to the BMI-1 peptide were detected in 5 of 25 (20%) 
donors, and in 8 of 19 (42%) HLA-A*0201(+) CML patients. BMI-1 generated more
total and high-avidity immune responses, and was more immunogenic than EZH2.
PcG-specific CTLs had a memory phenotype, were readily expanded in short-term
cultures and were detected after SCT in recipients of PcG-specific CTL-positive
donors. A higher BMI-1 expression in CML CD34(+) progenitors was associated with 
native BMI-1 immune responses. These immune responses to PcG proteins may target 
leukemia stem cells and have relevance for disease control by GVL.

PMCID: PMC3076540
PMID: 21252986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 25;286(12):10671-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.199612. Epub
2011 Jan 19.

Myocyte enhancer factor-2 interacting transcriptional repressor (MITR) is a
switch that promotes osteogenesis and inhibits adipogenesis of mesenchymal stem
cells by inactivating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-2.

Chen YH(1), Yeh FL, Yeh SP, Ma HT, Hung SC, Hung MC, Li LY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung
40447, Taiwan.

EZH2, a catalytic subunit of Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), is a histone
lysine methyltransferase that methylates lysine 27 of histone H3, resulting in
gene silencing. It has been shown that EZH2 plays a pivotal role in fostering
self-renewal and inhibiting the differentiation of embryonic stem cells.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can be induced to differentiate into adipogenic and
osteogenic lineages, which are mutually exclusive. However, it is not clear
whether the molecular events of EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing may coordinate
differentiation between osteoblasts and adipocytes. Disruption of the balance
between adipogenesis and osteogenesis is associated with many diseases; thus,
identifying a switch that determines the fate of MSC is critical. In this study, 
we used EZH2-ChIP-on-chip assay to identify differential EZH2 targets in the two 
differentiation stages on a genome-wide scale. After validating the targets, we
found that myocyte enhancer factor-2 interacting transcriptional repressor
(MITR)/HDAC9c was expressed in osteoblasts and greatly decreased in adipocytes.
We demonstrated that MITR plays a crucial role in the acceleration of MSC
osteogenesis and attenuation of MSC adipogenesis through interaction with
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3>-2 in the nucleus of
osteoblasts, which interrupts PPAR<U+03B3>-2 activity and prevents adipogenesis.
Together, our results demonstrated that MITR plays a master switch role to
balance osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation of MSCs through regulation of
PPAR<U+03B3>-2 transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3060518
PMID: 21247904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Apr;43(4):474-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.01.005.
Epub 2011 Jan 15.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2: A potential target for tumor therapy.

Xiao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, 388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang Province, 310058, PR China. ytxiaocell@163.com

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a subunit of the Polycomb-Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2), which catalyses the trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys 27
(H3K27) and involves in genes repression. EZH2 is amplified and overexpressed in 
a variety of cancers, including prostate and breast cancer. Overexpression of
EZH2 has been associated with the invasion and progression of malignant cancers, 
especially with the progression of prostate cancer. Here, we review the structure
and biological function of EZH2, especially focused on its activities in the
tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21241820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Cell. 2011 Jan 18;20(1):5-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.12.012.

Epigenetic memory meets G2/M: to remember or to forget?

Sharif J(1), Endoh M, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 
230-0045, Japan.

The histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27) methyltransferase EZH2 is essential for stem
cell maintenance and proliferation. Recent insights suggest that the
cyclin-dependent kinase CDK1 phosphorylates EZH2 at specific threonine residues
by sensing developmental cues to mediate self-renewal or differentiation during
G2/M phase.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21238919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biotechnol. 2011 Feb 20;151(4):312-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.01.001. Epub 
2011 Jan 13.

Identification of RNF2-responding loci in long-range chromatin interactions using
the novel 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology.

Choi D(1), Goo HG, Yoo J, Kang S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, 1-5ga,
Seongbuk-ku, Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

RNF2 is a core component of Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1), which binds to 
various chromatic regions to regulate their transcriptional activity. It was
recently reported that EZH2, a Polycomb group complex member, helps mediate
long-range chromosomal interactions in mammalian cells. The present study
investigates whether RNF2-responding loci interact in long-range chromatin. The
new 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology was developed based on circular chromosome
conformation capture (4C) and ChIP. Use of the 4C-ChIP-Cloning technology
successfully identified four loci in long-range cis- or trans-interactions that
were mediated by the RNF2 protein. RNAi experiments showed that RNF2 regulated
the transcription levels of genes adjacent to the loci. These results suggest
that RNF2 protein, as part of PRC1, mediates long-range interactions between
RNF2-interation loci and regulates adjacent genes. This 4C-ChIP-Cloning
technology may contribute to the study of protein-mediated long-range chromatin
interactions with specific regulatory elements.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Leukemia. 2011 Apr;25(4):726-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.311. Epub 2011 Jan 14.

EZH2 Y641 mutations in follicular lymphoma.

Bödör C, O'Riain C, Wrench D, Matthews J, Iyengar S, Tayyib H, Calaminici M,
Clear A, Iqbal S, Quentmeier H, Drexler HG, Montoto S, Lister AT, Gribben JG,
Matolcsy A, Fitzgibbon J.

PMID: 21233829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Chin Med Sci J. 2010 Dec;25(4):199-205.

Epigenetic repression of SATB1 by polycomb group protein EZH2 in epithelial
cells.

Lei L(1), Lu L, Xiang L, Xue-song W, De-pei L, Chih-chuan L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the regulatory mechanism of SATB1 repression in cells other
than T cells or erythroid cells, which have high expression level of SATB1.
METHODS: HeLa epithelial cells were treated with either histone deacetylase
inhibitor (HDACi) trichostatin A (TSA) or DNA methylation inhibitor 5-Aza-C
before detecting SATB1 expression. Luciferase reporter system was applied to
measure effects of EZH2 on SATB1 promoter activity. Over-expression or knockdown 
of EZH2 and subsequent quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction were performed to determine the effect of this Polycomb group protein on
SATB1 transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was applied to
measure enrichment of EZH2 and trimethylated H3K27 (H3K27me3) at SATB1 promoter
in HeLa cells. K562 cells and Jurkat cells, both having high-level expression of 
SATB1, were used in the ChIP experiment as controls.
RESULTS: Both TSA and 5-Aza-C increased SATB1 expression in HeLa cells.
Over-expression of EZH2 reduced promoter activity as well as the mRNA level of
SATB1, while knockdown of EZH2 apparently enhanced SATB1 expression in HeLa cells
but not in K562 cells and Jurkat cells. ChIP assay Results suggested that
epigenetic silencing of SATB1 by EZH2 in HeLa cells was mediated by
trimethylation modification of H3K27. In contrast, enrichment of EZH2 and
H3K27me3 was not detected within proximal promoter region of SATB1 in either K562
or Jurkat cells.
CONCLUSION: SATB1 is a bona fide EZH2 target gene in HeLa cells and the
repression of SATB1 by EZH2 may be mediated by trimethylation modification on
H3K27.

PMID: 21232178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Haematologica. 2011 May;96(5):712-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.028605. Epub 2011
Jan 12.

Overexpression of Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 with trimethylation of lysine 27 on
histone H3 in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma as a target for epigenetic therapy.

Sasaki D(1), Imaizumi Y, Hasegawa H, Osaka A, Tsukasaki K, Choi YL, Mano H,
Marquez VE, Hayashi T, Yanagihara K, Moriwaki Y, Miyazaki Y, Kamihira S, Yamada
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is a component of the Polycomb repressive
complex 2 that mediates chromatin-based gene silencing through trimethylation of 
lysine 27 on histone H3. This complex plays vital roles in the regulation of
development-specific gene expression.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study, a comparative microarray analysis of gene
expression in primary adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma samples was performed, and
the results were evaluated for their oncogenic and clinical significance.
RESULTS: Significantly higher levels of Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 and RING1 and
YY1 binding protein transcripts with enhanced levels of trimethylation of lysine 
27 on histone H3 were found in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma cells compared with
those in normal CD4(+) T cells. Furthermore, there was an inverse correlation
between the expression level of Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 and that of miR-101
or miR-128a, suggesting that the altered expression of the latter miRNAs accounts
for the overexpression of the former. Patients with high Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 or RING1 and YY1 binding protein transcripts had a significantly worse 
prognosis than those without it, indicating a possible role of these genes in the
oncogenesis and progression of this disease. Indeed, adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma cells were sensitive to a histone methylation inhibitor,
3-deazaneplanocin A. Furthermore, 3-deazaneplanocin A and histone deacetylase
inhibitor panobinostat showed a synergistic effect in killing the cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal that adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma cells have
deregulated Polycomb repressive complex 2 with over-expressed Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2, and that there is the possibility of a new therapeutic strategy
targeting histone methylation in this disease.

PMCID: PMC3084918
PMID: 21228036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Feb 10;29(5):573-82. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.29.8711. Epub 2011 
Jan 10.

Myeloproliferative neoplasms: molecular pathophysiology, essential clinical
understanding, and treatment strategies.

Tefferi A(1), Vainchenker W.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.
tefferi.ayalew@mayo.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Jun 20;29(18):e564-5.

To update oncologists on pathogenesis, contemporary diagnosis, risk
stratification, and treatment strategies in BCR-ABL1-negative myeloproliferative 
neoplasms, including polycythemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythemia (ET), and 
primary myelofibrosis (PMF). Recent literature was reviewed and interpreted in
the context of the authors' own experience and expertise. Pathogenetic mechanisms
in PV, ET, and PMF include stem cell-derived clonal myeloproliferation and
secondary stromal changes in the bone marrow and spleen. Most patients carry an
activating JAK2 or MPL mutation and a smaller subset also harbors LNK, CBL, TET2,
ASXL1, IDH, IKZF1, or EZH2 mutations; the precise pathogenetic contribution of
these mutations is under investigation. JAK2 mutation analysis is now a formal
component of diagnostic criteria for PV, ET, and PMF, but its prognostic utility 
is limited. Life expectancy in the majority of patients with PV or ET is
near-normal and disease complications are effectively (and safely) managed by
treatment with low-dose aspirin, phlebotomy, or hydroxyurea. In PMF, survival and
quality of life are significantly worse and current therapy is inadequate. In ET 
and PV, controlled studies are needed to show added value and justify the risk of
unknown long-term health effects associated with nonconventional therapeutic
approaches (eg, interferon-alfa). The unmet need for treatment in PMF dictates a 
different approach for assessing the therapeutic value of new drugs (eg, JAK
inhibitors, pomalidomide) or allogeneic stem-cell transplantation.

PMID: 21220604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Feb 11;405(2):210-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.01.010. Epub 2011 Jan 8.

Characterization of histone H3K27 modifications in the ß-globin locus.

Kim YW(1), Kim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Pusan 609-735, South Korea.

Histone H3K27 is acetylated or methylated in the environment of nuclear
chromatin. Here, to characterize the modification pattern of H3K27 in locus
control region (LCR) and to understand the correlation of various H3K27
modifications with transcriptional activity of genes, we analyzed the human
ß-globin locus using the ChIP assay. The LCR of the human ß-globin locus was
enriched by H3K27ac and H3K27me1 in erythroid K562 cells. The highly transcribed 
globin genes were hyperacetylated at H3K27, but the repressed globin genes were
highly dimethylated at this lysine in these cells. However, in non-erythroid
293FT cells, the ß-globin locus was marked by a high level of H3K27me3. EZH2 and 
SUZ12, subunits of polycomb repressive complex 2, were comparably detected with
the H3K27me3 pattern in K562 and 293FT cells. In addition, H3K27ac, H3K27me1 and 
H3K27me3 were established in an enhancer-dependent manner in a model
minichromosomal locus containing an enhancer and its target gene. Taken together,
these results show that H3K27 modifications have distinctive correlations with
the chromatin state or transcription level of genes and are influenced by an
enhancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21219849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 18;286(11):9657-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.185124. Epub 2011
Jan 7.

EZH2 regulates neuronal differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells through
PIP5K1C-dependent calcium signaling.

Yu YL(1), Chou RH, Chen LT, Shyu WC, Hsieh SC, Wu CS, Zeng HJ, Yeh SP, Yang DM,
Hung SC, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung
404, Taiwan. ylyu@mail.cmu.edu.tw

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) regulates stem cells renewal, maintenance, and
differentiation into different cell lineages including neuron. Changes in
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration play a critical role in the differentiation of
neurons. However, whether EZH2 modulates intracellular Ca(2+) signaling in
regulating neuronal differentiation from human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs)
still remains unclear. When hMSCs were treated with a Ca(2+) chelator or a PLC
inhibitor to block IP(3)-mediated Ca(2+) signaling, neuronal differentiation was 
disrupted. EZH2 bound to the promoter region of PIP5K1C to suppress its
transcription in proliferating hMSCs. Interestingly, knockdown of EZH2 enhanced
the expression of PIP5K1C, which in turn increased the amount of PI(4,5)P(2), a
precursor of IP(3), and resulted in increasing the intracellular Ca(2+) level,
suggesting that EZH2 negatively regulates intracellular Ca(2+) through
suppression of PIP5K1C. Knockdown of EZH2 also enhanced hMSCs differentiation
into functional neuron both in vitro and in vivo. In contrast, knockdown of
PIP5K1C significantly reduced PI(4,5)P(2) contents and intracellular Ca(2+)
release in EZH2-silenced cells and resulted in the disruption of neuronal
differentiation from hMSCs. Here, we provide the first evidence to demonstrate
that after induction to neuronal differentiation, decreased EZH2 activates the
expression of PIP5K1C to evoke intracellular Ca(2+) signaling, which leads hMSCs 
to differentiate into functional neuron lineage. Activation of intracellular
Ca(2+) signaling by repressing or knocking down EZH2 might be a potential
strategy to promote neuronal differentiation from hMSCs for application to
neurological dysfunction diseases.

PMCID: PMC3059014
PMID: 21216957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Feb;10(2):325-35. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-10-0788. Epub 
2011 Jan 7.

Ovarian cancer stem cell-like side populations are enriched following
chemotherapy and overexpress EZH2.

Rizzo S(1), Hersey JM, Mellor P, Dai W, Santos-Silva A, Liber D, Luk L, Titley I,
Carden CP, Box G, Hudson DL, Kaye SB, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Medicine, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, United
Kingdom.

Platinum-based chemotherapy, with cytoreductive surgery, is the cornerstone of
treatment of advanced ovarian cancer; however, acquired drug resistance is a
major clinical obstacle. It has been proposed that subpopulations of tumor cells 
with stem cell-like properties, such as so-called side populations (SP) that
overexpress ABC drug transporters, can sustain the growth of drug-resistant tumor
cells, leading to tumor recurrence following chemotherapy. The histone
methyltransferase EZH2 is a key component of the polycomb-repressive complex 2
required for maintenance of a stem cell state, and overexpression has been
implicated in drug resistance and shorter survival of ovarian cancer patients. We
observed higher percentage SP in ascites from patients that have relapsed
following chemotherapy compared with chemonaive patients, consistent with
selection for this subpopulation during platinum-based chemotherapy. Furthermore,
ABCB1 (P-glycoprotein) and EZH2 are consistently overexpressed in SP compared
with non-SP from patients' tumor cells. The siRNA knockdown of EZH2 leads to loss
of SP in ovarian tumor models, reduced anchorage-independent growth, and reduced 
tumor growth in vivo. Together, these data support a key role for EZH2 in the
maintenance of a drug-resistant, tumor-sustaining subpopulation of cells in
ovarian cancers undergoing chemotherapy. As such, EZH2 is an important target for
anticancer drug development.

PMCID: PMC3037846
PMID: 21216927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Cell. 2011 Jan 18;19(1):86-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.10.035. Epub 2011 
Jan 6.

EZH2 promotes expansion of breast tumor initiating cells through activation of
RAF1-ß-catenin signaling.

Chang CJ(1), Yang JY, Xia W, Chen CT, Xie X, Chao CH, Woodward WA, Hsu JM,
Hortobagyi GN, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

It has been proposed that an aggressive secondary cancer stem cell population
arises from a primary cancer stem cell population through acquisition of
additional genetic mutations and drives cancer progression. Overexpression of
Polycomb protein EZH2, essential in stem cell self-renewal, has been linked to
breast cancer progression. However, critical mechanism linking increased EZH2
expression to BTIC (breast tumor initiating cell) regulation and cancer
progression remains unclear. Here, we identify a mechanism in which EZH2
expression-mediated downregulation of DNA damage repair leads to accumulation of 
recurrent RAF1 gene amplification in BTICs, which activates p-ERK-ß-catenin
signaling to promote BTIC expansion. We further reveal that AZD6244, a clinical
trial drug that inhibits RAF1-ERK signaling, could prevent breast cancer
progression by eliminating BTICs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3041516
PMID: 21215703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cancer Sci. 2011 Mar;102(3):530-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01836.x. Epub
2011 Jan 18.

EZH2 regulates expression of p57 and contributes to progression of ovarian cancer
in vitro and in vivo.

Guo J(1), Cai J, Yu L, Tang H, Chen C, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Medical College, Union
Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

In order to determine the expression pattern of EZH2 in ovarian neoplasms and
assess the functions and mechanism of EZH2 in tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo,
we detected the protein and mRNA expression of EZH2 and p57 in normal, benign and
malignant ovarian tissues, used shRNA to knock down EZH2 expression in ovarian
cancer cells and established a nude mouse xenograft model. We found EZH2 was
overexpressed in ovarian tumor with the highest level expression in malignant
ovarian tissues, and the variation of EZH2 expression at different pathological
type/grade and International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO)
stages was statistically significant. Furthermore, the EZH2 expression was
inversely correlated with the p57 mRNA level in ovarian tissues. Moreover,
inhibition of endogenous EZH2 increased the expression of p57 and reduced
proliferation and migration of ovarian cancer cells. Loss of EZH2 suppresses
ovarian tumor formation in vivo. Our results indicate that the EZH2 gene acts as 
an oncogene in tumorigenesis of ovarian cancer with the possible mechanism to
suppress the anti-oncogene p57. EZH2 is a potential therapeutic target for
treatment of ovarian cancer.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21205084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Blood. 2011 Mar 31;117(13):3494-504. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-315614. Epub 2011
Jan 3.

How I treat myelofibrosis.

Tefferi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street 
SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. tefferi.ayalew@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7185.

It is currently assumed that myelofibrosis (MF) originates from acquired
mutations that target the hematopoietic stem cell and induce dysregulation of
kinase signaling, clonal myeloproliferation, and abnormal cytokine expression.
These pathogenetic processes are interdependent and also individually
contributory to disease phenotype-bone marrow stromal changes, extramedullary
hematopoiesis, ineffective erythropoiesis, and constitutional symptoms. Molecular
pathogenesis of MF is poorly understood despite a growing list of resident
somatic mutations that are either functionally linked to Janus kinase
(JAK)-signal transducer and activator of transcription hyperactivation (eg JAK2, 
MPL, and LNK mutations) or possibly involved in epigenetic dysregulation of
transcription (TET2, ASXL1, or EZH2 mutations). Current prognostication in
primary MF is based on the Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System-plus
model, which uses 8 independent predictors of inferior survival to classify
patients into low, intermediate 1, intermediate 2, and high-risk disease groups; 
corresponding median survivals are estimated at 15.4, 6.5, 2.9, and 1.3 years.
Such information is used to plan a risk-adapted treatment strategy for the
individual patient, which might include observation alone, conventional or
investigational (eg, JAK inhibitors, pomalidomide) drug therapy, allogenic stem
cell transplantation with reduced- or conventional-intensity conditioning,
splenectomy, or radiotherapy. I discuss these treatment approaches in the context
of who should get what and when.

PMID: 21200024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):225-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1850.

MiR-26a inhibits cell growth and tumorigenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma
through repression of EZH2.

Lu J(1), He ML, Wang L, Chen Y, Liu X, Dong Q, Chen YC, Peng Y, Yao KT, Kung HF, 
Li XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Several microRNAs (miRNA) have been implicated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC),
a highly invasive and metastatic cancer that is widely prevalent in southern
China. In this study, we report that microRNA miR-26a is commonly downregulated
in NPC specimens and NPC cell lines with important functional consequences.
Ectopic expression of miR-26a dramatically suppressed cell proliferation and
colony formation by inducing G(1)-phase cell-cycle arrest. We found that miR-26a 
strongly reduced the expression of EZH2 oncogene in NPC cells. Similar to the
restoring miR-26 expression, EZH2 downregulation inhibited cell growth and
cell-cycle progression, whereas EZH2 overexpression rescued the suppressive
effect of miR-26a. Mechanistic investigations revealed that miR-26a suppressed
the expression of c-myc, the cyclin D3 and E2, and the cyclin-dependent kinase
CDK4 and CDK6 while enhancing the expression of CDK inhibitors p14(ARF) and
p21(CIP1) in an EZH2-dependent manner. Interestingly, cyclin D2 was regulated by 
miR-26a but not by EZH2, revealing cyclin D2 as another direct yet
mechanistically distinct target of miR-26a. In clinical specimens, EZH2 was
widely overexpressed and its mRNA levels were inversely correlated with miR-26a
expression. Taken together, our results indicate that miR-26a functions as a
growth-suppressive miRNA in NPC, and that its suppressive effects are mediated
chiefly by repressing EZH2 expression.

© 2011 AACR.

PMID: 21199804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Blood Cancer J. 2011 Mar 4;1:e7. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2011.4.

Mutations with epigenetic effects in myeloproliferative neoplasms and recent
progress in treatment: Proceedings from the 5th International Post-ASH Symposium.

Tefferi A(1), Abdel-Wahab O, Cervantes F, Crispino JD, Finazzi G, Girodon F,
Gisslinger H, Gotlib J, Kiladjian JJ, Levine RL, Licht JD, Mullally A, Odenike O,
Pardanani A, Silver RT, Solary E, Mughal T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

Immediately following the 2010 annual American Society of Hematology (ASH)
meeting, the 5th International Post-ASH Symposium on Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia
and BCR-ABL1-Negative Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPNs) took place on 7-8
December 2010 in Orlando, Florida, USA. During this meeting, the most recent
advances in laboratory research and clinical practice, including those that were 
presented at the 2010 ASH meeting, were discussed among recognized authorities in
the field. The current paper summarizes the proceedings of this meeting in
BCR-ABL1-negative MPN. We provide a detailed overview of new mutations with
putative epigenetic effects (TET oncogene family member 2 (TET2), additional sex 
comb-like 1 (ASXL1), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) and enhancer of zeste homolog
2 (EZH2)) and an update on treatment with Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitors,
pomalidomide, everolimus, interferon-a, midostaurin and cladribine. In addition, 
the new 'Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System (DIPSS)-plus' prognostic
model for primary myelofibrosis (PMF) and the clinical relevance of
distinguishing essential thrombocythemia from prefibrotic PMF are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3255279
PMID: 23471017  [PubMed]


33. Cancer Biomark. 2012;11(2-3):123-8.

Different expression of EZH2, BMI1 and Ki67 in low and high grade neuroendocrine 
tumors of the lung.

Bondgaard AL(1), Poulsen TT, Poulsen HS, Skov BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Biology, Finsen Center, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. anloudk@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 2 (EZH2) and B lymphoma Mo-MLV Insertion
region 1 polycomb ring finger (BMI1) are involved in malignant transformation of 
many human carcinomas. Still, in neuroendocrine tumors of the lung (NELT) their
expression pattern is largely unknown. This study evaluated their expression in
96 NELT and correlated it to clinical features including survival.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Paraffin embedded material from 50 typical carcinoids
(TC), 13 atypical carcinoids (AC), 23 large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas
(LCNEC) and 10 small cell lung carcinomas (SCLC) was evaluated by
immunohistochemisty.
RESULTS: Significantly higher expression of EZH2 was found in high grade NELT
(LCNEC + SCLC) versus low grade NELT (TC + AC) (p < 0.0001). High expression of
BMI1 was observed in low grade NELT (TC + AC) in contrast to the expression in
high grade NELT (LCNEC+SCLC) (p=0.004). In multivariate models, diagnosis was the
strongest predictor of survival.
CONCLUSION: The immunohistochemical expression of EZH2 and BMI1 are significantly
different in low versus high grade NELT. This difference might be related to NELT
tumorigenesis. These markers have no independent prognostic impact in NELT.
Whether EZH2 could become target in new treatments strategies against NELT
remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 23011159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Blood. 2011 Feb 24;117(8):2451-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-11-321208. Epub 2010
Dec 29.

Somatic mutations at EZH2 Y641 act dominantly through a mechanism of selectively 
altered PRC2 catalytic activity, to increase H3K27 trimethylation.

Yap DB(1), Chu J, Berg T, Schapira M, Cheng SW, Moradian A, Morin RD, Mungall AJ,
Meissner B, Boyle M, Marquez VE, Marra MA, Gascoyne RD, Humphries RK, Arrowsmith 
CH, Morin GB, Aparicio SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Next-generation sequencing of follicular lymphoma and diffuse-large B-cell
lymphoma has revealed frequent somatic, heterozygous Y641 mutations in the
histone methyltransferase EZH2. Heterozygosity and the presence of equal
quantities of both mutant and wild-type mRNA and expressed protein suggest a
dominant mode of action. Surprisingly, B-cell lymphoma cell lines and lymphoma
samples harboring heterozygous EZH2(Y641) mutations have increased levels of
histone H3 Lys-27-specific trimethylation (H3K27me3). Expression of EZH2(Y641F/N)
mutants in cells with EZH2(WT) resulted in an increase of H3K27me3 levels in
vivo. Structural modeling of EZH2(Y641) mutants suggests a "Tyr/Phe switch" model
whereby structurally neutral, nontyrosine residues at position 641 would decrease
affinity for unmethylated and monomethylated H3K27 substrates and potentially
favor trimethylation. We demonstrate, using in vitro enzyme assays of
reconstituted PRC2 complexes, that Y641 mutations result in a decrease in
monomethylation and an increase in trimethylation activity of the enzyme relative
to the wild-type enzyme. This represents the first example of a
disease-associated gain-of-function mutation in a histone methyltransferase,
whereby somatic EZH2 Y641 mutations in lymphoma act dominantly to increase,
rather than decrease, histone methylation. The dominant mode of action suggests
that allele-specific EZH2 inhibitors should be a future therapeutic strategy for 
this disease.

PMCID: PMC3062411
PMID: 21190999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Jan;26(1):19-27. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2010.06447.x.

Epigenetic regulation of signaling pathways in cancer: role of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2.

Tsang DP(1), Cheng AS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Digestive Disease and Department of Medicine and Therapeutics,
the Chinese University of Hong Kong, China.

EZH2 is the histone H3 lysine 27 methyltransferase of polycomb-repressive complex
2. It transcriptionally silences cohorts of developmental regulators in
stem/progenitors and cancer cells. EZH2 is essential in maintaining stem cell
identity by globally repressing differentiation programs. Analogously, it plays a
key role in oncogenesis by targeting signaling molecules that control cell
differentiation. Emerging data indicate that EZH2 promotes cancer formation and
progression through epigenetic activation of oncogenic signaling cascades and
inhibition of pro-differentiation pathways. Genome-wide mapping analysis has been
expanding the repertoire of target genes and the associated signaling pathways
regulated by EZH2. Better understanding of the molecular basis of such
regulations in various cancer types will help establish EZH2-mediated epigenetic 
silencing as a therapeutic target.

© 2010 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Blackwell
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21175789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Mol Cell. 2010 Dec 22;40(6):939-53. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.12.011.

Genome-wide identification of polycomb-associated RNAs by RIP-seq.

Zhao J(1), Ohsumi TK, Kung JT, Ogawa Y, Grau DJ, Sarma K, Song JJ, Kingston RE,
Borowsky M, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Polycomb proteins play essential roles in stem cell renewal and human disease.
Recent studies of HOX genes and X inactivation have provided evidence for RNA
cofactors in Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). Here we develop a RIP-seq
method to capture the PRC2 transcriptome and identify a genome-wide pool of >9000
PRC2-interacting RNAs in embryonic stem cells. The transcriptome includes
antisense, intergenic, and promoter-associated transcripts, as well as many
unannotated RNAs. A large number of transcripts occur within imprinted regions,
oncogene and tumor suppressor loci, and stem cell-related bivalent domains. We
provide evidence for direct RNA-protein interactions, most likely via the Ezh2
subunit. We also identify Gtl2 RNA as a PRC2 cofactor that directs PRC2 to the
reciprocally imprinted Dlk1 coding gene. Thus, Polycomb proteins interact with a 
genome-wide family of RNAs, some of which may be used as biomarkers and
therapeutic targets for human disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3021903
PMID: 21172659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Int J Oncol. 2011 Feb;38(2):345-53. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2010.868. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Aberrant expression of EZH2 is associated with a poor outcome and P53 alteration 
in squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus.

Yamada A(1), Fujii S, Daiko H, Nishimura M, Chiba T, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, Chiba 277-8577,
Japan.

EZH2 and BMI1 are transcriptional repressors and have been implicated in the
progression of human cancers. Squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus (ESCC) is 
one of the most aggressive carcinomas in the gastrointestinal tract and generally
has an unfavorable outcome. In the present study, we immunohistochemically
investigated the expression of EZH2 and BMI1 in 136 surgically resected ESCCs and
adjacent epithelium. We also analyzed associations between aberrant expression of
EZH2 and BMI1, and both clinicopathological findings and outcome. MYC, RB, and
P53 expression was examined in selected cases and analyzed in relation to EZH2
expression. Mutations in the P53 gene were evaluated by direct sequencing. EZH2
mRNA expression was investigated in ESCC cell lines with and without P53
transcriptional activity. The results showed that EZH2 protein and BMI1 protein
were upregulated in ESCC tissue in comparison with adjacent non-neoplastic
epithelium. Aberrant EZH2 and BMI1 protein expression was observed in 19 (14.0%) 
and 23 (16.9%), respectively, of the 136 ESCCs. Aberrant EZH2 expression was
significantly associated with larger size, greater depth of invasion, presence of
distant metastasis, and shorter disease-free survival time. Aberrant BMI1
expression was inversely associated with lymph node metastasis and venous
invasion, but not associated with survival of the patients. In addition, aberrant
EZH2 expression was associated with P53 alteration in ESCC tissue. EZH2 mRNA
expression in ESCC cell lines was reduced by activation of P53. In conclusion,
P53 alteration may be involved in dysregulated EZH2 expression, and aberrant
expression of EZH2 may play a role in ESCC progression.

PMID: 21165554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 3;5(12):e14229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014229.

Epigenetic silencing of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> is a
biomarker for colorectal cancer progression and adverse patients' outcome.

Pancione M(1), Sabatino L, Fucci A, Carafa V, Nebbioso A, Forte N, Febbraro A,
Parente D, Ambrosino C, Normanno N, Altucci L, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Sannio,
Benevento, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(1). doi:
10.1371/annotation/07419a37-33f1-4e4a-adc9-b186f305bae5.

The relationship between peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPARG)
expression and epigenetic changes occurring in colorectal-cancer pathogenesis is 
largely unknown. We investigated whether PPARG is epigenetically regulated in
colorectal cancer (CRC) progression. PPARG expression was assessed in CRC tissues
and paired normal mucosa by western blot and immunohistochemistry and related to 
patients' clinicopathological parameters and survival. PPARG promoter methylation
was analyzed by methylation-specific-PCR and bisulphite sequencing. PPARG
expression and promoter methylation were similarly examined also in CRC derived
cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation in basal conditions and after
epigenetic treatment was performed along with knocking-down experiments of
putative regulatory factors. Gene expression was monitored by immunoblotting and 
functional assays of cell proliferation and invasiveness. Methylation on a
specific region of the promoter is strongly correlated with PPARG lack of
expression in 30% of primary CRCs and with patients' poor prognosis. Remarkably, 
the same methylation pattern is found in PPARG-negative CRC cell lines.
Epigenetic treatment with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine can revert this condition and, 
in combination with trichostatin A, dramatically re-activates gene transcription 
and receptor activity. Transcriptional silencing is due to the recruitment of
MeCP2, HDAC1 and EZH2 that impart repressive chromatin signatures determining an 
increased cell proliferative and invasive potential, features that can
experimentally be reverted. Our findings provide a novel mechanistic insight into
epigenetic silencing of PPARG in CRC that may be relevant as a prognostic marker 
of tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC2997072
PMID: 21151932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Transcription. 2010 Nov;1(3):165-175. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Transcriptional regulation of Oct4 by a long non-coding RNA antisense to
Oct4-pseudogene 5.

Hawkins PG(1), Morris KV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine; The Scripps Research
Institute; La Jolla, CA USA.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been shown to epigenetically regulate certain
genes in human cells. Here we report evidence for the involvement of an antisense
lncRNA in the transcriptional regulation of the pluripotency-associated factor
Oct4. When an lncRNA antisense to Oct4-pseudogene 5 was suppressed, transcription
of Oct4 and Oct4 pseudogenes 4 and 5 was observed to increase. This increase
correlated with a loss of silent state epigenetic marks and the histone
methyltransferase Ezh2 at the Oct4 promoter. We observed this lncRNA to interact 
with nucleolin and PURA, a 35 kD single-stranded DNA and RNA binding protein, and
found that these proteins may act to negatively regulate this antisense
transcript.

PMCID: PMC2999937
PMID: 21151833  [PubMed]


40. Biochem J. 2011 Mar 1;434(2):333-42. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100944.

Functional characterization of human Polycomb-like 3 isoforms identifies them as 
components of distinct EZH2 protein complexes.

Boulay G(1), Rosnoblet C, Guérardel C, Angrand PO, Leprince D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université Lille Nord de France,
IFR 142, 1 Rue Calmette, 59017 Lille Cedex, France.

PcG (Polycomb group) proteins are conserved transcriptional repressors essential 
to regulate cell fate and to maintain epigenetic cellular memory. They work in
concert through two main families of chromatin-modifying complexes, PRC1
(Polycomb repressive complex 1) and PRC2-4. In Drosophila, PRC2 contains the
H3K27 histone methyltransferase E(Z) whose trimethylation activity towards PcG
target genes is stimulated by PCL (Polycomb-like). In the present study, we have 
examined hPCL3, one of its three human paralogues. Through alternative splicing, 
hPCL3 encodes a long isoform, hPCL3L, containing an N-terminal TUDOR domain and
two PHDs (plant homeodomains) and a smaller isoform, hPCL3S, lacking the second
PHD finger (PHD2). By quantitative reverse transcription-PCR analyses, we showed 
that both isoforms are widely co-expressed at high levels in medulloblastoma. By 
co-immunoprecipitation analyses, we demonstrated that both isoforms interact with
EZH2 through their common TUDOR domain. However, the hPCL3L-specific PHD2 domain,
which is better conserved than PHD1 in the PCL family, is also involved in this
interaction and implicated in the self-association of hPCL3L. Finally, we have
demonstrated that both hPCL3 isoforms are physically associated with EZH2, but in
different complexes. Our results provide the first evidence that the two hPCL3
isoforms belong to different complexes and raise important questions about their 
relative functions, particularly in tumorigenesis.

© The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Biochemical Society

PMID: 21143197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2010 Dec 15;102(24):1824-5. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djq520. Epub
2010 Dec 7.

Targeted epigenetic therapies: the next frontier?

Tuma RS.

PMID: 21139098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;13(1):87-94. doi: 10.1038/ncb2139. Epub 2010 Dec 5.

CDK1-dependent phosphorylation of EZH2 suppresses methylation of H3K27 and
promotes osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells.

Wei Y(1), Chen YH, Li LY, Lang J, Yeh SP, Shi B, Yang CC, Yang JY, Lin CY, Lai
CC, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and catalyses the trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys
27 (H3K27), which represses gene transcription. EZH2 enhances cancer-cell
invasiveness and regulates stem cell differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that
EZH2 can be phosphorylated at Thr 487 through activation of cyclin-dependent
kinase 1 (CDK1). The phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487 disrupted EZH2 binding
with the other PRC2 components SUZ12 and EED, and thereby inhibited EZH2
methyltransferase activity, resulting in inhibition of cancer-cell invasion. In
human mesenchymal stem cells, activation of CDK1 promoted mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into osteoblasts through phosphorylation of EZH2 at Thr 487.
These findings define a signalling link between CDK1 and EZH2 that may have an
important role in diverse biological processes, including cancer-cell invasion
and osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3076036
PMID: 21131960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Ann Hematol. 2011 Jun;90(6):643-53. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1128-5. Epub 2010 Dec
2.

Overexpression of the EZH2, RING1 and BMI1 genes is common in myelodysplastic
syndromes: relation to adverse epigenetic alteration and poor prognostic scoring.

Xu F(1), Li X, Wu L, Zhang Q, Yang R, Yang Y, Zhang Z, He Q, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Sixth people Hospital, Shanghai JiaoTong
University, ShangHai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200233,
People's Republic of China.

Epigenetics refers to the study of clonally inherited changes in gene expression 
without accompanying genetic changes. Previous research on the epigenetics of
myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) mainly focused on the inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes as a result of DNA methylation. However, the basic molecular
pathogenesis of epigenetics in MDS remains poorly understood. Recent studies have
revealed that DNA methylation and histone modification may be controlled by
Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins, which may give new clues toward understanding the 
epigenetic mechanism of MDS. In this study, we explored for the first time the
expression of PcG genes, including EZH2, EED, SUZ12, RING1, and BMI1, in various 
MDS subsets and acute myeloid leukemia (AML), as well as the relationship between
the expression of PcG genes and epigenetic alteration and prognosis-risk scoring.
Patients with MDS/AML showed overexpression of EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 genes
compared to their expression levels in patients with non-clonal cytopenia
diseases. The MDS patients with DNA methylation had higher EZH2 expression than
those without DNA methylation. The patients who received decitabine treatment
presented significantly reduced expression of EZH2 and RING1 besides decreased
p15(INK4B) methylation after decitabine treatment. Moreover, overexpression of
EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 was always linked to poor prognostic scoring. In
conclusion, overexpression of the EZH2, RING1, and BMI1 genes is common in MDS
and indicate poor prognosis. The products of these genes might participate in
epigenetic regulation of MDS. These studies may also contribute to our
understanding of the effective mechanism of decitabine.

PMID: 21125401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Genes Dev. 2010 Dec 1;24(23):2615-20. doi: 10.1101/gad.1983810.

Phosphorylation of the PRC2 component Ezh2 is cell cycle-regulated and
up-regulates its binding to ncRNA.

Kaneko S(1), Li G, Son J, Xu CF, Margueron R, Neubert TA, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, 10016, USA.

Ezh2 functions as a histone H3 Lys 27 (H3K27) methyltransferase when comprising
the Polycomb-Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). Trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3)
correlates with transcriptionally repressed chromatin. The means by which PRC2
targets specific chromatin regions is currently unclear, but noncoding RNAs
(ncRNAs) have been shown to interact with PRC2 and may facilitate its recruitment
to some target genes. Here we show that Ezh2 interacts with HOTAIR and Xist. Ezh2
is phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) at threonine residues 345
and 487 in a cell cycle-dependent manner. A phospho-mimic at residue 345
increased HOTAIR ncRNA binding to Ezh2, while the phospho-mimic at residue 487
was ineffectual. An Ezh2 domain comprising T345 was found to be important for
binding to HOTAIR and the 5' end of Xist.

PMCID: PMC2994035
PMID: 21123648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):4219-24. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0544-x. Epub 2010
Nov 30.

Comparison of gene expression profiles reveals aberrant expression of FOXO1,
Aurora A/B and EZH2 in lesional psoriatic skins.

Liu Y(1), Luo W, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Zhuzhou No. 1 Hospital, Zhuzhou City, 412000, Hunan
Province, PR China.

Psoriasis is a chronic, non-infectious skin disease affects 2-3% of the
population worldwide. In order to find genes possibly cause this skin disease, we
re-analyzed the gene expression data-sets from three published studies. We
compared the gene expression profiles between lesional psoriatic skin (PP),
uninvolved psoriatic skin (PN) and normal skin (NN) tissues. We found that
compared with in PN and NN tissues, the expression of FOXO1 is significantly
repressed and the expression of AURKA, AURKB and EZH2 is significantly
up-regulated in PP tissues (P < 0.001). During the treatment of psoriasis
patients with TNF-a antagonist Etanercept, the expression of FOXO1 was
re-activated and the expression of AURKA and EZH2 was repressed. These results
suggest loss of FOXO1 expression and elevated AURKA/B and EZH2 expression in
lesional psoriatic tissues have potential contribution to the development of
psoriasis. It is worthwhile to test whether the combination of Aurora kinases or 
EZH2 inhibitors can enhance the therapeutic effects of Etanercept in psoriasis
management.

PMID: 21116854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Dec;8(12):1610-8. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0398. Epub
2010 Nov 29.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 promotes the proliferation and invasion of epithelial
ovarian cancer cells.

Li H(1), Cai Q, Godwin AK, Zhang R.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Cancer Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, W446, 333 Cottman Avenue,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) that includes noncatalytic subunits suppressor of
zeste 12 (SUZ12) and embryonic ectoderm development (EED). When present in PRC2, 
EZH2 catalyzes trimethylation on lysine 27 residue of histone H3 (H3K27Me3),
resulting in epigenetic silencing of gene expression. Here, we investigated the
expression and function of EZH2 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). When compared
with primary human ovarian surface epithelial (pHOSE) cells, EZH2, SUZ12, and EED
were expressed at higher levels in all 8 human EOC cell lines tested.
Consistently, H3K27Me3 was also overexpressed in human EOC cell lines compared
with pHOSE cells. EZH2 was significantly overexpressed in primary human EOCs (n =
134) when compared with normal ovarian surface epithelium (n = 46; P < 0.001).
EZH2 expression positively correlated with expression of Ki67 (P < 0.001; a
marker of cell proliferation) and tumor grade (P = 0.034) but not tumor stage (P 
= 0.908) in EOC. There was no correlation of EZH2 expression with overall (P =
0.3) or disease-free survival (P = 0.2) in high-grade serous histotype EOC
patients (n = 98). Knockdown of EZH2 expression reduced the level of H3K27Me3 and
suppressed the growth of human EOC cells both in vitro and in vivo in xenograft
models. EZH2 knockdown induced apoptosis of human EOC cells. Finally, we showed
that EZH2 knockdown suppressed the invasion of human EOC cells. Together, these
data demonstrate that EZH2 is frequently overexpressed in human EOC cells and its
overexpression promotes the proliferation and invasion of human EOC cells,
suggesting that EZH2 is a potential target for developing EOC therapeutics.

©2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3059727
PMID: 21115743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Feb 15;81(4):510-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2010.11.014. Epub 
2010 Nov 27.

Methotrexate induces apoptosis through p53/p21-dependent pathway and increases
E-cadherin expression through downregulation of HDAC/EZH2.

Huang WY(1), Yang PM, Chang YF, Marquez VE, Chen CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei 10018, Taiwan.

Methotrexate (MTX) is a dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) inhibitor widely used as
an anticancer drug in different kinds of human cancers. Here we investigated the 
anti-tumor mechanism of MTX against non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) A549
cells. MTX not only inhibited in vitro cell growth via induction of apoptosis,
but also inhibited tumor formation in animal xenograft model. RNase protection
assay (RPA) and RT-PCR demonstrated its induction of p53 target genes including
DR5, p21, Puma and Noxa. Moreover, MTX promoted p53 phosphorylation at Ser15 and 
acetylaion at Lys373/382, which increase its stability and expression. The
apoptosis and inhibition of cell viability induced by MTX were dependent on p53
and, partially, on p21. In addition, MTX also increased E-cadherin expression
through inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity and downregulation of
polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2). Therefore, the
anticancer mechanism of MTX acts through initiation of p53-dependent apoptosis
and restoration of E-cadherin expression by downregulation of HDAC/EZH2.

Copyright Â© 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21114963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Leuk Res. 2011 Mar;35(3):e23-4. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.10.014. Epub 2010 Nov
18.

Absence of mutations of the histone methyltransferase gene EZH2 in splenic b-cell
marginal zone lymphoma.

Salido M, Martinez-Avilés L, Ademà V, Ferrer A, Espinet B, Garcia M, Salar A,
Besses C, Florensa L, Serrano S, Bellosillo B, Solé F.

PMID: 21087793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Dec 7;107(49):20980-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1012525107. Epub 2010 Nov 15.

Coordinated activities of wild-type plus mutant EZH2 drive tumor-associated
hypertrimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27) in human B-cell lymphomas.

Sneeringer CJ(1), Scott MP, Kuntz KW, Knutson SK, Pollock RM, Richon VM, Copeland
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Epizyme, Inc, 840 Memorial Drive, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

EZH2, the catalytic subunit of the PRC2 complex, catalyzes the mono- through
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27). Histone H3K27 trimethylation
is a mechanism for suppressing transcription of specific genes that are proximal 
to the site of histone modification. Point mutations of the EZH2 gene (Tyr641)
have been reported to be linked to subsets of human B-cell lymphoma. The mutant
allele is always found associated with a wild-type allele (heterozygous) in
disease cells, and the mutations were reported to ablate the enzymatic activity
of the PRC2 complex for methylating an unmodified peptide substrate. Here we
demonstrate that the WT enzyme displays greatest catalytic efficiency (k(cat)/K) 
for the zero to monomethylation reaction of H3K27 and diminished efficiency for
subsequent (mono- to di- and di- to trimethylation) reactions. In stark contrast,
the disease-associated Y641 mutations display very limited ability to perform the
first methylation reaction, but have enhanced catalytic efficiency for the
subsequent reactions, relative to the WT enzyme. These results imply that the
malignant phenotype of disease requires the combined activities of a H3K27
monomethylating enzyme (PRC2 containing WT EZH2 or EZH1) together with the mutant
PRC2s for augmented conversion of H3K27 to the trimethylated form. To our
knowledge, this is the first example of a human disease that is dependent on the 
coordinated activities of normal and disease-associated mutant enzymatic
function.

PMCID: PMC3000297
PMID: 21078963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Jan;33(2):224-35. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07493.x.
Epub 2010 Nov 11.

MiR-138 inhibits EZH2 methyltransferase expression and methylation of histone H3 
at lysine 27, and affects thermotolerance acquisition.

Kisliouk T(1), Yosefi S, Meiri N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, ARO, the Volcani Center, P.O. Box 6, Bet Dagan
50250, Israel.

Thermotolerance acquisition involves neuronal network remodeling and, hence,
alteration in the repertoire of expressed proteins. We have previously
demonstrated the role of histone H3 methylation at lysine 27 (H3K27) by EZH2
methyltransferase in the regulation of gene expression during the critical period
for the establishment of thermal control in chicks. Here we describe another
level of biological regulation, demonstrating the inhibitory role of microRNAs
(miRNAs) in the regulation of EZH2 expression in thermoregulatory system
development and functioning. During heat conditioning in the critical period for 
the establishment of thermal control, a decrease in expression of the
EZH2-targeting miR-138 occurred simultaneously with an increase in EZH2 levels in
the preoptic anterior hypothalamus. Intracranial injection of miR-138 during the 
critical period led to a transient reduction in EZH2 levels, which was
accompanied by a decrease in H3K27 methylation. Injection of miR-138 followed by 
heat conditioning also abolished EZH2 induction during heat conditioning.
Moreover, this miR-138-induced inhibition of EZH2 during the critical period
resulted in a long-term effect on EZH2 expression. A week after the treatment,
the EZH2 protein levels in conditioned and in nonconditioned chicks were
different from those in their saline-injected counterparts and the directions of 
change were opposite to each other. Finally, miR-138 injection during the
critical period disrupted the establishment of thermoregulation, manifested as a 
defective body temperature response to heat. These data demonstrate a role for
miRNAs in regulating the expression of histone-modifying enzymes, and thus
emphasize the multilevel regulation mechanism which includes both epigenetic and 
miRNA regulatory mechanisms in neuronal network organization during the critical 
period of sensory development.

© 2010 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2010 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21070394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Oncol. 2010 Dec;37(6):1537-46.

Distinct epigenetic regulation of tumor suppressor genes in putative cancer stem 
cells of solid tumors.

Yasuda H(1), Soejima K, Watanabe H, Kawada I, Nakachi I, Yoda S, Nakayama S,
Satomi R, Ikemura S, Terai H, Sato T, Suzuki S, Matsuzaki Y, Naoki K, Ishizaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Epigenetic gene regulation plays essential roles in differentiation of embryonic 
and tissue stem cells. In these benign undifferentiated cells, some polycomb
targeted genes are kept in a state of DNA hypomethylation and they have a
distinct chromatin signature termed bivalent chromatin structure to maintain
their plasticity. We hypothesized that cancer stem cells (CSC), the malignant
counterpart of these cells, are also under the control of epigenetics like benign
stem cells. We compared the DNA methylation and chromatin structure in 10 tumor
suppressor genes between CSC and differentiated cancer cells of MCF7 and Huh7
cells. We found that the level of DNA methylation was indeed significantly lower 
in CSC, while surprisingly, the bivalent chromatin structure was more
ubiquitously seen in differentiated cancer cells compared to CSC. However,
repressive marks of chromatin structure, namely H3K27me3 and EZH2, were
significantly lower in CSC. As a consequence, CSC remained in a higher
transcriptionally active chromatin state compared to differentiated cancer cells.
We found that the differentiation of CSCs is also epigenetically regulated. These
findings could help towards a comprehensive understanding of CSC, and also
improve the development of eradicative therapies against human malignancies.

PMID: 21042723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Reprogram. 2011 Feb;13(1):1-6. doi: 10.1089/cell.2010.0052. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

Ezh2 expression in astrocytes induces their dedifferentiation toward neural stem 
cells.

Sher F(1), Boddeke E, Copray S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of
Groningen , Groningen, The Netherlands.

Recently, we have demonstrated the expression of the polycomb group protein Ezh2 
in embryonic and adult neural stem cells. Although Ezh2 remained highly expressed
when neural stem cells differentiate into oligodendrocyte precursor cells, it is 
downregulated during the differentiation into neurons or astrocytes. This is in
accordance with the differentiation repressive role Ezh2 is thought to play in
the maintenance and self-renewal of stem cells. To establish the importance of
downregulation of Ezh2 for becoming astrocytes, we have studied the effect of
forced Ezh2 expression in postnatal mouse astrocytes. Upon forced expression of
this polycomb group protein, cultured astrocytes retracted their cell extensions 
and became proliferating round/bipolar cells that occasionally formed small
neurosphere-like clusters. Analysis of the expression profile of these
Ezh2-expressing astrocytes reveal downregulation of typical astrocytic genes,
like GFAP and S100, and upregulation of genes that are generally expressed in
neural stem cells, like nestin, Sox2, musashi, and CD133. However, these neural
stem cell-like cells lack a differentiation potential, indicating that
overexpression of Ezh2 alone is insufficient for a complete dedifferentiation.

PMID: 20979531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 9;107(45):19266-71. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008937107. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Binding of different histone marks differentially regulates the activity and
specificity of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2).

Xu C(1), Bian C, Yang W, Galka M, Ouyang H, Chen C, Qiu W, Liu H, Jones AE,
MacKenzie F, Pan P, Li SS, Wang H, Min J.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Toronto, 101 College Street,
Toronto, ON, Canada.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is the major methyltransferase for H3K27
methylation, a modification critical for maintaining repressed gene expression
programs throughout development. It has been previously shown that PRC2 maintains
histone methylation patterns during DNA replication in part through its ability
to bind to H3K27me3. However, the mechanism by which PRC2 recognizes H3K27me3 is 
unclear. Here we show that the WD40 domain of EED, a PRC2 component, is a
methyllysine histone-binding domain. The crystal structures of apo-EED and EED in
complex respectively with five different trimethyllysine histone peptides reveal 
that EED binds these peptides via the top face of its ß-propeller architecture.
The ammonium group of the trimethyllysine is accommodated by an aromatic cage
formed by three aromatic residues, while its aliphatic chain is flanked by a
fourth aromatic residue. Our structural data provide an explanation for the
preferential recognition of the Ala-Arg-Lys-Ser motif-containing trimethylated
H3K27, H3K9, and H1K26 marks by EED over lower methylation states and other
histone methyllysine marks. More importantly, we found that binding of different 
histone marks by EED differentially regulates the activity and specificity of
PRC2. Whereas the H3K27me3 mark stimulates the histone methyltransferase activity
of PRC2, the H1K26me3 mark inhibits PRC2 methyltransferase activity on the
nucleosome. Moreover, H1K26me3 binding switches the specificity of PRC2 from
methylating H3K27 to EED. In addition to determining the molecular basis of
EED-methyllysine recognition, our work provides the biochemical characterization 
of how the activity of a histone methyltransferase is oppositely regulated by two
histone marks.

PMCID: PMC2984210
PMID: 20974918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jan;32(1):2-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq209. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Pathologically decreased miR-26a antagonizes apoptosis and facilitates
carcinogenesis by targeting MTDH and EZH2 in breast cancer.

Zhang B(1), Liu XX, He JR, Zhou CX, Guo M, He M, Li MF, Chen GQ, Zhao Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University 
School of Medicine, China.

The role of miR-26a in carcinogenesis appears to be a complicated one, in the
sense that both oncogenic and tumor suppressive effects were reported in cancers 
such as glioblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma, respectively. Here, we report 
for the first time that miR-26a is downregulated in breast cancer specimens and
cell lines and its transient transfection initiates apoptosis of breast cancer
cell line MCF7 cells. Furthermore, retrovirus-delivered miR-26a impairs the in
vitro colony forming and in vivo tumor-loading ability of MCF7 cells.
Subsequently, MTDH and EZH2 are identified as two direct targets of miR-26a and
they are significantly upregulated in breast cancer. MCF7 xenografts with
exogenous miR-26a show that a decrease in expression of both MTDH and EZH2 is
accompanied by an increase in apoptosis. Moreover, knockdown of MTDH causes
apoptosis while reexpression of MTDH partially reverses the proapoptotic effect
of miR-26a in MCF7 cells. Our findings suggest that miR-26a functionally
antagonizes human breast carcinogenesis by targeting MTDH and EZH2.

PMID: 20952513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Mar;39(6):1993-2006. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq864. Epub 2010
Oct 15.

Chromatin and DNA methylation dynamics during retinoic acid-induced RET gene
transcriptional activation in neuroblastoma cells.

Angrisano T(1), Sacchetti S, Natale F, Cerrato A, Pero R, Keller S, Peluso S,
Perillo B, Avvedimento VE, Fusco A, Bruni CB, Lembo F, Santoro M, Chiariotti L.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare and Istituto di
Endocrinologia ed Oncologia Sperimentale CNR, Università degli Studi di Napoli
'Federico II' 80131 Naples, Italy.

Although it is well known that RET gene is strongly activated by retinoic acid
(RA) in neuroblastoma cells, the mechanisms underlying such activation are still 
poorly understood. Here we show that a complex series of molecular events, that
include modifications of both chromatin and DNA methylation state, accompany
RA-mediated RET activation. Our results indicate that the primary epigenetic
determinants of RA-induced RET activation differ between enhancer and promoter
regions. At promoter region, the main mark of RET activation was the increase of 
H3K4me3 levels while no significant changes of the methylation state of H3K27 and
H3K9 were observed. At RET enhancer region a bipartite chromatin domain was
detected in unstimulated cells and a prompt demethylation of H3K27me3 marked RET 
gene activation upon RA exposure. Moreover, ChIP experiments demonstrated that
EZH2 and MeCP2 repressor complexes were associated to the heavily methylated
enhancer region in the absence of RA while both complexes were displaced during
RA stimulation. Finally, our data show that a demethylation of a specific CpG
site at the enhancer region could favor the displacement of MeCP2 from the
heavily methylated RET enhancer region providing a novel potential mechanism for 
transcriptional regulation of methylated RA-regulated loci.

PMCID: PMC3064803
PMID: 20952403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cancer Cell. 2010 Oct 19;18(4):316-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.09.006.

Epigenetic antagonism between polycomb and SWI/SNF complexes during oncogenic
transformation.

Wilson BG(1), Wang X, Shen X, McKenna ES, Lemieux ME, Cho YJ, Koellhoffer EC,
Pomeroy SL, Orkin SH, Roberts CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Children's
Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2011 Jan 18;19(1):153.

Epigenetic alterations have been increasingly implicated in oncogenesis. Analysis
of Drosophila mutants suggests that Polycomb and SWI/SNF complexes can serve
antagonistic developmental roles. However, the relevance of this relationship to 
human disease is unclear. Here, we have investigated functional relationships
between these epigenetic regulators in oncogenic transformation. Mechanistically,
we show that loss of the SNF5 tumor suppressor leads to elevated expression of
the Polycomb gene EZH2 and that Polycomb targets are broadly H3K27-trimethylated 
and repressed in SNF5-deficient fibroblasts and cancers. Further, we show
antagonism between SNF5 and EZH2 in the regulation of stem cell-associated
programs and that Snf5 loss activates those programs. Finally, using conditional 
mouse models, we show that inactivation of Ezh2 blocks tumor formation driven by 
Snf5 loss.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2957473
PMID: 20951942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2011 Jun;37(4):381-94. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2010.01132.x.

Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) is up-regulated in malignant gliomas and in glioma
stem-like cells.

Orzan F(1), Pellegatta S, Poliani PL, Pisati F, Caldera V, Menghi F, Kapetis D,
Marras C, Schiffer D, Finocchiaro G.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione I.R.C.C.S Istituto Neurologico C. Besta, Milan, Italy.

AIMS: Proteins of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) are epigenetic gene
silencers and are involved in tumour development. Their oncogenic function might 
be associated with their role in stem cell maintenance. The histone
methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) is a key member of PRC2 function: we
have investigated its expression and function in gliomas.
METHODS: EZH2 expression was studied in grade II-IV gliomas and in glioma
stem-like cells (GSC) by quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry. Effects of
EZH2 down-regulation were analysed by treating GSC with the histone deacetylase
(HDAC) inhibitor suberoylanide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and by shRNA.
RESULTS: DNA microarray analysis showed that EZH2 is highly expressed in murine
and human GSC. Real-time PCR on gliomas of different grade (n = 66) indicated
that EZH2 is more expressed in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) than in low-grade
gliomas (P = 0.0013). This was confirmed by immunohistochemistry on an
independent set of 106 gliomas. Treatment with SAHA caused significant
up-regulation of PRC2 predicted target genes, GSC disruption and decreased
expression of EZH2 and of the stem cell marker CD133. Inhibition of EZH2
expression by shRNA was associated with a significant decrease of glioma
proliferation.
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that EZH2 plays a role in glioma progression and
encourage the therapeutic targeting of these malignancies by HDAC inhibitors.

© 2011 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2011 British
Neuropathological Society.

PMID: 20946108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18433-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1009911107. Epub 2010 Oct 11.

Dimerization of a viral SET protein endows its function.

Wei H(1), Zhou MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
1425 Madison Avenue, Box 1677, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Histone modifications are regarded as the most indispensible phenomena in
epigenetics. Of these modifications, lysine methylation is of the greatest
complexity and importance as site- and state-specific lysine methylation exerts a
plethora of effects on chromatin structure and gene transcription. Notably,
paramecium bursaria chlorella viruses encode a conserved SET domain
methyltransferase, termed vSET, that functions to suppress host transcription by 
methylating histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27), a mark for eukaryotic gene
silencing. Unlike mammalian lysine methyltransferases (KMTs), vSET functions only
as a dimer, but the underlying mechanism has remained elusive. In this study, we 
demonstrate that dimeric vSET operates with negative cooperativity between the
two active sites and engages in H3K27 methylation one site at a time. New atomic 
structures of vSET in the free form and a ternary complex with S-adenosyl
homocysteine and a histone H3 peptide and biochemical analyses reveal the
molecular origin for the negative cooperativity and explain the substrate
specificity of H3K27 methyltransferases. Our study suggests a "walking"
mechanism, by which vSET acts all by itself to globally methylate host H3K27,
which is accomplished by the mammalian EZH2 KMT only in the context of the
Polycomb repressive complex.

PMCID: PMC2972924
PMID: 20937900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1108-14. doi: 10.1038/ncb2116. Epub 2010 Oct 10.

Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate epigenetic gene silencing through
phosphorylation of EZH2.

Chen S(1), Bohrer LR, Rai AN, Pan Y, Gan L, Zhou X, Bagchi A, Simon JA, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) protein, enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), has an
essential role in promoting histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and
epigenetic gene silencing. This function of EZH2 is important for cell
proliferation and inhibition of cell differentiation, and is implicated in cancer
progression. Here, we demonstrate that under physiological conditions,
cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (CDK1) and cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2)
phosphorylate EZH2 at Thr 350 in an evolutionarily conserved motif.
Phosphorylation of Thr 350 is important for recruitment of EZH2 and maintenance
of H3K27me3 levels at EZH2-target loci. Blockage of Thr 350 phosphorylation not
only diminishes the global effect of EZH2 on gene silencing, it also mitigates
EZH2-mediated cell proliferation and migration. These results demonstrate that
CDK-mediated phosphorylation is a key mechanism governing EZH2 function and that 
there is a link between the cell-cycle machinery and epigenetic gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC3292434
PMID: 20935635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. BMC Cancer. 2010 Oct 4;10:524. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-524.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) expression is an independent prognostic factor
in renal cell carcinoma.

Wagener N(1), Macher-Goeppinger S, Pritsch M, Hüsing J, Hoppe-Seyler K,
Schirmacher P, Pfitzenmaier J, Haferkamp A, Hoppe-Seyler F, Hohenfellner M.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers
(F065), Im Neuenheimer Feld 242, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene exerts oncogene-like
activities and its (over)expression has been linked to several human
malignancies. Here, we studied a possible association between EZH2 expression and
prognosis in patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
METHODS: EZH2 protein expression in RCC specimens was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray (TMA) containing RCC tumor tissue 
and corresponding normal tissue samples of 520 patients. For immunohistochemical 
assessment of EZH2 expression, nuclear staining quantity was evaluated using a
semiquantitative score. The effect of EZH2 expression on cancer specific survival
(CSS) was assessed by univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses.
RESULTS: During follow-up, 147 patients (28%) had died of their disease, median
follow-up of patients still alive was 6.0 years (range 0-16.1 years). EZH2
nuclear staining was present in tumor cores of 411 (79%) patients. A multivariate
Cox regression analysis revealed that high nuclear EZH2 expression was an
independent predictor of poor CSS (> 25-50% vs. 0%: HR 2.72, p = 0.025) in
patients suffering from non-metastatic RCC. Apart from high nuclear EZH2
expression, tumor stage and Fuhrman's grading emerged as significant prognostic
markers. In metastatic disease, nuclear EZH2 expression and histopathological
subtype were independent predictive parameters of poor CSS (EZH2: 1-5%: HR 2.63, 
p = 0.043, >5-25%: HR 3.35, p = 0.013, >25%-50%: HR 4.92, p = 0.003, all compared
to 0%: HR 0.36, p = 0.025, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: This study defines EZH2 as a powerful independent unfavourable
prognostic marker of CSS in patients with metastatic and non-metastatic RCC.

PMCID: PMC2958940
PMID: 20920340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cancer. 2010 Sep 30;9:265. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-265.

Clinical significance of Polycomb gene expression in brain tumors.

Crea F(1), Hurt EM, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Stem Cell Section, Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer
Institute at Frederick, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Frederick, MD, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are crucial for neural cancer stem cell (NCSC)
self-renewal. However, the relative expression levels of PcG genes in different
subtypes of brain tumors, their prognostic role and their effects on cellular
pathways have not been investigated. For this purpose, we queried the Oncomine
database and found that 4 PcG genes (EZH2, RBBP7, SUZ12, YY1) are specifically
expressed in brain tumors. EZH2 expression increases with tumor grade in adult
and pediatric brain tumors, and is a poor prognostic factor. In glioblastoma,
EZH2 inhibits differentiation, and activates cancer-, cell cycle- and cellular
movement-related genes. In keeping with previously published data, our results
suggest that EZH2 is both a prognostic factor and a promising therapy target in
brain tumors.

PMCID: PMC2958980
PMID: 20920292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Oct 8;7(4):455-69. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.08.013.

TNF/p38a/polycomb signaling to Pax7 locus in satellite cells links inflammation
to the epigenetic control of muscle regeneration.

Palacios D(1), Mozzetta C, Consalvi S, Caretti G, Saccone V, Proserpio V, Marquez
VE, Valente S, Mai A, Forcales SV, Sartorelli V, Puri PL.

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute (DTI), IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia and European
Brain Research Institute, 00143 Roma, Italy.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Oct 8;7(4):422-4.

How regeneration cues are converted into the epigenetic information that controls
gene expression in adult stem cells is currently unknown. We identified an
inflammation-activated signaling in muscle stem (satellite) cells, by which the
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) represses Pax7 expression during muscle
regeneration. TNF-activated p38a kinase promotes the interaction between YY1 and 
PRC2, via threonine 372 phosphorylation of EZH2, the enzymatic subunit of the
complex, leading to the formation of repressive chromatin on Pax7 promoter. TNF-a
antibodies stimulate satellite cell proliferation in regenerating muscles of
dystrophic or normal mice. Genetic knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of the
enzymatic components of the p38/PRC2 signaling--p38a and EZH2--invariably promote
Pax7 expression and expansion of satellite cells that retain their
differentiation potential upon signaling resumption. Genetic knockdown of Pax7
impaired satellite cell proliferation in response to p38 inhibition, thereby
establishing the biological link between p38/PRC2 signaling to Pax7 and satellite
cell decision to proliferate or differentiate.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2951277
PMID: 20887952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Endocrinology. 2010 Nov;151(11):5136-45. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0436. Epub 2010 Sep
29.

Androgens suppress EZH2 expression via retinoblastoma (RB) and p130-dependent
pathways: a potential mechanism of androgen-refractory progression of prostate
cancer.

Bohrer LR(1), Chen S, Hallstrom TC, Huang H.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, 
USA.

Androgens and the androgen receptor are important for both normal prostate
development and progression of prostate cancer (PCa). However, the underlying
mechanisms are not fully understood. The Polycomb protein enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) functions as an epigenetic gene silencer and plays a role in
oncogenesis by promoting cell proliferation and invasion. EZH2 has been
implicated in human PCa progression, because its expression is often elevated in 
hormone-refractory PCa. Here, we demonstrated that expression of EZH2 is lower in
androgen-sensitive LNCaP PCa cells compared with Rf and C4-2 cells, two
androgen-refractory sublines that are derived from LNCaP cells. Androgen ablation
by castration increased the level of EZH2 proteins in LNCaP xenografts in mice.
In contrast, treatment of LNCaP cells in culture with the synthetic androgen
methyltrieolone (R1881) at doses of 1 nm or higher suppressed EZH2 expression.
Moreover, our data suggest that androgen repression of EZH2 requires a functional
androgen receptor and this effect is mediated through the retinoblastoma protein 
and its related protein p130. We further showed that androgen treatment not only 
increases expression of EZH2 target genes DAB2IP and E-cadherin but also affects 
LNCaP cell migration. Our results reveal that androgens function as an epigenetic
regulator in prostatic cells by repression of EZH2 expression through the
retinoblastoma protein and p130-dependent pathways. Our findings also suggest
that blockade of EZH2 derepression during androgen deprivation therapy may
represent an effective tactic for the treatment of androgen-refractory PCa.

PMCID: PMC2954725
PMID: 20881251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9402-12. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1199. Epub 
2010 Sep 23.

ANCCA/ATAD2 overexpression identifies breast cancer patients with poor prognosis,
acting to drive proliferation and survival of triple-negative cells through
control of B-Myb and EZH2.

Kalashnikova EV(1), Revenko AS, Gemo AT, Andrews NP, Tepper CG, Zou JX, Cardiff
RD, Borowsky AD, Chen HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, and UC 
Davis Cancer Center/Basic Sciences, University of California at Davis,
Sacramento, California 95817, USA.

Chromatin coregulators are important factors in tumorigenesis and cancer
progression. ANCCA is an AAA+ ATPase and a bromodomain-containing nuclear
coactivator for the estrogen and androgen receptors that is crucial for assembly 
of chromatin-modifying complexes and proliferation of hormone-responsive cancer
cells. In this study, we show that ANCCA is overexpressed in >70% of breast
tumors and that its high protein level correlates well with tumor histologic
grades (P<0.0001), highlighting ANCCA as a prognostic factor for poor overall
survival and disease recurrence. Strikingly, high-level ANCCA correlated with
triple-negative tumors that represent highly aggressive disease. Analysis of
ANCCA transcript levels in multiple expression profiles of breast cancer
identified ANCCA as a common signature gene, indicating that elevated transcripts
also strongly correlate with tumor metastasis and poor survival. Biological and
mechanistic investigations revealed that ANCCA is crucial for proliferation and
survival of triple-negative/basal-like cancer cells and that it controls the
expression of B-Myb, histone methyltransferase EZH2, and an Rb-E2F core program
for proliferation, along with a subset of key mitotic kinesins and cell survival 
genes (IRS2, VEGF, and Akt1). In particular, ANCCA overexpression correlated
strongly with EZH2 in tumors. Our results suggest that ANCCA may integrate
multiple oncogenic programs in breast cancer, serving in particular as a
prognostic marker and a therapeutic target for triple-negative cancers.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2982862
PMID: 20864510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Leuk Res. 2011 Jan;35(1):e6-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.08.018. Epub 2010 Sep 
21.

Mutational analysis of EZH2 codon 641 in non-Hodgkin lymphomas and leukemias.

Park SW, Chung NG, Eom HS, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

PMID: 20863566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Nov;51(11):2135-6. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.510897. Epub
2010 Sep 21.

Somatic mutations altering Tyr641 of EZH2 are rare in primary central nervous
system lymphoma.

Pellissery S, Richter J, Haake A, Montesinos-Rongen M, Deckert M, Siebert R.

PMID: 20858097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Med. 2011 Jan-Feb;17(1-2):12-20. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00103. Epub 2010
Sep 10.

High expression of H3K27me3 in human hepatocellular carcinomas correlates closely
with vascular invasion and predicts worse prognosis in patients.

Cai MY(1), Hou JH, Rao HL, Luo RZ, Li M, Pei XQ, Lin MC, Guan XY, Kung HF, Zeng
YX, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
China.

It has been suggested that trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3)
is a crucial epigenetic process in tumorigenesis. However, the expression
dynamics of H3K27me3 and its clinicopathological/prognostic significance in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are unclear. In this study, immunohistochemical
analysis (IHC) was used to examine protein expression of H3K27me3 in HCC tissues 
from two independent cohorts and corresponding nontumorous hepatocellular tissues
by tissue microarray. The optimal cutpoint of H3K27me3 expression was assessed by
the X-tile program. Our results showed that the cutpoint for high expression of
H3K27me3 in HCCs was determined when more than 70% of the tumor cells showed
positive staining. High expression of H3K27me3 was observed in 134 of 212 (63.2%)
and 76 of 126 (60.4%) of HCCs in the testing and validation cohorts,
respectively. Correlation analysis demonstrated that high expression of H3K27me3 
in HCCs was significantly correlated with large tumor size, multiplicity, poor
differentiation, advanced clinical stage and vascular invasion (P < 0.05). In
addition, high expression of H3K27me3 in HCC patients was associated closely with
shortened survival time, independent of serum a-fetoprotein levels, tumor size
and multiplicity, clinical stage, vascular invasion and relapse as evidenced by
univariate and multivariate analysis in both cohorts (P < 0.05). In different
subsets of HCC patients, H3K27me3 expression was also a prognostic indicator in
patients with stage II tumors (P < 0.05). Thus, these findings provide evidence
that a high expression of H3K27me3, as detected by IHC, correlates closely with
vascular invasion of HCCs and is an independent molecular marker for poor
prognosis in patients with HCC.

PMCID: PMC3022987
PMID: 20844838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2010 Sep;37(9):1650-3.

[Molecular mechanisms involved in epigenetic alterations in cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Toyota M(1), Suzuki H, Nishizaka T, Sato A, Yamashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry, Sapporo Medical University, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

Epigenetic alterations such as DNA methylation and histone modification play a
role in gene silencing in tumorigenesis. DNA methylation affects the expression
of genes involved in cell cycle checkpoint, apoptosis, and DNA repair. Recently, 
epigenetic alterations are shown to play a role in silencing microRNA. Mutations 
of DNA methyltransferase and histone modification enzymes such as DNMT3A, UTX and
EZH2 have been shown in various types of tumors. Genes involved in epigenetic
regulation may be novel targets of cancer therapy in the near future.

PMID: 20841926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 13;30(2):223-33. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.409. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

BCR-ABL-mediated upregulation of PRAME is responsible for knocking down TRAIL in 
CML patients.

De Carvalho DD(1), Binato R, Pereira WO, Leroy JM, Colassanti MD, Proto-Siqueira 
R, Bueno-Da-Silva AE, Zago MA, Zanichelli MA, Abdelhay E, Castro FA, Jacysyn JF, 
Amarante-Mendes GP.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Imunologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de 
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-TNFSF10 (TRAIL), a member
of the TNF-a family and a death receptor ligand, was shown to selectively kill
tumor cells. Not surprisingly, TRAIL is downregulated in a variety of tumor
cells, including BCR-ABL-positive leukemia. Although we know much about the
molecular basis of TRAIL-mediated cell killing, the mechanism responsible for
TRAIL inhibition in tumors remains elusive because (a) TRAIL can be regulated by 
retinoic acid (RA); (b) the tumor antigen preferentially expressed antigen of
melanoma (PRAME) was shown to inhibit transcription of RA receptor target genes
through the polycomb protein, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2); and (c) we have
found that TRAIL is inversely correlated with BCR-ABL in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML) patients. Thus, we decided to investigate the association of PRAME, EZH2
and TRAIL in BCR-ABL-positive leukemia. Here, we demonstrate that PRAME, but not 
EZH2, is upregulated in BCR-ABL cells and is associated with the progression of
disease in CML patients. There is a positive correlation between PRAME and
BCR-ABL and an inverse correlation between PRAME and TRAIL in these patients.
Importantly, knocking down PRAME or EZH2 by RNA interference in a
BCR-ABL-positive cell line restores TRAIL expression. Moreover, there is an
enrichment of EZH2 binding on the promoter region of TRAIL in a CML cell line.
This binding is lost after PRAME knockdown. Finally, knocking down PRAME or EZH2,
and consequently induction of TRAIL expression, enhances Imatinib sensibility.
Taken together, our data reveal a novel regulatory mechanism responsible for
lowering TRAIL expression and provide the basis of alternative targets for
combined therapeutic strategies for CML.

PMID: 20838376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proteomics. 2010 Oct;10(19):3506-14. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201000023.

Development of selected reaction monitoring-MS methodology to measure peptide
biomarkers in prostate cancer.

Yocum AK(1), Khan AP, Zhao R, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death. The current modality 
of diagnosis, the measurement of serum PSA, not only suffers from lack of
specificity, but does not distinguish clinical cases in which current treatment
measures would be most successful, i.e. aggressive, life-threatening tumors. A
multiplexed MS methodology, selected reaction monitoring-MS/MS coupled with
stable isotope dilution (SID), was developed and tested in both cells lines and
clinical tissue samples. Standard curves were generated for two peptides
representing PSA and one peptide from each of two additional orthogonally
validated biomarkers, AMACR and EZH2. The standard curves show high
reproducibility, sensitivity, and good linearity. All four peptides were then
measured in six clinically relevant cell lines and are in agreement with the
biochemical characteristics of each individual cell line. The SID selected
reaction monitoring-MS/MS methodology was then transferred to tissue samples, in 
which the assay shows potential to differentiate benign disease from localized
cancer and localized cancer from aggressive metastatic disease. These results
establish the preliminary development of a rational targeted MS platform that
strives to bridge the gap between discovery and validation of biomarkers for the 
detection of prostate cancer.

PMID: 20821805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncogene. 2011 Jan 20;30(3):301-12. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.412. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Control of mammary tumor differentiation by SKI-606 (bosutinib).

Hebbard L(1), Cecena G, Golas J, Sawada J, Ellies LG, Charbono A, Williams R,
Jimenez RE, Wankell M, Arndt KT, DeJoy SQ, Rollins RA, Diesl V, Follettie M, Chen
L, Rosfjord E, Cardiff RD, Komatsu M, Boschelli F, Oshima RG.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.

C-Src is infrequently mutated in human cancers but it mediates oncogenic signals 
of many activated growth factor receptors and thus remains a key target for
cancer therapy. However, the broad function of Src in many cell types and
processes requires evaluation of Src-targeted therapeutics within a normal
developmental and immune-competent environment. In an effort to understand the
appropriate clinical use of Src inhibitors, we tested an Src inhibitor, SKI-606
(bosutinib), in the MMTV-PyVmT transgenic mouse model of breast cancer. Tumor
formation in this model is dependent on the presence of Src, but the necessity of
Src kinase activity for tumor formation has not been determined. Furthermore, Src
inhibitors have not been examined in an autochthonous tumor model that permits
assessment of effects on different stages of tumor progression. Here we show that
oral administration of SKI-606 inhibited the phosphorylation of Src in mammary
tumors and caused a rapid decrease in the Ezh2 Polycomb group histone H3K27
methyltransferase and an increase in epithelial organization. SKI-606 prevented
the appearance of palpable tumors in over 50% of the animals and stopped tumor
growth in older animals with pre-existing tumors. These antitumor effects were
accompanied by decreased cellular proliferation, altered tumor blood vessel
organization and dramatically increased differentiation to lactational and
epidermal cell fates. SKI-606 controls the development of mammary tumors by
inducing differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3000443
PMID: 20818417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 30;5(8):e12479. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012479.

TNF inhibits Notch-1 in skeletal muscle cells by Ezh2 and DNA methylation
mediated repression: implications in duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Acharyya S(1), Sharma SM, Cheng AS, Ladner KJ, He W, Kline W, Wang H, Ostrowski
MC, Huang TH, Guttridge DC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genetics and Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and
Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Classical NF-kappaB signaling functions as a negative regulator of
skeletal myogenesis through potentially multiple mechanisms. The inhibitory
actions of TNFalpha on skeletal muscle differentiation are mediated in part
through sustained NF-kappaB activity. In dystrophic muscles, NF-kappaB activity
is compartmentalized to myofibers to inhibit regeneration by limiting the number 
of myogenic progenitor cells. This regulation coincides with elevated levels of
muscle derived TNFalpha that is also under IKKbeta and NF-kappaB control.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Based on these findings we speculated that in
DMD, TNFalpha secreted from myotubes inhibits regeneration by directly acting on 
satellite cells. Analysis of several satellite cell regulators revealed that
TNFalpha is capable of inhibiting Notch-1 in satellite cells and C2C12 myoblasts,
which was also found to be dependent on NF-kappaB. Notch-1 inhibition occurred at
the mRNA level suggesting a transcriptional repression mechanism. Unlike its
classical mode of action, TNFalpha stimulated the recruitment of Ezh2 and Dnmt-3b
to coordinate histone and DNA methylation, respectively. Dnmt-3b recruitment was 
dependent on Ezh2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We propose that in dystrophic muscles, elevated levels 
of TNFalpha and NF-kappaB inhibit the regenerative potential of satellite cells
via epigenetic silencing of the Notch-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC2930001
PMID: 20814569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Sep 7;107(36):15957-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002530107. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Ezh2, the histone methyltransferase of PRC2, regulates the balance between
self-renewal and differentiation in the cerebral cortex.

Pereira JD(1), Sansom SN, Smith J, Dobenecker MW, Tarakhovsky A, Livesey FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gurdon Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, United 
Kingdom.

Multipotent progenitor cells of the cerebral cortex balance self-renewal and
differentiation to produce complex neural lineages in a fixed temporal order in a
cell-autonomous manner. We studied the role of the polycomb epigenetic system, a 
chromatin-based repressive mechanism, in controlling cortical progenitor cell
self-renewal and differentiation. We found that the histone methyltransferase of 
polycomb repressive complex 2 (PCR2), enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), is
essential for controlling the rate at which development progresses within
cortical progenitor cell lineages. Loss of function of Ezh2 removes the
repressive mark of trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in cortical
progenitor cells and also prevents its establishment in postmitotic neurons.
Removal of this repressive chromatin modification results in marked up-regulation
in gene expression, the consequence of which is a shift in the balance between
self-renewal and differentiation toward differentiation, both directly to neurons
and indirectly via basal progenitor cell genesis. Although the temporal order of 
neurogenesis and gliogenesis are broadly conserved under these conditions, the
timing of neurogenesis, the relative numbers of different cell types, and the
switch to gliogenesis are all altered, narrowing the neurogenic period for
progenitor cells and reducing their neuronal output. As a consequence, the timing
of cortical development is altered significantly after loss of PRC2 function.

PMCID: PMC2936600
PMID: 20798045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Blood. 2010 Dec 9;116(24):5247-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-280149. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

EZH2-mediated epigenetic silencing in germinal center B cells contributes to
proliferation and lymphomagenesis.

Velichutina I(1), Shaknovich R, Geng H, Johnson NA, Gascoyne RD, Melnick AM,
Elemento O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY,
USA.

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of the PRC2 Polycomb complex and mediates
transcriptional repression through its histone methyltransferase activity. EZH2
is up-regulated in normal germinal center (GC) B cells and is implicated in
lymphomagenesis. To explore the transcriptional programs controlled by EZH2, we
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-on-chip) in GC cells and found that
it binds approximately 1800 promoters, often associated with DNA sequences
similar to Droso-phila Polycomb response elements. While EZH2 targets overlapped 
extensively between GC B cells and embryonic stem cells, we also observed a large
GC-specific EZH2 regulatory program. These genes are preferentially histone 3
lysine 27-trimethylated and repressed in GC B cells and include several key cell 
cycle-related tumor suppressor genes. Accordingly, siRNA-mediated down-regulation
of EZH2 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells resulted in acute cell
cycle arrest at the G(1)/S transition and up-regulation of its tumor suppressor
target genes. At the DNA level, EZH2-bound promoters are hypomethylated in GC B
cells, but many of them are aberrantly hypermethylated in DLBCL, suggesting
disruption of normal epigenetic processes in these cells. EZH2 is thus involved
in regulating a specific epigenetic program in normal GCs, including silencing of
antiproliferative genes, which may contribute to the malignant transformation of 
GC B cells into DLBCLs.

PMCID: PMC3012542
PMID: 20736451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Leukemia. 2010 Oct;24(10):1799-804. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.167. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Novel homo- and hemizygous mutations in EZH2 in myeloid malignancies.

Makishima H, Jankowska AM, Tiu RV, Szpurka H, Sugimoto Y, Hu Z, Saunthararajah Y,
Guinta K, Keddache MA, Putnam P, Sekeres MA, Moliterno AR, List AF, McDevitt MA, 
Maciejewski JP.

PMID: 20724984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Clin Invest. 2010 Sep;120(9):3209-19. doi: 10.1172/JCI40034. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Epigenetic basis for aberrant upregulation of autoantigen genes in humans with
ANCA vasculitis.

Ciavatta DJ(1), Yang J, Preston GA, Badhwar AK, Xiao H, Hewins P, Nester CM,
Pendergraft WF 3rd, Magnuson TR, Jennette JC, Falk RJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of North Carolina Kidney Center, UNC-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599-7155, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Nov;6(11):614.

Antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA) causes vascular injury that leads 
to small-vessel vasculitis. Patients with ANCA aberrantly express neutrophil
granule-encoding genes, including 2 that encode autoantigens: proteinase 3 (PR3) 
and myeloperoxidase (MPO). To uncover a potential transcriptional regulatory
mechanism for PR3 and MPO disrupted in patients with ANCA vasculitis, we examined
the PR3 and MPO loci in neutrophils from ANCA patients and healthy control
individuals for epigenetic modifications associated with gene silencing. We found
that levels of the chromatin modification H3K27me3, which is associated with gene
silencing, were depleted at PR3 and MPO loci in ANCA patients compared with
healthy controls. Interestingly, in both patients and controls, DNA was
unmethylated at a CpG island in PR3, whereas in healthy controls, DNA was
methylated at a CpG island in MPO. Consistent with decreased levels of H3K27me3, 
JMJD3, the demethylase specific for H3K27me3, was preferentially expressed in
ANCA patients versus healthy controls. In addition, we describe a mechanism for
recruiting the H3K27 methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) to PR3 
and MPO loci mediated by RUNX3. RUNX3 message was decreased in patients compared 
with healthy controls, and may also be under epigenetic control. DNA methylation 
was increased at the RUNX3 promoter in ANCA patients. These data indicate that
epigenetic modifications associated with gene silencing are perturbed at ANCA
autoantigen-encoding genes, potentially contributing to inappropriate expression 
of PR3 and MPO in ANCA patients.

PMCID: PMC2929711
PMID: 20714105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Cancer. 2010 Aug;46(12):2295-303.

MicroRNA-101 is down-regulated in gastric cancer and involved in cell migration
and invasion.

Wang HJ(1), Ruan HJ, He XJ, Ma YY, Jiang XT, Xia YJ, Ye ZY, Tao HQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou, 310014
Zhejiang, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNA molecules playing regulatory roles by
repressing translation or cleaving RNA transcripts. Dysregulated expression of
miRNAs is associated with several diseases, including cancer. In this study, we
report that the expression of microRNA-101 (miR-101) is down-regulated in gastric
cancer tissues and cells, and ectopic expression of miR-101 significantly
inhibits cellular proliferation, migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells
by targeting EZH2, Cox-2, Mcl-1 and Fos. Our animal study also indicates that
miR-101 could potentially suppress tumour growth in vivo. Collectively, these
results suggest that miR-101 may function as a tumour suppressor in gastric
cancer, as it has an inhibitory role not only in cellular proliferation,
migration and invasion in vitro, but also in tumour growth in vivo.

PMID: 20712078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Cancer Cell. 2010 Aug 9;18(2):185-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.06.016.

Regulation of tumor angiogenesis by EZH2.

Lu C(1), Han HD, Mangala LS, Ali-Fehmi R, Newton CS, Ozbun L, Armaiz-Pena GN, Hu 
W, Stone RL, Munkarah A, Ravoori MK, Shahzad MM, Lee JW, Mora E, Langley RR,
Carroll AR, Matsuo K, Spannuth WA, Schmandt R, Jennings NB, Goodman BW, Jaffe RB,
Nick AM, Kim HS, Guven EO, Chen YH, Li LY, Hsu MC, Coleman RL, Calin GA, Denkbas 
EB, Lim JY, Lee JS, Kundra V, Birrer MJ, Hung MC, Lopez-Berestein G, Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, U.T. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

Although VEGF-targeted therapies are showing promise, new angiogenesis targets
are needed to make additional gains. Here, we show that increased Zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) expression in either tumor cells or in tumor vasculature is predictive of 
poor clinical outcome. The increase in endothelial EZH2 is a direct result of
VEGF stimulation by a paracrine circuit that promotes angiogenesis by methylating
and silencing vasohibin1 (vash1). Ezh2 silencing in the tumor-associated
endothelial cells inhibited angiogenesis mediated by reactivation of VASH1, and
reduced ovarian cancer growth, which is further enhanced in combination with ezh2
silencing in tumor cells. Collectively, these data support the potential for
targeting ezh2 as an important therapeutic approach.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2923653
PMID: 20708159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Oct 15;10(8):788-95. Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Overexpression of EZH2 contributes to acquired cisplatin resistance in ovarian
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.

Hu S(1), Yu L, Li Z, Shen Y, Wang J, Cai J, Xiao L, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Enhancer of Zeste Homologue 2 (EZH2), a specific histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
methyltransferase, plays a critical role in tumorigenesis and cancer progression 
through epigenetic gene silencing and chromatin remodeling. However, the role of 
EZH2 in chemotherapy resistance is unknown. In this study, we found that EZH2 was
overexpressed in cisplatin-resistant ovarian cancer cells compared with
cisplatin-sensitive cells. Knockdown of EZH2 by RNA interference (RNAi)
resensitized drug-resistant ovarian cancer A2780/DDP cells to cisplatin and
decreased the level of H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). Moreover, EZH2
downregulation suppressed cell proliferation and caused G2/M cell cycle arrest in
A2780/DDP cells. Loss of EZH2 also enhanced sensibility of tumor xenografts to
cisplatin and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Our results indicate that EZH2 is
essential for chemotherapy resistance in cisplatin-resistant cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo, which is probably through H3K27 methylation as well as
regulation of cell proliferation. EZH2 could be a potential novel epigenetic
target to overcome drug resistance.

PMID: 20686362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Lett. 2010 Nov 1;297(1):109-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.05.003. Epub
2010 Jun 1.

RNAi targeting EZH2 inhibits tumor growth and liver metastasis of pancreatic
cancer in vivo.

Chen Y(1), Xie D, Yin Li W, Man Cheung C, Yao H, Chan CY, Chan CY, Xu FP, Liu YH,
Sung JJ, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.
b110796@mailserv.cuhk.edu.hk

The function of EZH2 in tumorigenesis and liver metastasis of pancreatic cancer
has never been elucidated in vivo. EZH2 was overexpressed in pancreatic
carcinomas and its overexpression was associated with tumor differentiation and
pT status. Suppression of EZH2 caused a significant growth inhibition of
pancreatic cancer cells in vitro and markedly diminished their tumorigenicity in 
vivo. Knock-down of EZH2 inhibited liver metastasis of pancreatic cancer in vivo.
EZH2 has a crucial role in tumor growth and liver metastasis of pancreatic
cancer.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20684863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Res. 2010 Oct;20(10):1109-16. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.114. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Role of H3K27 methylation in the regulation of lncRNA expression.

Wu SC(1), Kallin EM, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Once thought to be transcriptional noise, large non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have
recently been demonstrated to be functional molecules. The cell-type-specific
expression patterns of lncRNAs suggest that their transcription may be regulated 
epigenetically. Using a custom-designed microarray, here we examine the
expression profile of lncRNAs in embryonic stem (ES) cells, lineage-restricted
neuronal progenitor cells, and terminally differentiated fibroblasts. In
addition, we also analyze the relationship between their expression and their
promoter H3K4 and H3K27 methylation patterns. We find that numerous lncRNAs in
these cell types undergo changes in the levels of expression and promoter H3K4me3
and H3K27me3. Interestingly, lncRNAs that are expressed at lower levels in ES
cells exhibit higher levels of H3K27me3 at their promoters. Consistent with this 
result, knockdown of the H3K27me3 methyltransferase Ezh2 results in derepression 
of these lncRNAs in ES cells. Thus, our results establish a role for
Ezh2-mediated H3K27 methylation in lncRNA silencing in ES cells and reveal that
lncRNAs are subject to epigenetic regulation in a similar manner to that of the
protein-coding genes.

PMCID: PMC2949548
PMID: 20680032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Prostate Cancer Prostatic Dis. 2010 Dec;13(4):369-75. doi: 10.1038/pcan.2010.25. 
Epub 2010 Aug 3.

Effect of androgen deprivation therapy on the expression of prostate cancer
biomarkers MSMB and MSMB-binding protein CRISP3.

Dahlman A(1), Edsjö A, Halldén C, Persson JL, Fine SW, Lilja H, Gerald W,
Bjartell A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Division of Urological Cancers, Lund
University, University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden.

We have investigated the effects of short-term neoadjuvant and long-term androgen
deprivation therapies (ADTs) on ß-microseminoprotein (MSMB) and cysteine-rich
secretory protein-3 (CRISP3) expression in prostate cancer patients. We also
studied if MSMB expression was related to genotype and epigenetic silencing.
Using an Affymetrix cDNA microarray analysis, we investigated the expression of
MSMB, CRISP3, androgen receptor (AR), KLK3 and Enhancer of Zeste Homologue-2
(EZH2) in tissue from prostate cancer patients receiving (n=17) or not receiving 
(n=23) ADT before radical prostatectomy. MSMB, CRISP3 and AR were studied in
tissue from the same patients undergoing TURP before and during ADT (n=16). MSMB 
genotyping of these patients was performed by TaqMan PCR. MSMB and KLK3
expression levels decreased during ADT. Expression levels of AR and CRISP3 were
not affected by short-term ADT but were high in castration-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) and metastases. Levels of EZH2 were also high in metastases, where 
MSMB was low. Genotyping of the MSMB rs10993994 polymorphism showed that the TT
genotype conveys poor MSMB expression. MSMB expression is influenced by
androgens, but also by genotype and epigenetic silencing. AR and CRISP3
expression are not influenced by short-term ADT, and high levels were found in
CRPC and metastases.

PMID: 20680031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 15;9(14):2705-6. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

HDAC inhibitors repress the polycomb protein BMI1.

Grant S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University Health Sciences Center, Richmond, VA, USA.
stgrant@vcu.edu

PMCID: PMC3713104
PMID: 20676031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 15;9(14):2705. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

HDAC inhibitors conquer Polycomb proteins.

Yaswen P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkley, CA, USA. P_Yaswen@lbl.gov.

PMID: 20676029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Dec;51(12):6784-92. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4730.
Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Dynamic patterns of histone lysine methylation in the developing retina.

Rao RC(1), Tchedre KT, Malik MT, Coleman N, Fang Y, Marquez VE, Chen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Schepens Eye Research Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

PURPOSE: Histone lysine methylation (HKM) is an important epigenetic mechanism
that establishes cell-specific gene expression and functions in development.
However, epigenetic control of retinal development is poorly understood. To study
the roles of HKM in retinogenesis, the authors examined the dynamic changes of
three HKM modifications and of two of their regulators, the histone
methyltransferases (HMTases) Ezh2 and G9a, in the mouse retina.
METHODS: Retinal sections and lysates from embryonic day 16 through adult were
processed for immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting using antibodies against
various marks and HMTases. To further analyze the biological functions of HKM,
the effects of small molecule inhibitors of HMTases were examined in vitro.
RESULTS: Methylation marks of trimethyl lysine 4 and 27 on histone H3 (H3K4me3
and H3K27me3) were detected primarily in differentiated retinal neurons in the
embryonic and adult retina. In contrast, dimethyl lysine 9 on histone H3
(H3K9me2) was noted in early differentiating retinal ganglion cells but was lost 
after birth. The HMTases controlling H3K27me3, H3K9me2, Ezh2, and G9a were
enriched in the inner embryonic retina during the period of active retinogenesis.
Using the chemical inhibitors of Ezh2 and G9a, the authors reveal a role for HKM 
in regulating retinal neuron survival.
CONCLUSIONS: HKM is a dynamic and spatiotemporally regulated process in the
developing retina. Epigenetic regulation of gene transcription by Ezh2- and
G9a-mediated HKM plays crucial roles in retinal neuron survival and may represent
novel epigenetic targets to enhance viability in retinal neurodegenerative
diseases such as glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3055777
PMID: 20671280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Nov;38(21):7500-12. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq643. Epub 2010
Jul 29.

The phosphatase interactor NIPP1 regulates the occupancy of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2 at Polycomb targets.

Van Dessel N(1), Beke L, Görnemann J, Minnebo N, Beullens M, Tanuma N, Shima H,
Van Eynde A, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling and Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, KULeuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are key regulators of stem-cell and cancer biology.
They mainly act as repressors of differentiation and tumor-suppressor genes. One 
key silencing step involves the trimethylation of histone H3 on Lys27 (H3K27) by 
EZH2, a core component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). The mechanism
underlying the initial recruitment of mammalian PRC2 complexes is not well
understood. Here, we show that NIPP1, a regulator of protein Ser/Thr
phosphatase-1 (PP1), forms a complex with PP1 and PRC2 components on chromatin.
The knockdown of NIPP1 or PP1 reduced the association of EZH2 with a subset of
its target genes, whereas the overexpression of NIPP1 resulted in a retargeting
of EZH2 from fully repressed to partially active PcG targets. However, the
expression of a PP1-binding mutant of NIPP1 (NIPP1m) did not cause a
redistribution of EZH2. Moreover, mapping of the chromatin binding sites with the
DamID technique revealed that NIPP1 was associated with multiple PcG target
genes, including the Homeobox A cluster, whereas NIPP1m showed a deficient
binding at these loci. We propose that NIPP1 associates with a subset of PcG
targets in a PP1-dependent manner and thereby contributes to the recruitment of
the PRC2 complex.

PMCID: PMC2995064
PMID: 20671031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Sep;31(9):1576-83. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq150. Epub 2010 Jul
28.

EZH2 supports ovarian carcinoma cell invasion and/or metastasis via regulation of
TGF-beta1 and is a predictor of outcome in ovarian carcinoma patients.

Rao ZY(1), Cai MY, Yang GF, He LR, Mai SJ, Hua WF, Liao YJ, Deng HX, Chen YC,
Guan XY, Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, 510060 Guangzhou, China.

It was suggested that the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene is a putative
candidate oncogene in several types of human cancer. The potential oncogenic role
of EZH2 and its clinical/prognostic significance, however, in ovarian carcinoma
are unclear. In this study, EZH2 expression was examined by immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) in cohorts of normal and tumorous ovarian tissues. High expression of EZH2 
was examined in none of the normal ovaries, in 3% of the cystadenomas, in 23% of 
the borderline tumors and in 50% of the ovarian carcinomas, respectively. In the 
ovarian carcinomas, high expression of EZH2 was positively correlated with an
ascending histological grade and/or advanced stage of the disease (P < 0.05).
Moreover, high expression of EZH2 in ovarian carcinoma was determined to be a
strong and an independent predictor of short overall survival (P < 0.05). In
ovarian carcinoma HO-8910 and UACC-326 cell lines, EZH2 knockdown by RNA
interference led to a G(1) phase cell cycle arrest, reduced cell
growth/proliferation and inhibited cell migration and/or invasion in vitro. In
addition, EZH2 knockdown was found to reduce transforming growth factor-beta1
(TGF-beta1) expression and increase E-cadherin expression either in the
transcript or in the protein levels. Furthermore, a significant positive
correlation between overexpression of EZH2 and TGF-beta1 in ovarian carcinoma
tissues was observed (P < 0.001). These findings suggest a potential important
role of EZH2 in the control of cell migration and/or invasion via the regulation 
of TGF-beta1 expression, and the high expression of EZH2, as detected by IHC, is 
an independent molecular marker for shortened survival time of patients with
ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 20668008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jul 22;6(7):e1001013. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001013.

Epigenetic analysis of KSHV latent and lytic genomes.

Toth Z(1), Maglinte DT, Lee SH, Lee HR, Wong LY, Brulois KF, Lee S, Buckley JD,
Laird PW, Marquez VE, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

Epigenetic modifications of the herpesviral genome play a key role in the
transcriptional control of latent and lytic genes during a productive viral
lifecycle. In this study, we describe for the first time a comprehensive
genome-wide ChIP-on-Chip analysis of the chromatin associated with the Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) genome during latency and lytic
reactivation. Depending on the gene expression class, different combinations of
activating [acetylated H3 (AcH3) and H3K4me3] and repressive [H3K9me3 and
H3K27me3] histone modifications are associated with the viral latent genome,
which changes upon reactivation in a manner that is correlated with their
expression. Specifically, both the activating marks co-localize on the KSHV
latent genome, as do the repressive marks. However, the activating and repressive
histone modifications are mutually exclusive of each other on the bulk of the
latent KSHV genome. The genomic region encoding the IE genes ORF50 and ORF48
possesses the features of a bivalent chromatin structure characterized by the
concomitant presence of the activating H3K4me3 and the repressive H3K27me3 marks 
during latency, which rapidly changes upon reactivation with increasing AcH3 and 
H3K4me3 marks and decreasing H3K27me3. Furthermore, EZH2, the H3K27me3 histone
methyltransferase of the Polycomb group proteins (PcG), colocalizes with the
H3K27me3 mark on the entire KSHV genome during latency, whereas RTA-mediated
reactivation induces EZH2 dissociation from the genomic regions encoding IE and E
genes concurrent with decreasing H3K27me3 level and increasing IE/E lytic gene
expression. Moreover, either the inhibition of EZH2 expression by a small
molecule inhibitor DZNep and RNAi knockdown, or the expression of
H3K27me3-specific histone demethylases apparently induced the KSHV lytic gene
expression cascade. These data indicate that histone modifications associated
with the KSHV latent genome are involved in the regulation of latency and
ultimately in the control of the temporal and sequential expression of the lytic 
gene cascade. In addition, the PcG proteins play a critical role in the control
of KSHV latency by maintaining a reversible heterochromatin on the KSHV lytic
genes. Thus, the regulation of the spatial and temporal association of the PcG
proteins with the KSHV genome may be crucial for propagating the KSHV lifecycle.

PMCID: PMC2908616
PMID: 20661424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 9;5(7):e11483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011483.

Polycomb target genes are silenced in multiple myeloma.

Kalushkova A(1), Fryknäs M, Lemaire M, Fristedt C, Agarwal P, Eriksson M, Deleu
S, Atadja P, Osterborg A, Nilsson K, Vanderkerken K, Oberg F, Jernberg-Wiklund H.

Author information: 
(1)Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala Sweden.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a genetically heterogeneous disease, which to date
remains fatal. Finding a common mechanism for initiation and progression of MM
continues to be challenging. By means of integrative genomics, we identified an
underexpressed gene signature in MM patient cells compared to normal counterpart 
plasma cells. This profile was enriched for previously defined
H3K27-tri-methylated genes, targets of the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins in human
embryonic fibroblasts. Additionally, the silenced gene signature was more
pronounced in ISS stage III MM compared to stage I and II. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay on purified CD138+ cells from four MM patients
and on two MM cell lines, we found enrichment of H3K27me3 at genes selected from 
the profile. As the data implied that the Polycomb-targeted gene profile would be
highly relevant for pharmacological treatment of MM, we used two compounds to
chemically revert the H3K27-tri-methylation mediated gene silencing. The
S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor 3-Deazaneplanocin (DZNep) and the
histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 (Panobinostat), reactivated the expression
of genes repressed by H3K27me3, depleted cells from the PRC2 component EZH2 and
induced apoptosis in human MM cell lines. In the immunocompetent 5T33MM in vivo
model for MM, treatment with LBH589 resulted in gene upregulation, reduced tumor 
load and increased overall survival. Taken together, our results reveal a common 
gene signature in MM, mediated by gene silencing via the Polycomb repressor
complex. The importance of the underexpressed gene profile in MM tumor initiation
and progression should be subjected to further studies.

PMCID: PMC2901331
PMID: 20634887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Sep;31(9):1567-75. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq147. Epub 2010 Jul
14.

The role of EZH2 and DNA methylation in the silencing of the tumour suppressor
RUNX3 in colorectal cancer.

Kodach LL(1), Jacobs RJ, Heijmans J, van Noesel CJ, Langers AM, Verspaget HW,
Hommes DW, Offerhaus GJ, van den Brink GR, Hardwick JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

In gastric cancer, a new epigenetic mechanism of tumour suppressor loss has been 
suggested where the histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) 
is responsible for loss of expression of RUNX3. This is consistent with EZH2
upregulation in multiple cancer types being associated with poor prognosis. We
investigated whether EZH2 influences the expression of RUNX3 in colorectal cancer
(CRC) and whether this is independent of methylation. We determined protein and
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of EZH2 and RUNX3 and assessed RUNX3 methylation with
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction using 72 human CRCs and 8 CRC cell
lines. We assessed the effect of efficient RNA interference-mediated knockdown of
EZH2 on RUNX3 levels, cell viability and H3K27 trimethylation of the RUNX3
promoter using chromatin immunoprecipitation. Despite higher levels of EZH2 and
lower levels of RUNX3 in CRC specimens in general, no inverse correlation between
EZH2 and RUNX3 in paired samples was found arguing against a major role for
histone methylation in silencing RUNX3 in CRC. Conversely, downregulation of
RUNX3 mRNA in the same tumours was associated with RUNX3 DNA methylation (P <
0.05). In cell lines, knockdown of EZH2 removed the repressive chromatin marks
from RUNX3 but did not result in RUNX3 re-expression. However, it prevented the
re-silencing of RUNX3 after the removal of demethylating agents. In conclusion,
DNA methylation is primarily responsible for the transcriptional silencing of
RUNX3 in CRC, but EZH2 and histone methylation are necessary for its
methylation-dependent re-silencing after the removal of demethylating agents.
These results would predict that inhibitors of EZH2 and histone methylation would
enhance the effects of demethylating agents in cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2930806
PMID: 20631058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 30;29(39):5370-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.269. Epub 2010 Jul
12.

The neuronal repellent SLIT2 is a target for repression by EZH2 in prostate
cancer.

Yu J(1), Cao Q, Yu J, Wu L, Dallol A, Li J, Chen G, Grasso C, Cao X, Lonigro RJ, 
Varambally S, Mehra R, Palanisamy N, Wu JY, Latif F, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. 
jindan-yu@northwestern.edu

The neuronal repellent SLIT2 is repressed in a number of cancer types primarily
through promoter hypermethylation. SLIT2, however, has not been studied in
prostate cancer. Through genome-wide location analysis we identified SLIT2 as a
target of polycomb group (PcG) protein EZH2. The EZH2-containing polycomb
repressive complexes bound to the SLIT2 promoter inhibiting its expression. SLIT2
was downregulated in a majority of metastatic prostate tumors, showing a negative
correlation with EZH2. This repressed expression could be restored by methylation
inhibitors or EZH2-suppressing compounds. In addition, a low level of SLIT2
expression was associated with aggressive prostate, breast and lung cancers.
Functional assays showed that SLIT2 inhibited prostate cancer cell proliferation 
and invasion. Thus, this study showed for the first time the epigenetic silencing
of SLIT2 in prostate tumors, and supported SLIT2 as a potential biomarker for
aggressive solid tumors. Importantly, PcG-mediated repression may serve as a
precursor for the silencing of SLIT2 by DNA methylation in cancer.

PMCID: PMC2948081
PMID: 20622896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Science. 2010 Aug 6;329(5992):689-93. doi: 10.1126/science.1192002. Epub 2010 Jul
8.

Long noncoding RNA as modular scaffold of histone modification complexes.

Tsai MC(1), Manor O, Wan Y, Mosammaparast N, Wang JK, Lan F, Shi Y, Segal E,
Chang HY.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) regulate chromatin states and
epigenetic inheritance. Here, we show that the lincRNA HOTAIR serves as a
scaffold for at least two distinct histone modification complexes. A 5' domain of
HOTAIR binds polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), whereas a 3' domain of HOTAIR 
binds the LSD1/CoREST/REST complex. The ability to tether two distinct complexes 
enables RNA-mediated assembly of PRC2 and LSD1 and coordinates targeting of PRC2 
and LSD1 to chromatin for coupled histone H3 lysine 27 methylation and lysine 4
demethylation. Our results suggest that lincRNAs may serve as scaffolds by
providing binding surfaces to assemble select histone modification enzymes,
thereby specifying the pattern of histone modifications on target genes.

PMCID: PMC2967777
PMID: 20616235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nat Genet. 2010 Aug;42(8):665-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.620. Epub 2010 Jul 4.

Somatic mutations of the histone methyltransferase gene EZH2 in myelodysplastic
syndromes.

Nikoloski G(1), Langemeijer SM, Kuiper RP, Knops R, Massop M, Tönnissen ER, van
der Heijden A, Scheele TN, Vandenberghe P, de Witte T, van der Reijden BA, Jansen
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), deletions of chromosome 7 or 7q are common
and correlate with a poor prognosis. The relevant genes on chromosome 7 are
unknown. We report here that EZH2, located at 7q36.1, is frequently targeted in
MDS. Analysis of EZH2 deletions, missense and frameshift mutations strongly
suggests that EZH2 is a tumor suppressor. As EZH2 functions as a histone
methyltransferase, abnormal histone modification may contribute to epigenetic
deregulation in MDS.

PMID: 20601954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Genet. 2010 Aug;42(8):722-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.621. Epub 2010 Jul 4.

Inactivating mutations of the histone methyltransferase gene EZH2 in myeloid
disorders.

Ernst T(1), Chase AJ, Score J, Hidalgo-Curtis CE, Bryant C, Jones AV, Waghorn K, 
Zoi K, Ross FM, Reiter A, Hochhaus A, Drexler HG, Duncombe A, Cervantes F, Oscier
D, Boultwood J, Grand FH, Cross NC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Southampton, UK.

Abnormalities of chromosome 7q are common in myeloid malignancies, but no
specific target genes have yet been identified. Here, we describe the finding of 
homozygous EZH2 mutations in 9 of 12 individuals with 7q acquired uniparental
disomy. Screening of a total of 614 individuals with myeloid disorders revealed
49 monoallelic or biallelic EZH2 mutations in 42 individuals; the mutations were 
found most commonly in those with myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasms
(27 out of 219 individuals, or 12%) and in those with myelofibrosis (4 out of 30 
individuals, or 13%). EZH2 encodes the catalytic subunit of the polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), a highly conserved histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27)
methyltransferase that influences stem cell renewal by epigenetic repression of
genes involved in cell fate decisions. EZH2 has oncogenic activity, and its
overexpression has previously been causally linked to differentiation blocks in
epithelial tumors. Notably, the mutations we identified resulted in premature
chain termination or direct abrogation of histone methyltransferase activity,
suggesting that EZH2 acts as a tumor suppressor for myeloid malignancies.

PMID: 20601953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Prostate. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):18-25. doi: 10.1002/pros.21217.

Expression analysis of putative stem cell markers in human benign and malignant
prostate.

Ugolkov AV(1), Eisengart LJ, Luan C, Yang XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

BACKGROUND: Stem cells were suggested to be present in human prostate cancer as a
small population of distinct cells, which may contribute to carcinogenesis, tumor
recurrence, and chemoresistance. To identify potential prostatic stem cells, we
analyzed the expression of several potential stem cell markers in benign prostate
and prostatic adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: CD44, CD133, Oct4, SOX2, and EZH2 expression was detected by
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining using tissue microarray assays (TMA) composed 
of benign (non-neoplastic) prostatic tissue, high grade prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (HGPIN), and prostatic adenocarcinoma. Positive staining was defined as
1+ (<10%), 2+ (10-50%), or 3+ (>50%).
RESULTS: We found CD44 staining in 97% and 72% of benign<U+2009>+<U+2009>HGPIN and malignant
lesions, respectively. CD133 staining was detected in a small fraction (4 of 67) 
of prostate carcinomas. We found that Oct4 nuclear expression was strongly
associated with benign lesions and HGPIN but not prostate cancer (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In
most cases, nuclear expression of EZH2 and SOX2 was detected in less than 10% of 
cells in non-neoplastic prostate glands, HGPINs or prostate adenocarcinomas.
Moreover, 27 of 33 SOX2 1+ prostate cancers were also EZH2 1+, whereas all 33 of 
these cases were CD44+.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of CD44 and Oct4 identified large populations of benign
and malignant cells in the prostate, which did not fit the definition of stem
cells as a small fraction of the total cell population. Our results suggest that 
combined expression of embryonic stem cell markers EZH2 and SOX2 might identify
potential cancer stem cells as a minor (<10%) subgroup in CD44+ prostatic
adenocarcinoma.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20583131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Pathol. 2010 Aug;177(2):884-95. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.091166. Epub 2010
Jun 25.

Loss of estrogen receptor 1 enhances cervical cancer invasion.

Zhai Y(1), Bommer GT, Feng Y, Wiese AB, Fearon ER, Cho KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-2200, USA.

If left untreated, some cervical high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions will
progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), but the molecular events
conferring invasive potential remain poorly defined. In prior work, we identified
48 genes that were down-regulated in SCCs compared with high-grade squamous
intraepithelial lesions and normal squamous epithelia. In this study, a
functional screening strategy was used to identify which of these genes regulate 
cervical cancer cell invasion. Two independent squamous epithelial cell lines
were transduced with a library of short hairpin RNAs targeting the differentially
expressed genes and tested for invasion of the chick chorioallantoic membrane.
PCR was used to recover specific short hairpin RNAs from cells that invaded the
chorioallantoic membrane. Constructs targeting estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) were
highly enriched in the invasive cells. The short hairpin RNA-mediated inhibition 
of ESR1 in SCC- and precancer-derived cell lines increased invasiveness in both
in vivo and in vitro assays. Conversely, restoration of ESR1 expression in
ESR1-negative cervical cancer cells reduced cell invasiveness. Loss of ESR1
expression was found to accompany cervical cancer progression in an analysis of
primary normal cervix, low grade squamous intraepithelial lesions, high-grade
squamous intraepithelial lesions, and SCC specimens. Molecular mechanisms
underlying down-regulation of ESR1 in invasive cervical carcinomas appear to be
complex and likely heterogeneous. Our findings indicate that loss of ESR1 has a
major role in mediating cervical cancer invasion and progression.

PMCID: PMC2913367
PMID: 20581058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Hum Pathol. 2010 Sep;41(9):1205-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.03.004. Epub 2010 
Jun 22.

Implications of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 expression in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma.

Toll AD(1), Dasgupta A, Potoczek M, Yeo CJ, Kleer CG, Brody JR, Witkiewicz AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Thomas Jefferson University, Jefferson Pancreas,
Biliary and Related Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer deaths in 
the United States. Single-agent gemcitabine remains the standard treatment of
advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. A recently discovered histone
methyltransferase termed enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) was found to be
overexpressed in a variety of carcinomas including pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Silencing of E-cadherin was proposed as a mechanism by which enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 mediates tumor aggressiveness, and enhancer of zeste homologue 2
depletion has been found to sensitize pancreatic cancer cells to gemcitabine. In 
this study, we correlated enhancer of zeste homologue 2 with E-cadherin
expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma and evaluated response to gemcitabine in 
relation to enhancer of zeste homologue 2 expression in tumor cells. Fifty-four
pancreatic adenocarcinomas, 13 intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms, and 6
chronic pancreatitis cases were stained with antibodies against enhancer of zeste
homologue 2 and E-cadherin. Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 staining was scored
from 1 to 4+ and classified as either low (1-2+ in <25% of tumor nuclei) or high 
(3-4+ in >25% of tumor nuclei). E-cadherin expression was scored on membrane
positivity as follows: 0 (0%-10%), 1 (10%-25%), 2 (25%-75%), and 3 (>75%). High
enhancer of zeste homologue 2 expression in pancreatic adenocarcinoma was
significantly associated with decreased E-cadherin expression and more aggressive
disease. There was significantly longer survival in gemcitabine-treated patients 
with low versus high enhancer of zeste homologue 2 expression. High enhancer of
zeste homologue 2 expression was detected in intraductal papillary mucinous
neoplasms with moderate to severe dysplasia, but not in chronic pancreatitis. Our
study suggests that E-cadherin down-regulation may lead to enhancer of zeste
homologue 2-mediated invasion and metastasis.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20573371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 17;9:151. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-151.

Polycomb repressor complex 2 regulates HOXA9 and HOXA10, activating ID2 in
NK/T-cell lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Marquez VE, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, MacLeod RA,
Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

BACKGROUND: NK- and T-cells are closely related lymphocytes, originating from the
same early progenitor cells during hematopoiesis. In these differentiation
processes deregulation of developmental genes may contribute to leukemogenesis.
Here, we compared expression profiles of NK- and T-cell lines for identification 
of aberrantly expressed genes in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
which physiologically regulate the differentiation program of the NK-cell
lineage.
RESULTS: This analysis showed high expression levels of HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2 in 
NK-cell lines in addition to T-cell line LOUCY, suggesting leukemic deregulation 
therein. Overexpression experiments, chromatin immuno-precipitation and promoter 
analysis demonstrated that HOXA9 and HOXA10 directly activated expression of ID2.
Concomitantly elevated expression levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 together with ID2 in
cell lines containing MLL translocations confirmed this form of regulation in
both ALL and acute myeloid leukemia. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10 or ID2
resulted in repressed expression of apoptosis factor BIM. Furthermore, profiling 
data of genes coding for chromatin regulators of homeobox genes, including
components of polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), indicated lacking expression
of EZH2 in LOUCY and exclusive expression of HOP in NK-cell lines. Subsequent
treatment of T-cell lines JURKAT and LOUCY with DZNep, an inhibitor of EZH2/PRC2,
resulted in elevated and unchanged HOXA9/10 expression levels, respectively.
Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 in JURKAT enhanced HOXA10 expression, 
confirming HOXA10-repression by EZH2. Additionally, profiling data and
overexpression analysis indicated that reduced expression of E2F cofactor TFDP1
contributed to the lack of EZH2 in LOUCY. Forced expression of HOP in JURKAT
cells resulted in reduced HOXA10 and ID2 expression levels, suggesting
enhancement of PRC2 repression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that major differentiation factors of the NK-cell
lineage, including HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2, were (de)regulated via PRC2 which
therefore contributes to T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2894765
PMID: 20565746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cancer. 2010 Jun 15;116(12):3015-24. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25128.

Distinctive expression of the polycomb group proteins Bmi1 polycomb ring finger
oncogene and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 in nonsmall cell lung cancers and their 
clinical and clinicopathologic significance.

Kikuchi J(1), Kinoshita I, Shimizu Y, Kikuchi E, Konishi J, Oizumi S, Kaga K,
Matsuno Y, Nishimura M, Dosaka-Akita H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Medicine, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: The polycomb group genes Bmi1 polycomb ring finger oncogene (Bmi1)
and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) function as transcriptional repressors
involved in gene silencing and in the malignant transformation and biologic
aggressiveness of several human carcinomas. In the current study, the authors
evaluated Bmi1 and EZH2 protein expression in specimens of human nonsmall cell
lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: The authors conducted an immunohistochemical assessment of 157
surgically resected NSCLCs to evaluate the correlation between Bmi1 and EZH2
expression and various features, including clinical, clinicopathologic, and
biologic characteristics.
RESULTS: Normal bronchial epithelia revealed abundant expression of Bmi1 and
sporadic expression of EZH2. Patients who had high EZH2 expression in tumor cells
had a poorer prognosis than patients who had low EZH2 expression in tumor cells
all pathologic stages of NSCLC (P = .001) and in pathologic stage I NSCLC (P =
.006). Multivariate analysis revealed that high EZH2 expression was a
independent, unfavorable prognostic factor in patients with pathologic stage I
disease (P = .048). High EZH2 expression was correlated significantly with
nonadenocarcinoma histology (P = .001), moderate and poor differentiation (P =
.001), advanced pathologic tumor classification (P = .02), and high Ki-67 and
cyclin E labeling indices (P < .001). Bmi1 expression, in contrast, was not a
significant prognostic factor and was not correlated with any clinicopathologic
factors other than early pathologic tumor classification.
CONCLUSIONS: Bmi1 and EZH2 had characteristic and distinctive expression in
NSCLCs. High EZH2 expression was correlated with tumor aggressiveness and may
provide a novel prognostic marker for NSCLCs.

PMID: 20564407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Pathol. 2010 Aug;177(2):930-42. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090769. Epub 2010
Jun 17.

Deregulated expression of the polycomb-group protein SUZ12 target genes
characterizes mantle cell lymphoma.

Martín-Pérez D(1), Sánchez E, Maestre L, Suela J, Vargiu P, Di Lisio L, Martínez 
N, Alves J, Piris MA, Sánchez-Beato M.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Polycomb proteins are known to be of great importance in human cancer
pathogenesis. SUZ12 is a component of the Polycomb PRC2 complex that, along with 
EZH2, is involved in embryonic stem cell differentiation. EZH2 plays an essential
role in many cancer types, but an equivalent involvement of SUZ12 has not been as
thoroughly demonstrated. Here we show that SUZ12 is anomalously expressed in
human primary tumors, especially in mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), pulmonary
carcinomas and melanoma, and is associated with gene locus amplification in some 
cases. Using MCL as a model, functional and genomic studies demonstrate that
SUZ12 loss compromises cell viability, increases apoptosis, and targets genes
involved in central oncogenic pathways associated with MCL pathogenesis. Our
results support the hypothesis that the abnormal expression of SUZ12 accounts for
some of the unexplained features of MCL, such as abnormal DNA repair and
increased resistance to apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2913342
PMID: 20558579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 May;127(1):109-19. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0982-0. 
Epub 2010 Jun 17.

S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibition by 3-deazaneplanocin A analogues
induces anti-cancer effects in breast cancer cell lines and synergy with both
histone deacetylase and HER2 inhibition.

Hayden A(1), Johnson PW, Packham G, Crabb SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Centre, University of Southampton School of Medicine,
Mailpoint 824, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road, Southampton, SO16 6YD,
UK.

Epigenetic abnormalities including abnormal histone methyltransferase activity
contribute to breast cancer pathogenesis. An example is over expression of the
polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 2 member enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2)
which is linked to epigenetic silencing and poor prognosis. Recent evidence shows
that S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy) hydrolase inhibitors (AHI) such as
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) modulate chromatin through indirect inhibition of
histone methyltransferases including EZH2. We investigated the biological effects
of AdoHcy hydrolase inhibition using DZNep and its structural analogues
3-deazaadenosine (DZA) and neplanocin A (Nep A) in breast cancer cells. EZH2
protein expression was decreased and dose dependent growth inhibition occurred
with variable potencies in MCF7, MDA-MB-231 and SKBr3 breast cancer cells.
Cellular proliferation was inhibited through G(2)/M cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. In addition breast cancer cells accumulated cytoplasmic lipid droplets
in response to AdoHcy hydrolase inhibition consistent with a differentiating
effect. Each analogue induced a similar pattern of biological activity against
breast cancer cells but with differences in potency (DZA > DZNep > Nep A).
Co-administration with the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A
(TSA) induced synergistic inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation.
Furthermore, the relatively AHI resistant human epidermal growth factor receptor 
2 (HER2) positive cell line SKBr3 underwent synergistic growth inhibition in
response to co-treatment with the HER2 directed therapeutic antibody trastuzumab.
In conclusion, AHI induce growth inhibition, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and
differentiation in breast cancer cells and synergise with HDAC and HER2
inhibition. Targeting histone methyltransferase activity might be of therapeutic 
value in breast cancer.

PMID: 20556507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Nov 10;646(1-3):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.05.034.
Epub 2010 Jun 12.

Role of triptolide in cell proliferation, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and
histone methylation in multiple myeloma U266 cells.

Zhao F(1), Chen Y, Zeng L, Li R, Zeng R, Wen L, Liu Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Multiple myeloma is an incurable hematological malignancy. Different studies
demonstrated the occurrence of genetic and epigenetic alterations in multiple
myeloma. Histone lysine methylation has emerged as a central epigenetic change in
the organization of eukaryotic chromatin with far-reaching implications for the
regulation of cell proliferation, cell-type differentiation, gene expression,
genome stability, overall development, and genesis of cancer. Triptolide is the
principal active ingredient in extracts from the Chinese herb Tripterygium
wilfordii Hook.F (TwHF), and numerous studies have elucidated its antitumor
property. Our experiments discovered that triptolide inhibited the proliferation 
of multiple myeloma cell line U266 in a time- and dose-dependent manner, induced 
G2/M cell cycle arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis. Triptolide could decrease
the expression of histone H3K4, H3K27 and H3K36 trimethylation in parallel with
histone methyltransferases SMYD3, EZH2 and NSD1 respectively, which possibly was 
the anti-myeloma mechanism of triptolide.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20547150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cell Cycle. 2010 Jul 1;9(13):2663-73.

The polycomb group protein BMI1 is a transcriptional target of HDAC inhibitors.

Bommi PV(1), Dimri M, Sahasrabuddhe AA, Khandekar J, Dimri GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, NorthShore University HealthSystem Research Institute,
Evanston, IL, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are overexpressed in several human malignancies
including breast cancer. In particular, aberrant expression of BMI1 and EZH2 has 
been linked to metastasis and poor prognosis in cancer patients. At present, very
little is known about the pharmacological inhibitors of PcG proteins. Here we
show that histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) downregulate expression of BMI1.
Treatment of MCF10A cells, which are immortal non-transformed breast epithelial
cells, and breast cancer cells with HDACi led to decreased expression of BMI1. We
further show that downregulation of BMI1 by HDACi results due to the
transcriptional downregulation of BMI1 gene. Specifically, we show that primary
transcription and promoter activity of BMI1 is suppressed upon treatment with
HDACi. Furthermore, downregulation of BMI1 was accompanied by a decrease in
histone 2A lysine 119 ubiquitination (H2AK119Ub), which is catalyzed by BMI1
containing polycomb repressive complex 1. HDACi treatment also led to
derepression of growth inhibitory genes and putative tumor suppressors, which are
known to be silenced by PcG proteins and polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs). In
summary, our findings suggest that BMI1 is an important therapy target of HDACi, 
and that HDACi can be used alone or in combination with other therapies to
inhibit growth of tumors that overexpress PcG proteins such as BMI1.

© 2010 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3010287
PMID: 20543557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Jul 31;42(7):484-502.

Integrative epigenomic and genomic analysis of malignant pheochromocytoma.

Sandgren J(1), Andersson R, Rada-Iglesias A, Enroth S, Akerstrom G, Dumanski JP, 
Komorowski J, Westin G, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Epigenomic and genomic changes affect gene expression and contribute to tumor
development. The histone modifications trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4me3) and lysine 27 (H3K27me3) are epigenetic regulators associated to active
and silenced genes, respectively and alterations of these modifications have been
observed in cancer. Furthermore, genomic aberrations such as DNA copy number
changes are common events in tumors. Pheochromocytoma is a rare endocrine tumor
of the adrenal gland that mostly occurs sporadic with unknown epigenetic/genetic 
cause. The majority of cases are benign. Here we aimed to combine the genome-wide
profiling of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, obtained by the ChIP-chip methodology, and DNA
copy number data with global gene expression examination in a malignant
pheochromocytoma sample. The integrated analysis of the tumor expression levels, 
in relation to normal adrenal medulla, indicated that either histone
modifications or chromosomal alterations, or both, have great impact on the
expression of a substantial fraction of the genes in the investigated sample.
Candidate tumor suppressor genes identified with decreased expression, a H3K27me3
mark and/or in regions of deletion were for instance TGIF1, DSC3, TNFRSF10B,
RASSF2, HOXA9, PTPRE and CDH11. More genes were found with increased expression, 
a H3K4me3 mark, and/or in regions of gain. Potential oncogenes detected among
those were GNAS, INSM1, DOK5, ETV1, RET, NTRK1, IGF2, and the H3K27 trimethylase 
gene EZH2. Our approach to associate histone methylations and DNA copy number
changes to gene expression revealed apparent impact on global gene transcription,
and enabled the identification of candidate tumor genes for further exploration.

PMCID: PMC2912476
PMID: 20534969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2010 May 19;5(5):e10726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010726.

Nucleoside drugs induce cellular differentiation by caspase-dependent degradation
of stem cell factors.

Musch T(1), Oz Y, Lyko F, Breiling A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenetics, DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Stem cell characteristics are an important feature of human cancer
cells and play a major role in the therapy resistance of tumours. Strategies to
target cancer stem cells are thus of major importance for cancer therapy.
Differentiation therapy by nucleoside drugs represents an attractive approach for
the elimination of cancer stem cells. However, even if it is generally assumed
that the activity of these drugs is mediated by their ability to modulate
epigenetic pathways, their precise mode of action remains to be established. We
therefore analysed the potential of three nucleoside analogues to induce
differentiation of the embryonic cancer stem cell line NTERA 2 D1 and compared
their effect to the natural ligand retinoic acid.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: All nucleoside analogues analyzed, but not
retinoic acid, triggered proteolytic degradation of the Polycomb group protein
EZH2. Two of them, 3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) and 2'-deoxy-5-azacytidine
(decitabine), also induced a decrease in global DNA methylation. Nevertheless,
only decitabine and 1beta-arabinofuranosylcytosine (cytarabine) effectively
triggered neuronal differentiation of NT2 cells. We show that drug-induced
differentiation, in contrast to retinoic acid induction, is caused by caspase
activation, which mediates depletion of the stem cell factors NANOG and OCT4.
Consistent with this observation, protein degradation and differentiation could
be counteracted by co-treatment with caspase inhibitors or by depletion of
CASPASE-3 and CASPASE-7 through dsRNA interference. In agreement with this, OCT4 
was found to be a direct in-vitro-target of CASPASE-7.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We show that drug-induced differentiation is not a
consequence of pharmacologic epigenetic modulation, but is induced by the
degradation of stem-cell-specific proteins by caspases. Our results thus uncover 
a novel pathway that induces differentiation of embryonic cancer stem cells and
is triggered by the established anticancer drugs cytarabine and decitabine. These
findings suggest new approaches for directly targeting the stem cell fraction of 
human tumours.

PMCID: PMC2873290
PMID: 20502711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 May 21;16(19):2421-7.

EZH2 and STAT6 expression profiles are correlated with colorectal cancer stage
and prognosis.

Wang CG(1), Ye YJ, Yuan J, Liu FF, Zhang H, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Surgical Oncology Laboratory,
People's Hospital, Beijing University, No. 11, South Xizhimen Street, Beijing
100044, China.

AIM: To investigate the role of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) and STAT6
immunohistochemistry in the evaluation of clinical stages and prognosis of
colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: The expression patterns were examined by immunohistochemistry in both
tumor and adjacent non-neoplastic tissues of 119 CRC patients who underwent
operation during the time period from 2002 to 2004.
RESULTS: The positive rates of EZH2 and STAT6 in CRC cases were 69.7% (83 of 119)
and 60.5% (72 of 119), respectively, and there was significant difference when
compared with tumor adjacent non-neoplastic tissues (P < 0.05). In all CRC cases,
patients with EZH2-positive, or STAT6-positive expression had lower survival
rates than those with EZH2-negative or STAT6-negative expression (P = 0.002 and P
= 0.005, respectively). Co-expression of EZH2 and STAT6 showed significantly
higher levels in CRC cases of high clinical TNM stages (P = 0.001), and the
expression of STAT6 was also correlated with lymph node metastasis and distant
metastasis (P = 0.001 and P = 0.016, respectively). Multivariate analysis
revealed that EZH2 expression was an independent prognostic indicator of CRC (P =
0.039).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 and STAT6 expressions have significant values in distinguishing 
clinical stages of CRC and predicting the prognosis of the patients.

PMCID: PMC2874149
PMID: 20480530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2010 May 10;5(5):e10547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010547.

ETS transcription factors control transcription of EZH2 and epigenetic silencing 
of the tumor suppressor gene Nkx3.1 in prostate cancer.

Kunderfranco P(1), Mello-Grand M, Cangemi R, Pellini S, Mensah A, Albertini V,
Malek A, Chiorino G, Catapano CV, Carbone GM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Oncology Institute of Southern
Switzerland, Bellinzona, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: ETS transcription factors regulate important signaling pathways
involved in cell differentiation and development in many tissues and have emerged
as important players in prostate cancer. However, the biological impact of ETS
factors in prostate tumorigenesis is still debated.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed an analysis of the ETS gene family
using microarray data and real-time PCR in normal and tumor tissues along with
functional studies in normal and cancer cell lines to understand the impact in
prostate tumorigenesis and identify key targets of these transcription factors.
We found frequent dysregulation of ETS genes with oncogenic (i.e., ERG and ESE1) 
and tumor suppressor (i.e., ESE3) properties in prostate tumors compared to
normal prostate. Tumor subgroups (i.e., ERG(high), ESE1(high), ESE3(low) and
NoETS tumors) were identified on the basis of their ETS expression status and
showed distinct transcriptional and biological features. ERG(high) and ESE3(low) 
tumors had the most robust gene signatures with both distinct and overlapping
features. Integrating genomic data with functional studies in multiple cell
lines, we demonstrated that ERG and ESE3 controlled in opposite direction
transcription of the Polycomb Group protein EZH2, a key gene in development,
differentiation, stem cell biology and tumorigenesis. We further demonstrated
that the prostate-specific tumor suppressor gene Nkx3.1 was controlled by ERG and
ESE3 both directly and through induction of EZH2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings provide new insights into the role of
the ETS transcriptional network in prostate tumorigenesis and uncover previously 
unrecognized links between aberrant expression of ETS factors, deregulation of
epigenetic effectors and silencing of tumor suppressor genes. The link between
aberrant ETS activity and epigenetic gene silencing may be relevant for the
clinical management of prostate cancer and design of new therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2866657
PMID: 20479932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Cell. 2010 May 18;17(5):443-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.03.018.

An integrated network of androgen receptor, polycomb, and TMPRSS2-ERG gene
fusions in prostate cancer progression.

Yu J(1), Yu J, Mani RS, Cao Q, Brenner CJ, Cao X, Wang X, Wu L, Li J, Hu M, Gong 
Y, Cheng H, Laxman B, Vellaichamy A, Shankar S, Li Y, Dhanasekaran SM, Morey R,
Barrette T, Lonigro RJ, Tomlins SA, Varambally S, Qin ZS, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2010 May 18;17(5):415-6.

Chromosomal rearrangements fusing the androgen-regulated gene TMPRSS2 to the
oncogenic ETS transcription factor ERG occur in approximately 50% of prostate
cancers, but how the fusion products regulate prostate cancer remains unclear.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with massively parallel sequencing,
we found that ERG disrupts androgen receptor (AR) signaling by inhibiting AR
expression, binding to and inhibiting AR activity at gene-specific loci, and
inducing repressive epigenetic programs via direct activation of the H3K27
methyltransferase EZH2, a Polycomb group protein. These findings provide a
working model in which TMPRSS2-ERG plays a critical role in cancer progression by
disrupting lineage-specific differentiation of the prostate and potentiating the 
EZH2-mediated dedifferentiation program.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2874722
PMID: 20478527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Cell. 2010 May 18;17(5):415-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.022.

Coordinate transcriptional regulation by ERG and androgen receptor in
fusion-positive prostate cancers.

Chen Y(1), Sawyers CL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2010 May 18;17(5):443-54.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Yu and colleagues mapped the genomic binding sites 
of ERG and androgen receptor, two crucial transcription factors in prostate
cancer. There is an extraordinary degree of overlap between binding sites, with
the suggestion that ERG inhibits androgen receptor-mediated differentiation and
promotes EZH2-mediated dedifferentiation.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2931314
PMID: 20478521  [PubMed]


110. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 17;9:108. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-108.

MicroRNA-101 negatively regulates Ezh2 and its expression is modulated by
androgen receptor and HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta.

Cao P(1), Deng Z, Wan M, Huang W, Cramer SD, Xu J, Lei M, Sui G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

BACKGROUND: In prostate cancer (PCa), the common treatment involving androgen
ablation alleviates the disease temporarily, but results in the recurrence of
highly aggressive and androgen-independent metastatic cancer. Therefore, more
effective therapeutic approaches are needed. It is known that aberrant
epigenetics contributes to prostate malignancy. Unlike genetic changes, these
epigenetic alterations are reversible, which makes them attractive targets in PCa
therapy to impede cancer progression. As a histone methyltransferase, Ezh2 plays 
an essential role in epigenetic regulation. Since Ezh2 is overexpressed and acts 
as an oncogene in PCa, it has been proposed as a bona fide target of PCa therapy.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression through modulating protein
translation. Recently, the contribution of miRNAs in cancer development is
increasingly appreciated. In this report, we present our study showing that
microRNA-101 (miR-101) inhibits Ezh2 expression and differentially regulates
prostate cancer cells. In addition, the expression of miR-101 alters upon
androgen treatment and HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induction.
RESULT: In our reporter assays, both miR-101 and miR-26a inhibit the expression
of a reporter construct containing the 3'-UTR of Ezh2. When ectopically expressed
in PC-3, DU145 and LNCaP cells, miR-101 inhibits endogenous Ezh2 expression in
all three cell lines, while miR-26a only decreases Ezh2 in DU145. Ectopic miR-101
reduces the invasion ability of PC-3 cells, while restored Ezh2 expression
rescues the invasiveness of PC-3 cells. Similarly, miR-101 also inhibits cell
invasion and migration of DU145 and LNCaP cells, respectively. Interestingly,
ectopic miR-101 exhibits differential effects on the proliferation of PC-3,
DU-145 and LNCaP cells and also causes morphological changes of LNCaP cells. In
addition, the expression of miR-101 is regulated by androgen receptor and
HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta. While HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induced by deferoxamine mesylate
(DFO) decreases miR-101 levels, the overall effects of R-1881 on miR-101
expression are stimulatory.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that miR-101 targets Ezh2 and decreases the
invasiveness of PCa cells, suggesting that miR-101 introduction is a potential
therapeutic strategy to combat PCa. MiR-101 differentially regulates prostate
cell proliferation. Meanwhile, the expression of miR-101 is also modulated at
different physiological conditions, such as androgen stimulation and
HIF-1alpha/HIF-1beta induction.

PMCID: PMC2881117
PMID: 20478051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2010 Aug 5;116(5):731-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-260760. Epub 2010 May 
5.

Opposing roles of polycomb repressive complexes in hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells.

Majewski IJ(1), Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Corbin J, Pakusch M, Ebert A, Busslinger
M, Koseki H, Hu Y, Smyth GK, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ, Blewitt ME.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are transcriptional repressors with a central role 
in the establishment and maintenance of gene expression patterns during
development. We have investigated the role of polycomb repressive complexes
(PRCs) in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and progenitor populations. We show
that mice with loss of function mutations in PRC2 components display enhanced
HSC/progenitor population activity, whereas mutations that disrupt PRC1 or
pleiohomeotic repressive complex are associated with HSC/progenitor cell defects.
Because the hierarchical model of PRC action would predict synergistic effects of
PRC1 and PRC2 mutation, these opposing effects suggest this model does not hold
true in HSC/progenitor cells. To investigate the molecular targets of each
complex in HSC/progenitor cells, we measured genome-wide expression changes
associated with PRC deficiency, and identified transcriptional networks that are 
differentially regulated by PRC1 and PRC2. These studies provide new insights
into the mechanistic interplay between distinct PRCs and have important
implications for approaching PcG proteins as therapeutic targets.

PMID: 20445021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biomed Sci. 2010 May 6;17:35. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-17-35.

PKCalpha mediated induction of miR-101 in human hepatoma HepG2 cells.

Chiang CW(1), Huang Y, Leong KW, Chen LC, Chen HC, Chen SJ, Chou CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology & Immunology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Protein Kinase C (PKC) is a serine/threonine kinase that involved in 
controlling of many cellular processes such as cell proliferation and
differentiation. We have observed previously that TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 
13-acetate) induces cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase in human hepatoma HepG2
cells. However, is there any miRNA involved in PKCalpha mediated cell growth
arrest is still unknown.
METHODS: We first surveyed 270 miRNA expression profiles in 20 pairs of human
hepatoma tissues. We identified 11 up-regulated and 23 down-regulated miRNAs (FDR
< = 0.01; fold-change > = 2) in human hepatoma tissue after Student's T-test and 
Mann-Whitney rank test. We then examined miRNAs expression profile in TPA treated
HepG2 cells. Two miRNAs, miR-101, and miR-29c, were shown to be significantly
down regulated in human hepatoma tissues and induced over 4-fold in HepG2 cells
under TPA treatment.
RESULTS: In this study, we examined TPA regulated miRNA expression profile in
human hepatoma HepG2 cells. We identified two miRNAs, 101 and 29c, were induced
by TPA and down regulated in human hepatoma tissues suggest that they might play 
as tumor suppressor gene and in tumor formation of HCC. Since induction kinetics 
of miR-101 by TPA was much faster than miR-29c suggests that the induction of
miR-101 may be the primary response of TPA treatment. We then further
investigated how miR-101 was regulated by TPA. MiR-101 targets two subunits of
PRC2 complex, enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) and EED, and was shown to play
as a tumor suppressor gene in human prostate, breast and liver cancers. The
target sequence of miR-101 located in the 3' UTR of both EZH2 and EED's mRNA was 
identified by bioinformatic analysis and was validated by reporter luciferase
activity assay. Then we showed that TPA not only up regulated miR-101 expression,
but also reduced protein level of EZH2, EED and H3K27me3 in HepG2 cells. Using
lenti-virus-mediated shRNA to knockdown endogenous PKCalpha expression, we
observed that TPA induced growth arrest, elevation of miR-101 and reduction of
EZH2, EED and H3K27me3 proteins were all PKCalpha dependent. Specific inhibitor
of ERK completely blocked TPA induced miR-101 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, this is the first time to show that PKCalpha and ERK
pathway play important role to activate miR-101 expression, reduce PRC2 complex
and H3K27me3 level. This epigenetic regulatory pathway may represent a novel
mechanism of carcinogenesis and deserve further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2874775
PMID: 20444294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Stem Cells. 2010 May;3(1):46-53.

Timing of the cell cycle exit of differentiating hippocampal neural stem cells.

Järvinen E(1), Angers-Loustau A(1), Osiceanu AM(1), Wartiovaara K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Novagenesis Oy, Tukholmankatu 8U, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

Neural stem cells contribute to mammalian brain tissue turnover in specific
locations throughout life. Differentiation of stem cells is associated with
terminal mitosis and cell cycle exit, but it is unclear how the timing and
signaling of these are interlinked. Here, we have investigated the cell cycle
exit characteristics in comparison with morphological changes during hippocampal 
stem cell differentiation in an adult mammalian cell line. Our results suggest
that the cell-specific gene pathway induction is fast and robust and takes place 
in one day, whereas the cell cycle exit machinery is slower and takes several
days to fully execute. The hippocampal differentiation is associated with
epigenetic changes, such as Ezh2 down regulation and histone methylation. A small
percentage of stem cells is able to resist differentiation-induced terminal
mitosis for weeks in culture, and can be reverted to proliferation by re-adding
the mitotic growth factors.

PMCID: PMC4022689
PMID: 24855540  [PubMed]


114. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jun;23(6):1701-8.

BCL2L10 is frequently silenced by promoter hypermethylation in gastric cancer.

Mikata R(1), Fukai K, Imazeki F, Arai M, Fujiwara K, Yonemitsu Y, Zhang K, Nabeya
Y, Ochiai T, Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

In gastric cancer, several tumor suppressor and tumor-related genes are silenced 
by aberrant methylation. Previously, we demonstrated that BCL2L10, which belongs 
to the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family, was transcriptionally repressed by promoter
hypermethylation and that its overexpression caused apoptosis and growth
inhibition of gastric cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the
methylation status of BCL2L10 and its expression in 21 gastric cancer tissues and
corresponding non-neoplastic mucosae along with the methylation status of p16,
RUNX3, and hMLH1 genes by using methylation specific PCR. In addition, we
examined the association between the methylation status of each gene and the
expression of EZH2, which was associated with DNA methylation of its target
genes. As a result, aberrant methylation of BCL2L10 was detected in 38% of
gastric cancer and in 24% of corresponding non-neoplastic mucosae and correlated 
with low expression of BCL2L10. Methylation of p16, RUNX3, and hMLH1 was found in
gastric cancer and in corresponding non-neoplastic mucosae at almost similar
frequencies as previous reports. Expression of EZH2 was detected more frequently 
in tumors (48%) as compared to corresponding non-neoplastic mucosae (10%)
(p=0.006), however, no significant difference was found between expression of
EZH2 and the methylation frequency of each gene. In conclusion, our data suggest 
that silencing of BCL2L10 by aberrant methylation is a common feature in gastric 
cancer and its inactivation may be involved in the early steps of gastric
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20428828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Dig Dis. 2010 Apr;11(2):88-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-2980.2010.00420.x.

Expression of polycomb protein EZH2 in multi-stage tissues of gastric
carcinogenesis.

Cai GH(1), Wang K, Miao Q, Peng YS, Chen XY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role and significance of the polycomb group (PcG) protein
EZH2 (enhancer of zeste homolog 2) in the multi-step process of intestinal-type
gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Gastric specimens were obtained from 142 patients with gastric disease, 
including 34 with chronic non-atrophic gastritis (NCAG), 33 chronic atrophic
gastritis (CAG) with intestinal metaplasia (IM), 40 CAG with dysplasia (DYS) and 
35 with intestinal-type gastric carcinomas (GC), and 32 Helicobacter
pylori-negative controls. The EZH2 protein was stained by the immunohistochemical
method and was expressed as the intensity and percentage of the total number of
epithelial cells. The chronic gastritis and the grading of dysplasia were
classified according to Chinese National Consensus on chronic gastritis and the
Padova international classification.
RESULTS: The EZH2 protein levels in the specimens of normal gastric tissue, NCAG,
CAG with IM, DYS and intestinal-type GC were gradually increased (P < 0.05), but 
statistical significance was not found between the groups of DYS and GC.
CONCLUSION: PcG protein EZH2 plays an important role in the multi-step process of
intestinal-type gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20402834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Hepatol. 2010 Jun;52(6):854-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.01.027. Epub 2010 Mar 
24.

The polycomb group gene product Ezh2 regulates proliferation and differentiation 
of murine hepatic stem/progenitor cells.

Aoki R(1), Chiba T, Miyagi S, Negishi M, Konuma T, Taniguchi H, Ogawa M, Yokosuka
O, Iwama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Polycomb group proteins initiate and maintain gene silencing
through chromatin modifications and contribute to the maintenance of self-renewal
in a variety of stem cells. Among polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs), PRC2
initiates gene silencing by methylating histone H3 lysine 27, and PRC1 maintains 
gene silencing through mono-ubiquitination of histone H2A lysine 119. We have
previously shown that Bmi1, a core component of PRC1, tightly regulates the
self-renewal of hepatic stem/progenitor cells.
METHODS: In this study, we conducted lentivirus-mediated knockdown of Ezh2 to
characterise the function of Ezh2, a major component of PRC2, in hepatic
stem/progenitor cells.
RESULTS: Loss of Ezh2 function in embryonic murine hepatic stem/progenitor cells 
severely impaired proliferation and self-renewal capability. This effect was more
prominent than that of Bmi1-knockdown and was partially abrogated by the deletion
of both Ink4a and Arf, major targets of PRC1 and PRC2. Importantly,
Ezh2-knockdown but not Bmi1-knockdown promoted the differentiation and terminal
maturation of hepatocytes, followed by the up-regulation of several
transcriptional regulators of hepatocyte differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that Ezh2 plays an essential role in the
maintenance of both the proliferative and self-renewal capacity of hepatic
stem/progenitor cells and the full execution of their differentiation.

Copyright 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20395008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Jul 10;637(1-3):16-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.03.051.
Epub 2010 Apr 10.

Curcumin induces down-regulation of EZH2 expression through the MAPK pathway in
MDA-MB-435 human breast cancer cells.

Hua WF(1), Fu YS, Liao YJ, Xia WJ, Chen YC, Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Curcumin, a natural compound isolated from turmeric, may inhibit cell
proliferation in various tumor cells through a mechanism that is not fully
understood. The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene is overexpressed in human
breast cancers with poor prognosis. In this study, we observed a dose- and
time-dependent down-regulation of expression of EZH2 by curcumin that correlates 
with decreased proliferation in the MDA-MB-435 breast cancer cell line. The
curcumin treatment resulted in an accumulation of cells in the G(1) phase of the 
cell cycle. Further investigation revealed that curcumin-induced down-regulation 
of EZH2 through stimulation of three major members of the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathway: c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 kinase. These data suggest that an
underlying mechanism of the MAPK pathway mediates the down-regulation of EZH2,
thus contributing to the anti-proliferative effects of curcumin against breast
cancer.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20385124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Cycle. 2010 Apr 15;9(8):1445-6. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

MicroRNA-214 and polycomb group proteins: a regulatory circuit controlling
differentiation and cell fate decisions.

Juan AH, Sartorelli V.

PMCID: PMC2903648
PMID: 20372071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2010 Feb;16(2):123-8.

[EZH2 expression in human prostate cancer and its clinicopathologic
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Fan QH, Fan XS, Zhou W, Qiu Y, Qiu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jiangsu Provincial Geriatrics Hospital, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210024, China. lijiang6993@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of the EZH2 protein and EZH2 mRNA in
human prostate cancer (PCa) and their correlation with the clinicopathologic
parameters.
METHODS: A tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed, which contained 48 dots of
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples of human PCa. The expressions of 
the EZH2 protein and EZH2 mRNA in the samples were detected by
immunohistochemistry (EnVision) and in situ hybridization (ISH). Another 15 cases
of human benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and 12 cases of human prostate
intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) were taken as controls.
RESULTS: The positive rates of the EZH2 protein and mRNA were significantly
higher in PCa than in BPH and HGPIN (87.5% vs 13.33% and 16.67%, 81.25% vs 6.67% 
and 16.67%, P < 0.05). The positive expression of the EZH2 protein was 96.67% and
72.22% in the Gleason score > or = 7 and Gleason score < or = 6 groups,
respectively, with significant differences between the two groups (P < 0.05). The
positivity of the EZH2 protein was significantly related to the TNM stage,
increasing with tumor progression (P < 0.05), but not to age and serum PSA (P >
0.05), and so was that of EZH2 mRNA to TNM stage (P < 0.05), but not to age,
serum PSA and Gleason score (P > 0.05). When the above characteristics were
regarded as two-level discrete variables, both the EZH2 protein and EZH2 mRNA
showed statistically significant differences in the positive expression rate (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: The over-expressions of the EZH2 protein and EZH2 mRNA may play an
important role in the pathogenesis and progression of PCa and provide some
reference indexes for estimating the malignancy, progression and prognosis of
PCa.

PMID: 20369694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Cell Biol. 2010 Apr 5;189(1):127-41. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200908151.

Cross talk between microRNA and epigenetic regulation in adult neurogenesis.

Szulwach KE(1), Li X, Smrt RD, Li Y, Luo Y, Lin L, Santistevan NJ, Li W, Zhao X, 
Jin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Both microRNAs (miRNAs) and epigenetic regulation have important functions in
stem cell biology, although the interactions between these two pathways are not
well understood. Here, we show that MeCP2, a DNA methyl-CpG-binding protein, can 
epigenetically regulate specific miRNAs in adult neural stem cells (aNSCs).
MeCP2-mediated epigenetic regulation of one such miRNA, miR-137, involves
coregulation by Sox2, a core transcription factor in stem cells. miR-137
modulates the proliferation and differentiation of aNSCs in vitro and in vivo.
Overexpression of miR-137 promotes the proliferation of aNSCs, whereas a
reduction of miR-137 enhances aNSC differentiation. We further show that miR-137 
post-transcriptionally represses the expression of Ezh2, a histone
methyltransferase and Polycomb group (PcG) protein. The miR-137-mediated
repression of Ezh2 feeds back to chromatin, resulting in a global decrease in
histone H3 trimethyl lysine 27. Coexpression of Ezh2 can rescue phenotypes
associated with miR-137 overexpression. These results demonstrate that cross talk
between miRNA and epigenetic regulation contributes to the modulation of adult
neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2854370
PMID: 20368621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 20;107(16):7317-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000031107. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Histone H3K27 methyltransferase Ezh2 represses Wnt genes to facilitate
adipogenesis.

Wang L(1), Jin Q, Lee JE, Su IH, Ge K.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Biology Section, Clinical Endocrinology Branch, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Wnt/beta-catenin signaling inhibits adipogenesis. Genome-wide profiling studies
have revealed the enrichment of histone H3K27 methyltransferase Ezh2 on Wnt
genes. However, the functional significance of such a direct link between the two
types of developmental regulators in mammalian cells, and the role of Ezh2 in
adipogenesis, remain unclear. Here we show Ezh2 and its H3K27 methyltransferase
activity are required for adipogenesis. Ezh2 directly represses Wnt1, -6, -10a,
and -10b genes in preadipocytes and during adipogenesis. Deletion of Ezh2
eliminates H3K27me3 on Wnt promoters and derepresses Wnt expression, which leads 
to activation of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and inhibition of adipogenesis.
Ectopic expression of the wild-type (WT) Ezh2, but not the enzymatically inactive
F667I mutant, prevents the loss of H3K27me3 and the defects in adipogenesis in
Ezh2(-/-) preadipocytes. The adipogenesis defects in Ezh2(-/-) cells can be
rescued by expression of adipogenic transcription factors PPARgamma, C/EBPalpha, 
or inhibitors of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Interestingly, Ezh2(-/-) cells show 
marked increase of H3K27 acetylation globally as well as on Wnt promoters. These 
results indicate that H3K27 methyltransferase Ezh2 directly represses Wnt genes
to facilitate adipogenesis and suggest that acetylation and trimethylation on
H3K27 play opposing roles in regulating Wnt expression.

PMCID: PMC2867706
PMID: 20368440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):993-1006. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0438. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

Xenoestrogen-induced regulation of EZH2 and histone methylation via estrogen
receptor signaling to PI3K/AKT.

Bredfeldt TG(1), Greathouse KL, Safe SH, Hung MC, Bedford MT, Walker CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park Research Division, 1808 Park Road 1C, P.O. Box 389,
Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Although rapid, membrane-activated estrogen receptor (ER) signaling is no longer 
controversial, the biological function of this nongenomic signaling is not fully 
characterized. We found that rapid signaling from membrane-associated ER
regulates the histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). In
response to both 17beta-estradiol (E2) and the xenoestrogen diethylstilbestrol,
ER signaling via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B phosphorylates
EZH2 at S21, reducing levels of trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 in
hormone-responsive cells. During windows of uterine development that are
susceptible to developmental reprogramming, activation of this ER signaling
pathway by diethylstilbestrol resulted in phosphorylation of EZH2 and reduced
levels of trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 in chromatin of the
developing uterus. Furthermore, activation of nongenomic signaling reprogrammed
the expression profile of estrogen-responsive genes in uterine myometrial cells, 
suggesting this as a potential mechanism for developmental reprogramming caused
by early-life exposure to xenoestrogens. These data demonstrate that rapid ER
signaling provides a direct linkage between xenoestrogen-induced nuclear hormone 
receptor signaling and modulation of the epigenetic machinery during tissue
development.

PMCID: PMC2870935
PMID: 20351197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jan;125(2):387-94. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0836-9. 
Epub 2010 Mar 20.

Decreased expression of EZH2 is associated with upregulation of ER and favorable 
outcome to tamoxifen in advanced breast cancer.

Reijm EA(1), Jansen MP, Ruigrok-Ritstier K, van Staveren IL, Look MP, van Gelder 
ME, Sieuwerts AM, Sleijfer S, Foekens JA, Berns EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC/Daniel den Hoed Cancer
Center/Josephine Nefkens Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The purpose of this study is to investigate EZH2 in a large series of breast
cancer patients for its prognostic and predictive value, and to evaluate its
functional role in treatment response in vitro. EZH2 levels were measured using
quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT-PCR) in primary breast
cancer specimens and related to clinicopathologic factors and disease outcome.
EZH2 expression was downregulated with siRNAs in MCF7, to assess expression
alterations of putative EZH2 downstream genes and to determine cell numbers after
treatment with the anti-estrogen ICI 164384. In 688 lymph node-negative patients 
who did not receive adjuvant systemic therapy, EZH2 was not significantly
correlated with metastasis-free survival (MFS). In 278 patients with advanced
disease treated with first-line tamoxifen monotherapy, the tertile with highest
EZH2 levels was associated with the lowest clinical benefit (OR = 0.48; P = 0.02)
and with a shorter progression-free survival (PFS) in both univariate (HR = 1.80;
P < 0.001) and multivariate analysis, including traditional factors (HR = 1.61; P
= 0.004). In vitro, EZH2 silencing in MCF7 caused a 38% decrease in cell numbers 
(P < 0.001) whereas ICI 164384 treatment resulted in a 25% decrease (P < 0.001)
compared to controls. Combining EZH2 silencing with ICI treatment reduced cell
numbers with 67% (P < 0.001) compared to control conditions. EZH2 downregulation 
was associated with an almost two-fold upregulation of the estrogen receptor
alpha (ER) (P = 0.001). In conclusion, EZH2 has no prognostic value in breast
cancer. High levels of EZH2 are associated with poor outcome to tamoxifen therapy
in advanced breast cancer. Downregulated EZH2 leads to upregulation of the ER and
better response to anti-estrogens.

PMID: 20306127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Epigenetics. 2010 Apr;5(3):229-40. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

5-azacytidine treatment reorganizes genomic histone modification patterns.

Komashko VM, Farnham PJ.

Methylation of DNA in combination with histone modifications establishes an
epigenetic code that ensures the proper control of gene expression. Although DNA 
methyltransferases have been shown to interact with histone methyltransferases
such as EZH2 (which methylates histone H3 on lysine 27) and G9a (which methylates
histone H3 on lysine 9), the relationship between DNA methylation and repressive 
histone marks has not been fully studied. In cancer cells, promoters of genes are
often aberrantly methylated. Accordingly, 5-azacytidine (a DNA demethylating
drug) is used for treating patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. However, no
genome-scale studies of the effects of this drug have been reported. In this
work, we report the effects of 5-azacytidine on global gene expression and
analyze ~24,000 human promoters using ChIP-chip to determine how 5-azacytidine
treatment effects H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 levels. We found that (1) 5-azacytidine
treatment results in large changes in gene regulation with distinct functional
categories of genes showing increased (e.g. C2H2 zinc finger transcription
factors) and decreased (e.g. genes involved in regulation of mitochondria and
oxidoreductase activity) levels; (2) most genes that show altered expression are 
not regulated by promoters that display DNA methylation prior to the treatment;
(3) certain gene classes switch their repression mark upon treatment with
5-azacytidine (from H3K27me3 to H3K9me3 and vice versa); and (4) most changes in 
gene expression are not due to relief of repression mediated by DNA or histone
methylation.

PMID: 20305384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. EMBO J. 2010 Apr 21;29(8):1401-11. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.37. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

UTX mediates demethylation of H3K27me3 at muscle-specific genes during
myogenesis.

Seenundun S(1), Rampalli S, Liu QC, Aziz A, Palii C, Hong S, Blais A, Brand M, Ge
K, Dilworth FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Sprott Center for Stem Cell Research, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Polycomb (PcG) and Trithorax (TrxG) group proteins act antagonistically to
establish tissue-specific patterns of gene expression. The PcG protein Ezh2
facilitates repression by catalysing histone H3-Lys27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). 
For expression, H3K27me3 marks are removed and replaced by TrxG protein catalysed
histone H3-Lys4 trimethylation (H3K4me3). Although H3K27 demethylases have been
identified, the mechanism by which these enzymes are targeted to specific genomic
regions to remove H3K27me3 marks has not been established. Here, we demonstrate a
two-step mechanism for UTX-mediated demethylation at muscle-specific genes during
myogenesis. Although the transactivator Six4 initially recruits UTX to the
regulatory region of muscle genes, the resulting loss of H3K27me3 marks is
limited to the region upstream of the transcriptional start site. Removal of the 
repressive H3K27me3 mark within the coding region then requires RNA Polymerase II
(Pol II) elongation. Interestingly, blocking Pol II elongation on transcribed
genes leads to increased H3K27me3 within the coding region, and formation of
bivalent (H3K27me3/H3K4me3) chromatin domains. Thus, removal of repressive
H3K27me3 marks by UTX occurs through targeted recruitment followed by spreading
across the gene.

PMCID: PMC2868576
PMID: 20300060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Dec;38(12):856-8.

[Recent advances on EZH2 in malignant tumors].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J, Fan QH.

PMID: 20193471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Blood. 2010 Apr 15;115(15):3098-108. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-233858. Epub 2010
Feb 26.

Signatures of polycomb repression and reduced H3K4 trimethylation are associated 
with p15INK4b DNA methylation in AML.

Paul TA(1), Bies J, Small D, Wolff L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4263, USA.

DNA hypermethylation of the p15INK4b tumor suppressor gene is commonly observed
in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Repressive histone modifications and their
associated binding proteins have been implicated in the regulation of DNA
methylation and the transcriptional repression of genes with DNA methylation. We 
have used high-density chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip to determine the
histone modifications that normally regulate p15INK4b expression in AML cells and
how these marks are altered in cells that have p15INK4b DNA methylation. In AML
patient blasts without p15INK4b DNA methylation, a bivalent pattern of active
(H3K4me3) and repressive (H3K27me3) modifications exist at the p15INK4b promoter.
AML patient blasts with p15INK4b DNA methylation lose H3K4me3 at p15INK4b and
become exclusively marked by H3K27me3. H3K27me3, as well as EZH2, extends
throughout p14ARF and p16INK4a, indicating that polycomb repression of p15INK4b
is a common feature in all AML blasts irrespective of the DNA methylation status 
of the gene. Reactivation of p15INK4b expression in AML cell lines and patient
blasts using 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) and trichostatin A increased
H3K4me3 and maintained H3K27me3 enrichment at p15INK4b. These data indicate that 
AML cells with p15INK4b DNA methylation have an altered histone methylation
pattern compared with unmethylated samples and that these changes are reversible 
by epigenetic drugs.

PMCID: PMC2858468
PMID: 20190193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Med. 2010 Mar;16(3):286-94. doi: 10.1038/nm.2100. Epub 2010 Feb 14.

An oncogene-tumor suppressor cascade drives metastatic prostate cancer by
coordinately activating Ras and nuclear factor-kappaB.

Min J(1), Zaslavsky A, Fedele G, McLaughlin SK, Reczek EE, De Raedt T, Guney I,
Strochlic DE, Macconaill LE, Beroukhim R, Bronson RT, Ryeom S, Hahn WC, Loda M,
Cichowski K.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Metastasis is responsible for the majority of prostate cancer-related deaths;
however, little is known about the molecular mechanisms that underlie this
process. Here we identify an oncogene-tumor suppressor cascade that promotes
prostate cancer growth and metastasis by coordinately activating the small GTPase
Ras and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). Specifically, we show that loss of the
Ras GTPase-activating protein (RasGAP) gene DAB2IP induces metastatic prostate
cancer in an orthotopic mouse tumor model. Notably, DAB2IP functions as a
signaling scaffold that coordinately regulates Ras and NF-kappaB through distinct
domains to promote tumor growth and metastasis, respectively. DAB2IP is
suppressed in human prostate cancer, where its expression inversely correlates
with tumor grade and predicts prognosis. Moreover, we report that epigenetic
silencing of DAB2IP is a key mechanism by which the polycomb-group protein
histone-lysine N-methyltransferase EZH2 activates Ras and NF-kappaB and triggers 
metastasis. These studies define the mechanism by which two major pathways can be
simultaneously activated in metastatic prostate cancer and establish EZH2 as a
driver of metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2903662
PMID: 20154697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Eur J Cancer Care (Engl). 2011 Jan;20(1):106-12. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2354.2009.01148.x.

EZH2 silencing by RNA interference inhibits proliferation in bladder cancer cell 
lines.

Zhang YB(1), Niu HT, Chang JW, Dong GL, Ma XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The North China Coal Medical University, Tangshan,
Hebei Province, China.

The Enhancer of Zeste homologue2 gene (EZH2) is frequently expressed at high
levels in malignant tumours, including bladder cancer. It functions as a
transcriptional regulator to the maintenance of cell identity, cell cycle
regulation and oncogenesis. In the study, we detected EZH2 expression in bladder 
cancer tissues. These results showed EZH2 high expression in bladder cancer
tissue at level of transcript and protein compared with normal bladder tissue and
EZH2 expression correlated positively with tumour stage and grade. Then, we used 
RNA interference to inhibit EZH2 expression in bladder cancer EJ cell line.
Efficient downregulation of EZH2 resulted in significantly decreased cell
proliferation in EJ cells and retarded transition of G(1) phase to S phase. Our
data suggest that EZH2 is involved in the tumourigenesis of bladder cancer and
EZH2 downregulation contributes to inhibiting malignant growth by retarding cell 
entrance to S phase.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 20148941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. APMIS. 2010 Mar;118(3):196-202. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2009.02579.x.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression is associated with tumor cell
proliferation and metastasis in gastric cancer.

Choi JH(1), Song YS, Yoon JS, Song KW, Lee YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine,
Gyunggi-do, Korea. jhcmd@hanyang.ac.kr

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a member of the polycomb group of
proteins, plays an important role in cell proliferation and cell cycle
regulation. EZH2 is overexpressed in aggressive forms of prostate, breast,
bladder, and endometrial cancers. However, the role of EZH2 expression in gastric
cancer has not been fully determined. This study was conducted to investigate the
correlation between EZH2 and cell cycle-related molecules, and the clinical value
of EZH2 expression in gastric cancer. We analyzed EZH2 expression using Western
blotting in AGS, MKN-28, SNU-16, SNU-484, SNU-601, and SNU-638 gastric cancer
cell lines. After transfection of EZH2 siRNA into MKN-28 cells, the change in
cell cycle-related molecules was assessed by Western blot analysis. Expression of
EZH2, Ki-67, and p53 was determined by immunohistochemical staining of tissue
microarrays from specimens of 137 cases of resected gastric cancer. We found high
expressions of EZH2 in all of the tested gastric cancer cell lines. RNA
interference of EZH2 induced upregulation of p53 and HDAC1 and downregulation of 
cyclin D1 and cyclin E. High EZH2 expression was observed in 60.6% of gastric
cancers and in 6.7% of non-neoplastic gastric tissues (p < 0.01); 40.1% were
positive for p53 in gastric cancers. High EZH2 expression was correlated with
Ki-67 and p53 expressions and was significantly associated with distant
metastases and non-signet ring cells. Our results suggest that high EZH2
expression is associated with tumor cell proliferation and metastasis in gastric 
cancer.

PMID: 20132185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncol Rep. 2010 Mar;23(3):677-84.

The knock-down of overexpressed EZH2 and BMI-1 does not prevent osteosarcoma
growth.

Sasaki H(1), Setoguchi T, Matsunoshita Y, Gao H, Hirotsu M, Komiya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima 890-8520, Japan.

Polycomb group proteins control the transcriptional memory of cells by
maintaining the stable silencing of specific sets of genes through chromatin
modifications. Polycomb group protein complexes control gene repression through
recruitment of histone deacetylase. This recruitment leads to trimethylation of
Lys27 of histone H3 (H3K27). Histone H3K27 trimethylation is a property of stably
silenced heterochromatin. EZH2 and BMI-1 are pivotal components of polycomb group
protein complexes. Increased EZH2 levels have been found in several malignancies 
and reported as a molecular biomarker of poor prognosis. Similarly, BMI-1 has
also been found to be associated with malignant transformation. In addition,
inhibition of EZH2 or BMI-1 inhibits the growth of various types of malignancies.
The expression of BMI-1 and EZH2 in human osteosarcoma has not been clearly
determined. We examined the potential involvement of aberrant polycomb group
protein expression in the pathogenesis of osteosarcoma. Real-time PCR revealed
that expression of EZH2 in 143B, HOS, NOS-1 and Saos2 was increased compared to
normal osteoblasts. BMI-1 was also up-regulated in 143B, HOS and NOS-1.
Expression of EZH2 and BMI-1 were up-regulated in osteosarcoma patient biopsy
specimens compared to normal bone. Immunohistochemical examinations showed that
EZH2 and BMI-1 were up-regulated in osteosarcoma cells and that trimethylation of
histone H3K27 was increased. We examined the effects of knock down of EZH2 and
BMI-1 by shRNA. Unexpectedly, the knock-down of EZH2 and BMI-1 did not prevent
osteosarcoma growth either in vitro or in vivo. Our findings suggest that EZH2
and BMI-1 may be tumor-associated antigens of osteosarcoma, but are not useful
molecular targets of osteosarcoma treatment.

PMID: 20127006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genes Dev. 2010 Feb 15;24(4):368-80. doi: 10.1101/gad.1886410. Epub 2010 Feb 1.

Jarid2 and PRC2, partners in regulating gene expression.

Li G(1), Margueron R, Ku M, Chambon P, Bernstein BE, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University Medical School, New York,
New York 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Jul 22;466(7305):417.

The Polycomb group proteins foster gene repression profiles required for proper
development and unimpaired adulthood, and comprise the components of the
Polycomb-Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) including the histone H3 Lys 27 (H3K27)
methyltransferase Ezh2. How mammalian PRC2 accesses chromatin is unclear. We
found that Jarid2 associates with PRC2 and stimulates its enzymatic activity in
vitro. Jarid2 contains a Jumonji C domain, but is devoid of detectable histone
demethylase activity. Instead, its artificial recruitment to a promoter in vivo
resulted in corecruitment of PRC2 with resultant increased levels of di- and
trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me2/3). Jarid2 colocalizes with Ezh2 and MTF2, a
homolog of Drosophila Pcl, at endogenous genes in embryonic stem (ES) cells.
Jarid2 can bind DNA and its recruitment in ES cells is interdependent with that
of PRC2, as Jarid2 knockdown reduced PRC2 at its target promoters, and ES cells
devoid of the PRC2 component EED are deficient in Jarid2 promoter access. In
addition to the well-documented defects in embryonic viability upon
down-regulation of Jarid2, ES cell differentiation is impaired, as is Oct4
silencing.

PMCID: PMC2816736
PMID: 20123894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2010 Jun;16(6):751-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2010.01.012. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Identification of stem cell transcriptional programs normally expressed in
embryonic and neural stem cells in alloreactive CD8+ T cells mediating
graft-versus-host disease.

Kato K(1), Cui S, Kuick R, Mineishi S, Hexner E, Ferrara JL, Emerson SG, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-5942, USA.

A hallmark of graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD), a life-threatening complication
after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, is the cytopathic
injury of host tissues mediated by persistent alloreactive effector T cells
(T(E)). However, the mechanisms that regulate the persistence of alloreactive
T(E) during GVHD remain largely unknown. Using mouse GVHD models, we demonstrate 
that alloreactive CD8(+) T(E) rapidly diminished in vivo when adoptively
transferred into irradiated secondary congenic recipient mice. In contrast,
although alloreactive CD8(+) T(E) underwent massive apoptosis upon chronic
exposure to alloantigens, they proliferated in vivo in secondary allogeneic
recipients, persisted, and caused severe GVHD. Thus, the continuous proliferation
of alloreactive CD8(+) T(E), which is mediated by alloantigenic stimuli rather
than homeostatic factors, is critical to maintaining their persistence. Gene
expression profile analysis revealed that although alloreactive CD8(+) T(E)
increased the expression of genes associated with cell death, they activated a
group of stem cell genes normally expressed in embryonic and neural stem cells.
Most of these stem cell genes are associated with cell cycle regulation, DNA
replication, chromatin modification, and transcription. One of these genes, Ezh2,
which encodes a chromatin modifying enzyme, was abundantly expressed in CD8(+)
T(E). Silencing Ezh2 significantly reduced the proliferation of
alloantigen-activated CD8(+) T cells. Thus, these findings identify that a group 
of stem cell genes could play important roles in sustaining terminally
differentiated alloreactive CD8(+) T(E) and may be therapeutic targets for
controlling GVHD.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Published
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2913321
PMID: 20116439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):100-1. doi: 10.1038/ng0210-100.

Deregulation of H3K27 methylation in cancer.

Martinez-Garcia E, Licht JD.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):181-5.

A new study now reports recurrent somatic mutation of EZH2, a histone
methyltransferase that modifies H3K27, in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). 
There is now evidence for both increased and decreased activity of enzymes
controlling H3K27 methylation in cancer, suggesting that a precise balance of
this methylation is critical for normal cell growth.

PMID: 20104248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Prostate. 2010 May 1;70(6):675-88. doi: 10.1002/pros.21112.

Comprehensive evaluation of the role of EZH2 in the growth, invasion, and
aggression of a panel of prostate cancer cell lines.

Karanikolas BD(1), Figueiredo ML, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California
90095-1738, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although most prostate cancers respond well to initial treatments, a 
fraction of prostate cancers are more aggressive and will recur and metastasize. 
At that point, there are few treatment options available. Significant efforts
have been made to identify biomarkers that will identify these more aggressive
cancers to tailor a more vigorous treatment in order to improve outcome. Polycomb
Group protein enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) was found to be overexpressed in
metastatic prostate tumors, and is considered an excellent candidate for such a
biomarker. Scattered studies have found that EZH2 overexpression causes
neoplastic transformation, invasion, and growth of prostate cells. However, these
studies utilized different systems and cell lines, and so are difficult to
correlate with one another.
METHODS: In this study, a comprehensive evaluation of the phenotypic effects of
EZH2 in a panel of five prostate cancer cell lines was performed. By using
multiple cell lines, and examining overexpression and knockdown of EZH2
concurrently, a broad view of EZH2's role in prostate cancer was achieved.
RESULTS: Overexpression of EZH2 led to more aggressive behaviors in all prostate 
cell lines tested. In contrast, downregulation of EZH2 reduced invasion and
tumorigenicity of androgen-independent (AI) cell lines CWR22Rv1, PC3, and DU145, 
but not of androgen-dependent (AD) cell lines LAPC4 and LNCaP.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings from this study suggest that AI prostate tumors are more
dependent on EZH2 expression than AD tumors. Our observations provide an
explanation for the strong correlation between EZH2 overexpression and advanced
stage, aggressive prostate cancers.

PMCID: PMC2848714
PMID: 20087897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):181-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.518. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Somatic mutations altering EZH2 (Tyr641) in follicular and diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas of germinal-center origin.

Morin RD(1), Johnson NA, Severson TM, Mungall AJ, An J, Goya R, Paul JE, Boyle M,
Woolcock BW, Kuchenbauer F, Yap D, Humphries RK, Griffith OL, Shah S, Zhu H,
Kimbara M, Shashkin P, Charlot JF, Tcherpakov M, Corbett R, Tam A, Varhol R,
Smailus D, Moksa M, Zhao Y, Delaney A, Qian H, Birol I, Schein J, Moore R, Holt
R, Horsman DE, Connors JM, Jones S, Aparicio S, Hirst M, Gascoyne RD, Marra MA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Feb;42(2):100-1.

Follicular lymphoma (FL) and the GCB subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) derive from germinal center B cells. Targeted resequencing studies have
revealed mutations in various genes encoding proteins in the NF-kappaB pathway
that contribute to the activated B-cell (ABC) DLBCL subtype, but thus far few
GCB-specific mutations have been identified. Here we report recurrent somatic
mutations affecting the polycomb-group oncogene EZH2, which encodes a histone
methyltransferase responsible for trimethylating Lys27 of histone H3 (H3K27).
After the recent discovery of mutations in KDM6A (UTX), which encodes the histone
H3K27me3 demethylase UTX, in several cancer types, EZH2 is the second histone
methyltransferase gene found to be mutated in cancer. These mutations, which
result in the replacement of a single tyrosine in the SET domain of the EZH2
protein (Tyr641), occur in 21.7% of GCB DLBCLs and 7.2% of FLs and are absent
from ABC DLBCLs. Our data are consistent with the notion that EZH2 proteins with 
mutant Tyr641 have reduced enzymatic activity in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2850970
PMID: 20081860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2009 Dec;31(6):707-11. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2009.06.011.

[Role of Ezh2 in the all-trans retinoic acid induced P19 neural differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Ge CT(1), Zhang Y, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of Ezh2 in the all-trans retinoic acid RA induced
P19 neural differentiation.
METHODS: The expression of Ngn1 in the RA induced P19 cells was detected at the
mRNA and protein levels using real time RT-PCR and Western blot assays. The
binding of Ezh2 and H3K27me3 on the Ngn 1 promoter was analyzed using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULT: In the RA induced P19 cells, the recruitment of Ezh2 and its methylated
substrate H3K27me3 on the promoter of Ngn 1 gene elevated in the first 2 days,
and then declined rapidly, followed by the initiation of neuronal
differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Ezh2 produces a repressive histone mark H3K27me3 in the early stage 
of RA induced P12 cells. By avoiding the premature expression of Ngn1 gene, Ezh2 
can ensure the normal differentiation of P19 cells.

PMID: 20078939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell. 2009 Dec 24;139(7):1290-302. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.12.002.

Jarid2/Jumonji coordinates control of PRC2 enzymatic activity and target gene
occupancy in pluripotent cells.

Peng JC(1), Valouev A, Swigut T, Zhang J, Zhao Y, Sidow A, Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) regulates key developmental genes in
embryonic stem (ES) cells and during development. Here we show that
Jarid2/Jumonji, a protein enriched in pluripotent cells and a founding member of 
the Jumonji C (JmjC) domain protein family, is a PRC2 subunit in ES cells.
Genome-wide ChIP-seq analyses of Jarid2, Ezh2, and Suz12 binding reveal that
Jarid2 and PRC2 occupy the same genomic regions. We further show that Jarid2
promotes PRC2 recruitment to the target genes while inhibiting PRC2 histone
methyltransferase activity, suggesting that it acts as a "molecular rheostat"
that finely calibrates PRC2 functions at developmental genes. Using Xenopus
laevis as a model we demonstrate that Jarid2 knockdown impairs the induction of
gastrulation genes in blastula embryos and results in failure of differentiation.
Our findings illuminate a mechanism of histone methylation regulation in
pluripotent cells and during early cell-fate transitions.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911953
PMID: 20064375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Apr;67(7):1165-76. doi: 10.1007/s00018-009-0242-9. Epub
2010 Jan 5.

Histone deacetylase controls adult stem cell aging by balancing the expression of
polycomb genes and jumonji domain containing 3.

Jung JW(1), Lee S, Seo MS, Park SB, Kurtz A, Kang SK, Kang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Adult Stem Cell Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Aging is linked to loss of the self-renewal capacity of adult stem cells. Here,
we observed that human multipotent stem cells (MSCs) underwent cellular
senescence in vitro. Decreased expression of histone deacetylases (HDACs),
followed by downregulation of polycomb group genes (PcGs), such as BMI1, EZH2 and
SUZ12, and by upregulation of jumonji domain containing 3 (JMJD3), was observed
in senescent MSCs. Similarly, HDAC inhibitors induced cellular senescence through
downregulation of PcGs and upregulation of JMJD3. Regulation of PcGs was
associated with HDAC inhibitor-induced hypophosphorylation of RB, which causes RB
to bind to and decrease the transcriptional activity of E2F. JMJD3 expression
regulation was dependant on histone acetylation status at its promoter regions. A
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) inhibitor prevented replicative senescence of
MSCs. These results suggest that HDAC activity might be important for MSC
self-renewal by balancing PcGs and JMJD3 expression, which govern cellular
senescence by p16(INK4A) regulation.

PMCID: PMC2835723
PMID: 20049504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. World J Urol. 2010 Oct;28(5):631-5. doi: 10.1007/s00345-009-0498-6. Epub 2009 Dec
31.

Deregulation of EZH2 expression in human spermatogenic disorders and testicular
germ cell tumors.

Hinz S(1), Magheli A, Weikert S, Schulze W, Krause H, Schrader M, Miller K,
Kempkensteffen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charité, Campus Mitte,
Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany. stefan.hinz@charite.de

INTRODUCTION: Enhancer of Zeste 2 (EZH2) is an epigenetic transcriptional
repressor involved in cell cycle control and cell fate decisions. Since these
processes play key roles during intact spermatogenesis, deregulation of EZH2
expression may contribute to the development and progression of benign and
malignant testicular diseases. The objective of this study was to investigate the
expression profile of EZH2 in testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) and
spermatogenic defects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR was applied to quantify the m-RNA
expression of EZH2 in 64 seminomas 36 non-seminomas, 4 carcinomas in situ (CIS), 
40 samples harboring impaired spermatogenesis and 24 normal testicular reference 
biopsies.
RESULTS: EZH2 was expressed in 99% of TGCT samples and in all biopsies with
intact spermatogenesis. Its expression levels were highest in normal testicular
tissue, and continuously decreased with malignant transformation to CIS and
further progression to invasive TGCT (P < 0.001). EZH2 tumor levels were not
related to the histological TGCT subtype or clinical tumor stage. Comparison of
distinct stages of spermatogenic failure revealed an inverse association of EZH2 
levels to the severity of the spermatogenic defect (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Our data strongly suggest that in TGCT EZH2 does not exert its often 
assumed oncogenic properties during malignant transformation and progression.
High EZH2 levels in normal testicular tissue and the inverse association of its
expression levels with the severity of spermatogenic failure point to its
potential value as a molecular marker for spermatogenic defects and may indicate 
an important physiological role of EZH2 during intact spermatogenesis.

PMID: 20043168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. BMC Cancer. 2009 Dec 22;9:461. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-461.

Prognostic impact of H3K27me3 expression on locoregional progression after
chemoradiotherapy in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

He LR(1), Liu MZ, Li BK, Rao HL, Liao YJ, Guan XY, Zeng YX, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China. helirujasmine@163.com

BACKGROUND: Trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3) by enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is an epigenetic mark that mediates gene silencing. EZH2
is overexpressed and correlates with poor prognosis in many cancers. However, the
clinical implication of H3K27me3 in human malignancies has not been well
established. We wished to ascertain whether a correlation exists between the
expression of H3K27me3 and clinical outcome in a group of patients with
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) treated with definitive
chemoradiotherapy (CRT).
METHODS: The method of immunohistochemistry (IHC) was utilized to examine the
protein expression of H3K27me3 in 98 pretreatment biopsy specimens of ESCC and in
30 samples of normal esophageal mucosa. The clinical/prognostic significance of
H3K27me3 expression was statistically analyzed.
RESULTS: The expression frequency and expression levels of H3K27me3 were
significantly higher in ESCCs than in normal tissues. There was a positive
correlation between H3K27me3 expression and WHO grade (P = 0.016), tumor size (P 
= 0.019), T status (P = 0.024), locoregional progression (P = 0.009) and EZH2
expression (P = 0.036). High H3K27me3 expression was associated with poor
locoregional progression-free survival (LPFS) (P = 0.010) in ESCC. Further
analysis demonstrated that H3K27me3 could stratify patient outcome in T2-3 (P =
0.048), N0 (P = 0.005) and M0 (P = 0.018) stages as well as in CRT effective
group (P = 0.022).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests that H3K27me3 expression examined by IHC might be 
useful for stratifying LPFS for different subsets of ESCC patients treated with
definitive CRT.

PMCID: PMC2804715
PMID: 20028503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 21;2:70. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-70.

Identifying significant genetic regulatory networks in the prostate cancer from
microarray data based on transcription factor analysis and conditional
independency.

Yeh HY(1), Cheng SW, Lin YC, Yeh CY, Lin SF, Soo VW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, National Tsing Hua University, HsinChu 300,
Taiwan. d926708@oz.nthu.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is a world wide leading cancer and it is
characterized by its aggressive metastasis. According to the clinical
heterogeneity, prostate cancer displays different stages and grades related to
the aggressive metastasis disease. Although numerous studies used microarray
analysis and traditional clustering method to identify the individual genes
during the disease processes, the important gene regulations remain unclear. We
present a computational method for inferring genetic regulatory networks from
micorarray data automatically with transcription factor analysis and conditional 
independence testing to explore the potential significant gene regulatory
networks that are correlated with cancer, tumor grade and stage in the prostate
cancer.
RESULTS: To deal with missing values in microarray data, we used a
K-nearest-neighbors (KNN) algorithm to determine the precise expression values.
We applied web services technology to wrap the bioinformatics toolkits and
databases to automatically extract the promoter regions of DNA sequences and
predicted the transcription factors that regulate the gene expressions. We adopt 
the microarray datasets consists of 62 primary tumors, 41 normal prostate tissues
from Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) as a target dataset to evaluate our
method. The predicted results showed that the possible biomarker genes related to
cancer and denoted the androgen functions and processes may be in the development
of the prostate cancer and promote the cell death in cell cycle. Our predicted
results showed that sub-networks of genes SREBF1, STAT6 and PBX1 are strongly
related to a high extent while ETS transcription factors ELK1, JUN and EGR2 are
related to a low extent. Gene SLC22A3 may explain clinically the differentiation 
associated with the high grade cancer compared with low grade cancer. Enhancer of
Zeste Homolg 2 (EZH2) regulated by RUNX1 and STAT3 is correlated to the
pathological stage.
CONCLUSIONS: We provide a computational framework to reconstruct the genetic
regulatory network from the microarray data using biological knowledge and
constraint-based inferences. Our method is helpful in verifying possible
interaction relations in gene regulatory networks and filtering out incorrect
relations inferred by imperfect methods. We predicted not only individual gene
related to cancer but also discovered significant gene regulation networks. Our
method is also validated in several enriched published papers and databases and
the significant gene regulatory networks perform critical biological functions
and processes including cell adhesion molecules, androgen and estrogen
metabolism, smooth muscle contraction, and GO-annotated processes. Those
significant gene regulations and the critical concept of tumor progression are
useful to understand cancer biology and disease treatment.

PMCID: PMC2805685
PMID: 20025723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):496-503. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp314. Epub 2009 Dec
16.

The Bmi-1 polycomb protein antagonizes the
(-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate-dependent suppression of skin cancer cell
survival.

Balasubramanian S(1), Adhikary G, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, 108 North Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) proteins are epigenetic regulators of gene expression
that enhance cell survival. This regulation is achieved via action of two
multiprotein PcG complexes--PRC2 (EED) and PRC1 [B-cell-specific Moloney murine
leukemia virus integration site 1 (Bmi-1)]. These complexes modulate gene
expression by increasing histone methylation and reducing acetylation--leading to
a closed chromatin conformation. Activity of these proteins is associated with
increased cell proliferation and survival. We show increased expression of key
PcG proteins in immortalized keratinocytes and skin cancer cell lines. We examine
the role of two key PcG proteins, Bmi-1 and enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2),
and the impact of the active agent in green tea, (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate
(EGCG), on the function of these regulators. EGCG treatment of SCC-13 cells
reduces Bmi-1 and Ezh2 level and this is associated with reduced cell survival.
The reduction in survival is associated with a global reduction in histone H3
lysine 27 trimethylation, a hallmark of PRC2 complex action. This change in PcG
protein expression is associated with reduced expression of key proteins that
enhance progression through the cell cycle [cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)1, cdk2,
cdk4, cyclin D1, cyclin E, cyclin A and cyclin B1] and increased expression of
proteins that inhibit cell cycle progression (p21 and p27). Apoptosis is also
enhanced, as evidenced by increased caspase 9, 8 and 3 cleavage and increased
poly(adenosine diphosphate ribose) polymerase cleavage. EGCG treatment also
increases Bax and suppresses Bcl-xL expression. Vector-mediated enhanced Bmi-1
expression reverses these EGCG-dependent changes. These findings suggest that
green tea polyphenols reduce skin tumor cell survival by influencing PcG-mediated
epigenetic regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2832547
PMID: 20015867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2010 Jan;10(1):49-64. doi: 10.1586/erm.09.74.

Discovery of prostate cancer biomarkers by microarray gene expression profiling.

Sørensen KD(1), Ørntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby,
Brendstrupgaardsvej 100, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark.
karina.dalsgaard.sorensen@ki.au.dk

Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in males in the Western
world. This review focuses on advances in biomarker discovery for prostate cancer
by microarray profiling of mRNA and microRNA expression. Novel biomarkers are
strongly needed to enable more accurate detection of prostate cancer, improve
prediction of tumor aggressiveness and facilitate discovery of new therapeutic
targets for tailored medicine. Promising molecular markers identified from gene
expression profiling studies include AMACR, EZH2, TMPRSS2-ERG, miR-221 and
miR-141, which are described in more detail. In addition, a compilation of
prognostic gene expression signatures for prediction of prostate cancer patient
outcome is provided, and their possible clinical utility is discussed.
Furthermore, limitations in the application of microarray-based expression
profiling for identification of prostate cancer biomarkers are addressed.

PMID: 20014922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Neuron. 2009 Dec 10;64(5):678-91. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.019.

Control of cognition and adaptive behavior by the GLP/G9a epigenetic suppressor
complex.

Schaefer A(1), Sampath SC, Intrator A, Min A, Gertler TS, Surmeier DJ,
Tarakhovsky A, Greengard P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University,
1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The genetic basis of cognition and behavioral adaptation to the environment
remains poorly understood. Here we demonstrate that the histone methyltransferase
complex GLP/G9a controls cognition and adaptive responses in a region-specific
fashion in the adult brain. Using conditional mutagenesis in mice, we show that
postnatal, neuron-specific deficiency of GLP/G9a leads to derepression of
numerous nonneuronal and neuron progenitor genes in adult neurons. This
transcriptional alteration is associated with complex behavioral abnormalities,
including defects in learning, motivation, and environmental adaptation. The
behavioral changes triggered by GLP/G9a deficiency are similar to key symptoms of
the human 9q34 mental retardation syndrome that is associated with structural
alterations of the GLP/EHMT1 gene. The likely causal role of GLP/G9a in mental
retardation in mice and humans suggests a key role for the GLP/G9a-controlled
histone H3K9 dimethylation in regulation of brain function through maintenance of
the transcriptional homeostasis in adult neurons.

PMCID: PMC2814156
PMID: 20005824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):489-95. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp305. Epub 2009 Dec 
7.

Dietary omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids suppress expression of EZH2 in breast
cancer cells.

Dimri M(1), Bommi PV, Sahasrabuddhe AA, Khandekar JD, Dimri GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, NorthShore University HealthSystem Research Institute,
1001 University Place, Evanston, IL 60201, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) protein, enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), is
overexpressed in several human malignancies including breast cancer. Aberrant
expression of EZH2 has been associated with metastasis and poor prognosis in
cancer patients. Despite the clear role of EZH2 in oncogenesis and therapy
failure, not much is known about chemotherapeutics and chemopreventive agents
that can suppress its expression and activity. Here, we show that dietary omega-3
(omega-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) can regulate the expression of EZH2
in breast cancer cells. The treatment of breast cancer cells with omega-3 PUFAs, 
but not omega-6 PUFAs, led to downregulation of EZH2. Studies using proteosome
inhibitor MG132 suggested that omega-3 PUFAs induce degradation of the PcG
protein EZH2 through posttranslational mechanisms. Furthermore, downregulation of
EZH2 by omega-3 PUFAs was accompanied by a decrease in histone 3 lysine 27
trimethylation (H3K27me3) activity of EZH2 and upregulation of E-cadherin and
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3, which are known targets of EZH2.
Treatment with omega-3 PUFAs also led to decrease in invasion of breast cancer
cells, an oncogenic phenotype that is known to be associated with EZH2. Thus, our
studies suggest that the PcG protein EZH2 is an important target of omega-3 PUFAs
and that downregulation of EZH2 may be involved in the mediation of
anti-oncogenic and chemopreventive effects of omega-3 PUFAs.

PMCID: PMC2832544
PMID: 19969553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21655-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0912384106. Epub 2009 Dec 2.

CRM1 mediates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of mature microRNAs.

Castanotto D(1), Lingeman R, Riggs AD, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of
the City of Hope, 1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Drosha-processed microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to be exported from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm by Exportin 5, where they are processed a second time to
generate mature miRNAs. In this work we show that miRNAs also use CRM1 for
nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling. Inhibition of CRM1 by Leptomycin B results in
nuclear accumulation of miRNA guide sequences. Nuclear to cytoplasmic transport
can be actively competed by synthetic small interfering RNAs, indicating that
this pathway is shared by different classes of processed small RNAs. We also find
that CRM1 coimmunoprecipitates with Ago-1, Ago-2, Topo2alpha, EzH2, and Mta,
consistent with a role of Argonautes and small RNAs in chromatin remodeling.

PMCID: PMC2787469
PMID: 19955415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Epigenetics Chromatin. 2009 Dec 2;2(1):16. doi: 10.1186/1756-8935-2-16.

EZH2-dependent chromatin looping controls INK4a and INK4b, but not ARF, during
human progenitor cell differentiation and cellular senescence.

Kheradmand Kia S(1), Solaimani Kartalaei P, Farahbakhshian E, Pourfarzad F, von
Lindern M, Verrijzer CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Center for Biomedical Genetics, Erasmus University
Medical Center, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
kheradmandkia@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: The INK4b-ARF-INK4a tumour suppressor locus controls the balance
between progenitor cell renewal and cancer. In this study, we investigated how
higher-order chromatin structure modulates differential expression of the human
INK4b-ARF-INK4a locus during progenitor cell differentiation, cellular ageing and
senescence of cancer cells.
RESULTS: We found that INK4b and INK4a, but not ARF, are upregulated following
the differentiation of haematopoietic progenitor cells, in ageing fibroblasts and
in senescing malignant rhabdoid tumour cells. To investigate the underlying
molecular mechanism we analysed binding of polycomb group (PcG) repressive
complexes (PRCs) and the spatial organization of the INK4b-ARF-INK4a locus. In
agreement with differential derepression, PcG protein binding across the locus is
discontinuous. As we described earlier, PcG repressors bind the INK4a promoter,
but not ARF. Here, we identified a second peak of PcG binding that is located
approximately 3 kb upstream of the INK4b promoter. During progenitor cell
differentiation and ageing, PcG silencer EZH2 attenuates, causing loss of PRC
binding and transcriptional activation of INK4b and INK4a. The expression pattern
of the locus is reflected by its organization in space. In the repressed state,
the PRC-binding regions are in close proximity, while the intervening chromatin
harbouring ARF loops out. Down regulation of EZH2 causes release of the
approximately 35 kb repressive chromatin loop and induction of both INK4a and
INK4b, whereas ARF expression remains unaltered.
CONCLUSION: PcG silencers bind and coordinately regulate INK4b and INK4a, but not
ARF, during a variety of physiological processes. Developmentally regulated EZH2 
levels are one of the factors that can determine the higher order chromatin
structure and expression pattern of the INK4b-ARF-INK4a locus, coupling human
progenitor cell differentiation to proliferation control. Our results revealed a 
chromatin looping mechanism of long-range control and argue against models
involving homogeneous spreading of PcG silencers across the INK4b-ARF-INK4a
locus.

PMCID: PMC3225837
PMID: 19954516  [PubMed]


150. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9211-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1622.

EZH2 is essential for glioblastoma cancer stem cell maintenance.

Suvà ML(1), Riggi N, Janiszewska M, Radovanovic I, Provero P, Stehle JC, Baumer
K, Le Bitoux MA, Marino D, Cironi L, Marquez VE, Clément V, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Overexpression of the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)
occurs in diverse malignancies, including prostate cancer, breast cancer, and
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). Based on its ability to modulate transcription of 
key genes implicated in cell cycle control, DNA repair, and cell differentiation,
EZH2 is believed to play a crucial role in tissue-specific stem cell maintenance 
and tumor development. Here, we show that targeted pharmacologic disruption of
EZH2 by the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A
(DZNep), or its specific downregulation by short hairpin RNA (shRNA), strongly
impairs GBM cancer stem cell (CSC) self-renewal in vitro and tumor-initiating
capacity in vivo. Using genome-wide expression analysis of DZNep-treated GBM
CSCs, we found the expression of c-myc, recently reported to be essential for GBM
CSCs, to be strongly repressed upon EZH2 depletion. Specific shRNA-mediated
downregulation of EZH2 in combination with chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that c-myc is a direct target of EZH2 in GBM CSCs. Taken
together, our observations provide evidence that direct transcriptional
regulation of c-myc by EZH2 may constitute a novel mechanism underlying GBM CSC
maintenance and suggest that EZH2 may be a valuable new therapeutic target for
GBM management.

PMID: 19934320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Dec;8(12):3191-202. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0479.

Combinatorial pharmacologic approaches target EZH2-mediated gene repression in
breast cancer cells.

Sun F(1), Chan E, Wu Z, Yang X, Marquez VE, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60 Biopolis
Street, #02-01 Genome, Singapore 138672.

Polycomb protein EZH2-mediated gene silencing is implicated in breast
tumorigenesis through methylation of histone H3 on Lysine 27 (H3K27). We have
previously shown that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A can modulate histone methylation and disrupt EZH2 complex.
Here, we used 3-deazaneplanocin A, together with other chromatin remodeling
agents, as well as RNA interference-mediated EZH2 depletion, to probe the role of
EZH2 in coordination with other epigenetic components in gene regulation in
breast cancer cells. Through genome-wide gene expression analysis, coupled with
extensive chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of histone modifications, we
have identified a variety of gene sets that are regulated either by EZH2 alone or
through the coordinated action of EZH2 with HDAC and/or DNA methylation. We
further found that tumor antigen GAGEs were regulated by distinct epigenetic
mechanisms in a cell context-dependent manner, possibly reflecting mechanistic
heterogeneity in breast cancer. Intriguingly, we found that EZH2 regulates a
remarkable cohort of genes whose functions are highly enriched in immunoresponse 
and autocrine inflammation network, and that their transcriptional activation
upon EZH2 perturbation is cancer specific, revealing a potential novel role of
EZH2 in regulating cancer immunity. These findings show the complexity and
diversity of epigenetic regulation in human cancer and underscore the importance 
for developing combinatorial pharmacologic approaches for effective epigenetic
gene reactivation.

PMCID: PMC2794891
PMID: 19934278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Cancer. 2010 Jul 1;127(1):138-47. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25031.

High expression of EZH2 is associated with tumor aggressiveness and poor
prognosis in patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma treated with
definitive chemoradiotherapy.

He LR(1), Liu MZ, Li BK, Jia WH, Zhang Y, Liao YJ, Chen YC, Zhang LJ, Guan XY,
Zeng YX, Kung HF, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a known repressor of gene transcription, 
has been reported to be associated with biological malignancy in several cancers.
The potential oncogenic role of EZH2 and its clinical/prognostic significance,
however, in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) are unclear. In this study,
the methods of immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in-situ hybridization were
used to examine protein expression and amplification of EZH2 in 98 pretreatment
biopsy specimens of ESCC who received definitive chemoradiotherapy (CRT). High
expression of EZH2 and amplification of EZH2 was found in 54.1% and 12.0% of
ESCCs, respectively. High EZH2 expression was significantly correlated with
increased cell proliferation (p = 0.009), high histopathological grade (p =
0.002), regional (p = 0.025) and distant lymph node metastasis (p < 0.001) and
lack of clinical complete response to CRT (p = 0.028). Univariate analysis
revealed that high expression of EZH2 was associated with poor metastasis-free
survival (MFS) (p = 0.003), poor progression-free survival (PFS) (p = 0.001) and 
poor disease-specific survival (DSS) (p < 0.001). In multivariate analysis, high 
expression of EZH2, together with lack of clinical complete response, were
evaluated as significant independent prognostic factors of MFS, PFS and DSS for
patients with ESCC. These findings suggest that high expression of EZH2
correlates with tumor aggressiveness and adverse patient outcome in ESCC treated 
with definitive CRT. Evaluation of EZH2 expressions might be useful for
predicting tumor response to CRT and prognosis for patients with ESCC.

PMID: 19904743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Thorac Oncol. 2010 Jan;5(1):10-6. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181c422d9.

Genetic polymorphisms in the polycomb group gene EZH2 and the risk of lung
cancer.

Yoon KA(1), Gil HJ, Han J, Park J, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi,
Korea.

INTRODUCTION: Polycomb group (PcG) proteins play essential roles in cellular
memory systems and as cell cycle regulators by maintaining homeotic genes in
their silenced states. EZH1 and EZH2, the human homologues of the Drosophila gene
Enhancer of Zeste (E(z)), are defined as PcG proteins and contain a highly
conserved motif, called the SET (Su(var)3-9, Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax)
domain, which is required for histone methyltransferase activity. Increased
expression of the transcriptional repressor EZH2 has been reported to be
associated with poor prognosis in various malignancies including breast cancer
and prostate cancer. Altered expression of EZH2 was also demonstrated in lung
cancer, suggesting an involvement in the progression of lung cancer.
METHODS: All 41 polymorphisms in EZH2 were genotyped in 335 patients with lung
cancer and 335 age- and gender-matched healthy controls. Finally, 26
polymorphisms were selected for the statistical analysis based on minor allele
frequency (>0.05) and linkage disequilibrium.
RESULTS: Two polymorphisms of EZH2, rs6950683 and rs3757441, showed a
statistically significant association with reduced risk of lung cancer (adjusted 
OR [aOR] = 0.71, p = 0.007; aOR = 0.73, p = 0.015, respectively). Two copies of a
haplotype (Ht2) of EZH2 also showed a significant association with reduced lung
cancer risk (aOR = 0.45, 95% confidence interval = 0.23-0.87).
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to show a significant association between
polymorphisms of the PcG gene EZH2 and lung cancer risk. This study suggests a
correlation between the genotype variants in EZH2 and reduced lung cancer risk
and hence presents a possible marker for lung cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 19901851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cell Death Differ. 2010 May;17(5):801-10. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.162. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Polycomb protein EZH2 regulates E2F1-dependent apoptosis through epigenetically
modulating Bim expression.

Wu ZL(1), Zheng SS, Li ZM, Qiao YY, Aau MY, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Biopolis, Singapore.

Deregulation of the pRB/E2F pathway, which occurs frequently in human malignancy,
is often associated with inappropriate proliferation and/or apoptosis. While the 
role of E2F1 in apoptosis induction has been well-established, it remains unclear
how this pro-apoptotic activity is regulated in cancer. Here we describe EZH2, an
oncogenic polycomb histone methyltransferase and an E2F1 target, as an important 
regulator of E2F1-dependent apoptosis. We show that E2F1 induces EZH2 expression,
which in turn antagonizes the induction of E2F1 pro-apoptotic target Bim
expression. RNAi-mediated gene depletion of EZH2 enhances E2F1-dependent Bim
expression, thereby promoting the pro-apoptotic activity of E2F1. Hence, the
concomitant induction of EZH2 and Bim by E2F1 constitutes a fail-safe mechanism
to allow tumor cells with aberrant E2F1 activity to evade apoptosis. These
findings reveal a novel mechanism by which the apoptotic activity of E2F1 is
restrained in human cancer and also provide the first evidence that EZH2 directly
regulates apoptotic process in cancer cells.

PMID: 19893569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. BJU Int. 2010 Jul;106(2):280-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2009.08998.x. Epub 2009 
Nov 3.

The value of EZH2, p27(kip1), BMI-1 and MIB-1 on biopsy specimens with low-risk
prostate cancer in selecting men with significant prostate cancer at
prostatectomy.

Wolters T(1), Vissers KJ, Bangma CH, Schröder FH, van Leenders GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
t.wolters@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To assess the additional prognostic value of the molecular markers
EZH2, MIB-1, p27(kip1) and BMI-1 on needle biopsies from men with low-risk
prostate cancer, as this disease in needle biopsies shows a heterogeneous
clinical outcome, and while it is known that the expression of these tissue
markers is predictive of the clinical outcome after radical prostatectomy (RP)
their value in prostate biopsies is largely unknown.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included men participating in a screening study, 
diagnosed with low-risk prostate cancer and subsequently treated with RP.
Immunohistochemical staining for EZH2, MIB-1, p27(kip1) and BMI-1 on the needle
biopsies were (semi)quantitatively scored and expression levels were related to
significant disease at RP. Clinical low-risk prostate cancer was defined as a
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level of < or =10 ng/mL, clinical T-stage < or
=2, biopsy Gleason score < or =6, a PSA density of <0.20 ng/mL/g and two or fewer
positive cores. Significant PC at RP was defined as presence of any of
extracapsular extension, Gleason pattern 4/5, or tumour volume > or =0.5 mL.
RESULTS: In all, 86 biopsy specimens were included; there was high EZH2
expression (>1.0%) in 42% and a low p27(kip) expression (<90%) in 63%.
Significant disease was present in 44 (51%) RP specimens. A high EZH2 (odds ratio
3.19, P = 0.043) and a low p27(kip1) (4.69, P = 0.036) were independent
predictors for significant prostate cancer at RP.
CONCLUSIONS: The determination of EZH2 and p27(kip1) on diagnostic needle
biopsies supports the selection of men with indolent prostate cancer at RP.
Especially p27(kip1) could improve the pretreatment risk assessment of patients
with low-risk prostate cancer.

PMID: 19888978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2009 Nov;133(11):1822-5. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-133.11.1822.

Carcinoma of the breast with medullary-like features: diagnostic challenges and
relationship with BRCA1 and EZH2 functions.

Kleer CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
kleer@umich.edu

This case presentation reviews the histologic distinction between pure medullary 
carcinoma and breast carcinomas with medullary-like features. This particular
case prompts us to analyze the relationship among medullary carcinoma, basal-like
breast carcinomas and carcinomas associated with germline BRCA1 mutations. In
addition to now well-defined features, such as expression of
high-molecular-weight cytokeratins and EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor),
basal-like tumors have a deficiency or dysfunction of BRCA1. This association in 
part explains the histologic features of BRCA1-associated breast cancers. Recent 
studies in our laboratory demonstrate that BRCA1 protein is regulated by a
recently described gene, EZH2. These concepts illustrate the important
relationships among histopathologic features; genomic profile; single gene
abnormalities, such as BRCA1 and EZH2; and growth regulation in this subset of
breast carcinomas.

PMID: 19886718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Toxicology. 2010 Jan 12;267(1-3):70-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2009.10.023. Epub 2009 
Oct 29.

Triptolide alters histone H3K9 and H3K27 methylation state and induces G0/G1
arrest and caspase-dependent apoptosis in multiple myeloma in vitro.

Zhao F(1), Chen Y, Li R, Liu Y, Wen L, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Triptolide is the principal active ingredient in extracts from the Chinese herb
Tripterygium wilfordii Hook.F (TwHF), and has various functions such as
immunosuppression, anti-inflammatory and antitumor properties. In diverse
hematological tumors triptolide exerts antitumor activity and many studies have
tried to elucidate the potential antitumor mechanism. The evidence that
triptolide-induced gene promoter DNA hypermethylation has suggested that
epigenetic mechanisms may play an important role in the antitumor activity of
triptolide. Our study aimed to investigate the association of the therapeutic
effect of triptolide on multiple myeloma with the regulation of histone
methylation. Triptolide inhibited the proliferation of multiple myeloma cell line
RPMI8226 in a time- and dose-dependent manner, induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis. Triptolide decreased histone H3K9 and H3K27 methylation via the
downregulation of histone methyltransferase SUV39H1 and EZH2, respectively, which
possibly was the anti-myeloma mechanism of triptolide.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19879315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3185-92. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22120.

Characterization of the expression pattern of the PRC2 core subunit Suz12 during 
embryonic development of Xenopus laevis.

Aldiri I(1), Vetter ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

The Polycomb repressive complex 2 is a multimeric aggregate that mediates
silencing of a broad range of genes, and is associated with important biological 
contexts such as stem cell maintenance and cancer progression. PRC2 mainly
trimethylates lysine 27 of histone H3 and is composed of three essential core
subunits: EZH2, EED, and SUZ12. The Xenopus orthologs of PRC2 subunits Ezh2 and
Eed have been described but Suz12 remained unidentified. Here, we report the
cloning of the Xenopus Suz12, and determine its spatiotemporal expression during 
development. Xsuz12 transcript is provided maternally and continues to be
expressed throughout development, particularly in the anterior part of the
developing central nervous system. Importantly, comparative analysis of the
expression of the PRC2 subunits Xez, Xeed, and Xrbbp4 indicates that their
expression largely coincides with Xsuz12 in the nervous system, suggesting that
PRC2 may have unexplored functions in the development of the frog central nervous
system.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3360962
PMID: 19877271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. World J Hepatol. 2009 Oct 31;1(1):35-42. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v1.i1.35.

Multistep carcinogenesis of perihilar cholangiocarcinoma arising in the
intrahepatic large bile ducts.

Nakanuma Y(1), Sasaki M, Sato Y, Ren X, Ikeda H, Harada K.

Author information: 
(1)Yasuni Nakanuma, Motoko Sasaki, Yasunori Sato, Xiangshan Ren, Kenichi Harada, 
Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

Flat-type "biliary intraepithelial neoplasia (BilIN)" and papillary-type
"intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct (IPN-B)" are proposed as
precursors of invasive, perihilar intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC). Three
carcinogenetic pathways are proposed: BilIN progressing to tubular
adenocarcinoma, and IPN-B progressing to tubular adenocarcinoma or to colloid
carcinoma. Carcinogenesis via BilIN was characterized by mucin core protein
2-/cytokeratin 20-(MUC2-/CK20-) with MUC1 expression, while carcinogenesis via
IPN-B leading to tubular adenocarcinoma was associated with MUC1 expression or
that to colloid carcinoma with MUC1-negativity. In both the BilIN and IPNB
series, the expression of p21, p53, and cyclin D1 was upregulated with
histological progression. Interestingly, p53 expression was upregulated at the
invasive stage of BilIN, but was low in noninvasive BilIN, while p53 expression
was upregulated in IPN-B1 and reached a plateau in IPN-B2 and invasive ICC.
Expression of p16(INK4a), which was frequent in BilIN1, was decreased in
BilIN-2/3 and invasive carcinoma. EZH2 expression showed a stepwise increase from
BilIN to invasive carcinoma. Membranous expression of ß-catenin and E-cadherin
was more markedly decreased in ICC with BilIN than in ICC with IPNB.
Interestingly, disruption of the membranous distribution of ß-catenin and
E-cadherin seems to result in the invasion and metastasis of carcinoma cells of
BilIN and IPN-B expressing MMP-7 and MT1-MMP. Increased expression of cyclin D1
and c-myc was more frequent in the IPNB lineage than BilIN lineage, possibly
related to the Wnt signaling pathway associated with the nuclear accumulation of 
ß-catenin. In conclusion, BilIN and IPN-B progress to invasive ICC through
characteristic multistep processes.

PMCID: PMC2999259
PMID: 21160963  [PubMed]


160. Cancer Sci. 2010 Feb;101(2):355-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01387.x. Epub
2009 Oct 6.

Histone deacetylase inhibitor (SAHA) and repression of EZH2 synergistically
inhibit proliferation of gallbladder carcinoma.

Yamaguchi J(1), Sasaki M, Sato Y, Itatsu K, Harada K, Zen Y, Ikeda H, Nimura Y,
Nagino M, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Polycomb group protein EZH2, frequently overexpressed in malignant tumors, is the
catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). PRC2 interacts with
HDACs in transcriptional silencing and relates to tumor suppressor loss. We
examined the expression of HDAC isoforms (HDAC 1 and 2) and EZH2, and evaluated
the possible use of HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and
EZH2 repressor for gallbladder carcinoma. We used 48 surgically resected
gallbladders and cultures of human gallbladder epithelial cells (HGECs),
gallbladder carcinoma (TGBC2TKB), and cholangiocarcinoma (HuCCT-1 and TFK-1) cell
lines for examination. Immunohistochemically, EZH2 was overexpressed in
gallbladder carcinoma, especially poorly differentiated carcinoma, but not in
normal epithelium. In contrast, HDAC1/2 were expressed in both carcinoma and
normal epithelium in vivo. This pattern was verified in cultured cells; EZH2 was 
highly expressed only in TGBC2TKB, whereas HDAC1/2 were expressed in HGECs and
TGBC2TKB. Interestingly, SAHA treatment caused significant cell number decline in
three carcinoma cells, and this effect was synergized with EZH2 siRNA treatment; 
however, HGECs were resistant to SAHA. In TGBC2TKB cells, the expression of EZH2 
and HDAC1/2 were decreased by SAHA treatment, and p16(INK4a), E-cadherin, and
p21were simultaneously activated; however, no such findings were obtained in
HGECs, suggesting that the effect of SAHA depends on the EZH2-mediated tumor
suppressor loss. In conclusion, this study suggests a possible mechanism by which
carcinoma cells but not normal cells are sensitive to SAHA and indicates the
efficacy of this new anticancer agent in combination with EZH2 repression in
gallbladder carcinoma.

PMID: 19860841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Aug;122(3):711-20. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0588-6. 
Epub 2009 Oct 27.

Analysis of breast cancer related gene expression using natural splines and the
Cox proportional hazard model to identify prognostic associations.

Kreike B(1), Hart G, Bartelink H, van de Vijver MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, Amsterdam 1066 CX, The Netherlands.

Many studies correlating gene expression data to clinical parameters assume a
linear increase or decrease of the clinical parameter under investigation with
the expression of a gene. We have studied genes encoding important breast
cancer-related proteins using a model for survival-type data that is based on
natural splines and the Cox proportional hazard model, thereby removing the
linearity assumption. Expression data of 16 genes were studied in relation to
metastasis-free probability in a cohort of 295 consecutive breast cancer patients
treated at The Netherlands Cancer Institute. The independent predictive power for
disease outcome of the 16 individual genes was tested in a multivariable model
with known clinical and pathological risk factors. There is a linear relationship
between increasing expression and a higher or lower hazard for distant metastasis
for ESR1, ERBB4, VEGF, CCNE2, EZH2, and UPA; for ERBB2, ERBB3, CCND1, CCNE1, EED,
CXCR4, CCR7, SDF1, and PAI1 there is no clear increase or decrease; and for EGFR 
there seems to be a non-linear relation. Multivariable analysis showed that the
70-gene prognosis profile outperforms all the other variables in the model
(hazard-rate 5.4, 95% CI 2.5-11.7; P = 0.000018). EGFR-expression seems to have a
non-linear relation with disease outcome, indicating that lower but also higher
expression of EGFR are associated with worse outcome compared to intermediate
expression levels; the other genes show no or a linear relation.

PMID: 19859804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Urol. 2009 Dec;182(6):2920-5. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2009.08.014. Epub 2009 Oct
20.

Expression profile of the polycomb group protein enhancer of Zeste homologue 2
and its prognostic relevance in renal cell carcinoma.

Hinz S(1), Weikert S, Magheli A, Hoffmann M, Engers R, Miller K, Kempkensteffen
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Mitte,
Berlin, Germany. stefan.hinz@charite.de

PURPOSE: EZH2 increases the proliferation rate and apoptosis resistance of renal 
cell carcinoma cell lines. To date its clinical impact on the outcome in patients
with renal cell carcinoma is not known. To our knowledge this is the first study 
of the association of EZH2 expression with histopathological features and disease
outcomes in a large cohort of patients who underwent surgery for renal cell
carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
was done to quantify EZH2 expression in malignant and adjacent benign renal
tissue from a cohort of 119 patients with clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Median
followup was 51 months. Immunohistochemistry was performed in a subset of
samples. The impact of EZH2 expression on clinicopathological tumor features and 
outcome was investigated.
RESULTS: EZH2 was over expressed in renal cell carcinoma compared to adjacent
benign renal parenchyma (median 57.02, range 0 to 368.11 vs 0, range 0 to 280.87,
p <0.001). Immunohistochemistry showed concordant results and revealed EZH2
protein predominantly located in the nucleus. EZH2 expression was not associated 
with histopathological tumor features and patient characteristics. High EZH2
levels predicted a lower disease recurrence rate on univariate and multivariate
analysis (p = 0.047 and 0.037, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: These data support a role of EZH2 expression for renal cell
carcinoma tumorigenesis rather than tumor progression. Contrary to previous EZH2 
findings in cases of various human malignancies, high tumor EZH2 levels appear to
indicate less aggressive tumor phenotypes with a favorable prognosis in renal
cell carcinoma cases. Our findings suggest that EZH2 provides not only a
potential therapeutic target, but also a molecular parameter for outcome
prediction in patients with renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 19846140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):705-14, 714.e1-4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.10.002. Epub 2009 Oct 17.

MeCP2 controls an epigenetic pathway that promotes myofibroblast
transdifferentiation and fibrosis.

Mann J(1), Chu DC, Maxwell A, Oakley F, Zhu NL, Tsukamoto H, Mann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. jelena.mann@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Myofibroblast transdifferentiation generates hepatic
myofibroblasts, which promote liver fibrogenesis. The peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is a negative regulator of this
process. We investigated epigenetic regulation of PPARgamma and myofibroblast
transdifferentiation.
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays assessed the binding of
methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) to PPARgamma and chromatin modifications
that silence this gene. MeCP2(-/y) mice and an inhibitor (DZNep) of the
epigenetic regulatory protein EZH2 were used in the carbon tetrachloride model of
liver fibrosis. Liver tissues from mice were assessed by histologic analysis;
markers of fibrosis were measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR). Reverse transcription PCR detected changes in expression of the microRNA 
miR132 and its target, elongated transcripts of MeCP2. Myofibroblasts were
transfected with miR132; PPARgamma and MeCP2 expressions were analyzed by qPCR or
immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Myofibroblast transdifferentiation of hepatic stellate cells is
controlled by a combination of MeCP2, EZH2, and miR132 in a relay pathway. The
pathway is activated by down-regulation of miR132, releasing the translational
block on MeCP2. MeCP2 is recruited to the 5' end of PPARgamma, where it promotes 
methylation by H3K9 and recruits the transcription repressor HP1alpha. MeCP2 also
stimulates expression of EZH2 and methylation of H3K27 to form a repressive
chromatin structure in the 3' exons of PPARgamma. Genetic and pharmacologic
disruptions of MeCP2 or EZH2 reduced the fibrogenic characteristics of
myofibroblasts and attenuated fibrogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver fibrosis is regulated by an epigenetic relay pathway that
includes MeCP2, EZH2, and miR132. Reagents that interfere with this pathway might
be developed to reduce fibrogenesis in chronic liver disease.

PMCID: PMC2819585
PMID: 19843474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Cell. 2009 Oct 9;36(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.08.008.

Mir-214-dependent regulation of the polycomb protein Ezh2 in skeletal muscle and 
embryonic stem cells.

Juan AH(1), Kumar RM, Marx JG, Young RA, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis, Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins exert essential functions in the most disparate
biological processes. The contribution of PcG proteins to cell commitment and
differentiation relates to their ability to repress transcription of
developmental regulators in embryonic stem (ES) cells and in committed cell
lineages, including skeletal muscle cells (SMC). PcG proteins are preferentially 
removed from transcribed regions, but the underlying mechanisms remain unclear.
Here, PcG proteins are found to occupy and repress transcription from an intronic
region containing the microRNA miR-214 in undifferentiated SMC. Differentiation
coincides with PcG disengagement, recruitment of the developmental regulators
MyoD and myogenin, and activation of miR-214 transcription. Once transcribed,
miR-214 negatively feeds back on PcG by targeting the Ezh2 3'UTR, the catalytic
subunit of the PRC2 complex. miR-214-mediated Ezh2 protein reduction accelerates 
SMC differentiation and promotes unscheduled transcription of developmental
regulators in ES cells. Thus, miR-214 and Ezh2 establish a regulatory loop
controlling PcG-dependent gene expression during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2761245
PMID: 19818710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(5):108. doi: 10.1186/bcr2362.

Development of 'synthetic lethal' strategies to target BRCA1-deficient breast
cancer.

Wicha MS.

Comment on
    Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R63.

Recent clinical trials demonstrating the efficacy of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 
(PARP) inhibitors for the treatment of BRCA1-deficient breast cancer have
provided support for the 'synthetic lethal' concept of targeted cancer
therapeutics. A new study provides further preclinical validation of this concept
by demonstrating that BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary tumor cells are selectively
sensitive to an inhibitor of the polycomb gene EZH2. The development of polycomb 
gene inhibitors may provide a novel approach to selectively exploit the molecular
alterations in BRCA1-deficient breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC2790845
PMID: 19804613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1282-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605333. Epub 2009
Sep 22.

Expression of EZH2 and Ki-67 in colorectal cancer and associations with treatment
response and prognosis.

Fluge Ø(1), Gravdal K, Carlsen E, Vonen B, Kjellevold K, Refsum S, Lilleng R,
Eide TJ, Halvorsen TB, Tveit KM, Otte AP, Akslen LA, Dahl O; Norwegian
Gastrointestinal Cancer Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) is a member of the Polycomb
group of genes that is involved in epigenetic silencing and cell cycle
regulation.
METHODS: We studied EZH2 expression in 409 patients with colorectal cancer stages
II and III. The patients were included in a randomised study, and treated with
surgery alone or surgery followed by adjuvant chemotherapy.
RESULTS: EZH2 expression was significantly related to increased tumour cell
proliferation, as assessed by Ki-67 expression. In colon cancer, strong EZH2
expression (P=0.041) and high proliferation (>or=40%; P=0.001) were both
associated with better relapse-free survival (RFS). In contrast, no such
associations were found among rectal cancers. High Ki-67 staining was associated 
with improved RFS in colon cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy
(P=0.001), but not among those who were treated by surgery alone (P=0.087). In
colon cancers stage III, a significant association between RFS and randomisation 
group was found in patients with high proliferation (P=0.046), but not in
patients with low proliferation (P=0.26). Multivariate analyses of colon cancers 
showed that stage III (hazard ratio (HR) 4.00) and high histological grade (HR
1.80) were independent predictors of reduced RFS, whereas high proliferation
indicated improved RFS (HR 0.55).
CONCLUSION: Strong EZH2 expression and high proliferation are associated features
and both indicate improved RFS in colon cancer, but not so in rectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2768450
PMID: 19773751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nature. 2009 Oct 8;461(7265):762-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08398. Epub 2009 Sep 20.

Role of the polycomb protein EED in the propagation of repressive histone marks.

Margueron R(1), Justin N, Ohno K, Sharpe ML, Son J, Drury WJ 3rd, Voigt P, Martin
SR, Taylor WR, De Marco V, Pirrotta V, Reinberg D, Gamblin SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, New York
University Medical School, 522 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Polycomb group proteins have an essential role in the epigenetic maintenance of
repressive chromatin states. The gene-silencing activity of the Polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) depends on its ability to trimethylate lysine 27 of
histone H3 (H3K27) by the catalytic SET domain of the EZH2 subunit, and at least 
two other subunits of the complex: SUZ12 and EED. Here we show that the
carboxy-terminal domain of EED specifically binds to histone tails carrying
trimethyl-lysine residues associated with repressive chromatin marks, and that
this leads to the allosteric activation of the methyltransferase activity of
PRC2. Mutations in EED that prevent it from recognizing repressive
trimethyl-lysine marks abolish the activation of PRC2 in vitro and, in
Drosophila, reduce global methylation and disrupt development. These findings
suggest a model for the propagation of the H3K27me3 mark that accounts for the
maintenance of repressive chromatin domains and for the transmission of a histone
modification from mother to daughter cells.

PMCID: PMC3772642
PMID: 19767730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009 Oct 7;101(19):1300-1. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djp342. Epub
2009 Sep 15.

Epigenetic therapies move into new territory, but how exactly do they work?

Tuma RS.

PMID: 19755677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Neuron. 2009 Sep 10;63(5):600-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.08.021.

Polycomb limits the neurogenic competence of neural precursor cells to promote
astrogenic fate transition.

Hirabayashi Y(1), Suzki N, Tsuboi M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Shinga J, Koseki H, Vidal
M, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

During neocortical development, neural precursor cells (NPCs, or neural stem
cells) produce neurons first and astrocytes later. Although the timing of the
fate switch from neurogenic to astrogenic is critical for determining the number 
of neurons, the mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we show that the
polycomb group complex (PcG) restricts neurogenic competence of NPCs and promotes
the transition of NPC fate from neurogenic to astrogenic. Inactivation of PcG by 
knockout of the Ring1B or Ezh2 gene or Eed knockdown prolonged the neurogenic
phase of NPCs and delayed the onset of the astrogenic phase. Moreover, PcG was
found to repress the promoter of the proneural gene neurogenin1 in a
developmental-stage-dependent manner. These results demonstrate a role of PcG:
the temporal regulation of NPC fate.

PMID: 19755104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 19;28(46):4095-104. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.273. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

Suppression of lung adenocarcinoma through menin and polycomb gene-mediated
repression of growth factor pleiotrophin.

Gao SB(1), Feng ZJ, Xu B, Wu Y, Yin P, Yang Y, Hua X, Jin GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical College, Xiamen University,
Xiamen 361005, Fujian, PR China.

Menin upregulates transcription of cell-cycle inhibitors to suppress endocrine
tumors, but it is poorly understood how menin suppresses non-endocrine tumors
such as lung cancer. Here, we show that menin inhibits proliferation of human
lung cancer cells and growth of lung cancer in mice. The menin-mediated tumor
suppression requires repression of growth factor pleiotrophin (PTN), which binds 
to its cell surface receptor, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) that is activated 
in certain lung adenocarcinomas. Menin represses PTN transcription and
PTN-induced proliferation of human lung cancer cells, and menin expression is
substantially reduced in primary human lung adenocarcinomas. Notably, menin binds
the PTN locus and enhances Polycomb gene Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2
(EZH2)-mediated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27m3), a negative mark
for gene transcription but does not affect histone H3K4 methylation that is
usually upregulated by menin in endocrine cells. Together, our findings indicate 
that menin suppresses lung cancer partly through increasing Polycomb
gene-mediated H3K27 methylation and repressing PTN transcription, unraveling a
novel, epigenetically regulated PTN-ALK signaling pathway in suppressing lung
cancer.

PMID: 19749796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Sep;7(9):1456-65. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0121. Epub
2009 Sep 1.

Polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste 2 is an oncogene that promotes the
neoplastic transformation of a benign prostatic epithelial cell line.

Karanikolas BD(1), Figueiredo ML, Wu L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology and Urology, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1738, USA.

Polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) is a master regulatory protein 
that plays a critical role in development as part of the polycomb repressive
complex 2. Polycomb repressive complex 2 controls numerous cell cycle and
regulatory genes through trimethylation of histone 3, which results in chromatin 
condensation and transcriptional silencing. EZH2 overexpression has been
correlated with high incidence of more aggressive, metastatic prostate cancers.
Although this correlation means EZH2 could prove valuable as a biomarker in
clinical settings, the question remains whether EZH2 is actually responsible for 
the initiation of these more aggressive tumor types. In this study, EZH2-mediated
neoplastic transformation of the normal prostate epithelial cell line benign
prostate hyperplasia 1 (BPH1) was confirmed by in vivo tumor growth and in vitro 
colony formation. Furthermore, EZH2 transformation resulted in increased invasive
behavior of BPH1 cells, indicating that EZH2 may be responsible for aggressive
behavior in prostate cancers. BPH1 was also transformed with the classic
oncogenes myristoylated Akt and activated Ras(V12) to allow phenotype comparisons
with the EZH2-transformed cells. This study marks the first demonstration of
neoplastic transformation in prostate cells mediated by EZH2 and establishes that
EZH2 possesses stronger transforming activity than Akt but weaker activity than
activated Ras.

PMCID: PMC2794652
PMID: 19723877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Epigenetics. 2009 Aug 16;4(6):404-14. Epub 2009 Aug 29.

Targeting of EZH2 to a defined genomic site is sufficient for recruitment of
Dnmt3a but not de novo DNA methylation.

Rush M(1), Appanah R, Lee S, Lam LL, Goyal P, Lorincz MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, The University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, CA.

Polycomb-mediated gene silencing and DNA methylation underlie many epigenetic
processes important in normal development as well as in cancer. An interaction
between EZH2 of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which trimethylates
lysine 27 on Histone 3 (H3K27me3), and all three DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs)
has been reported, implicating a role for PRC2 in directing DNA methylation.
Interestingly, however, the majority of H3K27me3 marked genes lack DNA
methylation in ES cells, indicating that EZH2 recruitment may not be sufficient
to promote DNA methylation. Here, we employed a Gal4DBD/gal4UAS-based system to
directly test if EZH2 binding at a defined genomic site is sufficient to promote 
de novo DNA methylation in a murine erythroleukaemia cell line. Targeting of a
Gal4DBD-EZH2 fusion to an intergenic transgene bearing a gal4 binding-site array 
promoted localized recruitment of Suz12 and Bmi1, subunits of PRC2 and PRC1,
respectively, and deposition of H3K27me3. Further analysis of the H3K27me3-marked
site revealed the persistence of H3K4me2, a mark inversely correlated with DNA
methylation. Strikingly, while Dnmt3a was also recruited in an EZH2-dependent
manner, de novo DNA methylation of the transgene was not observed. Thus, while
targeting of EZH2 to a specific genomic site is sufficient for recruitment of
Dnmt3a, additional events are required for de novo DNA methylation.

PMID: 19717977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(4):R63. doi: 10.1186/bcr2354. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

BRCA1-deficient mammary tumor cells are dependent on EZH2 expression and
sensitive to Polycomb Repressive Complex 2-inhibitor 3-deazaneplanocin A.

Puppe J(1), Drost R, Liu X, Joosse SA, Evers B, Cornelissen-Steijger P, Nederlof 
P, Yu Q, Jonkers J, van Lohuizen M, Pietersen AM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Cancer Genomics Centre, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Julianpuppe@gmx.de

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(5):108.

INTRODUCTION: Treatment of breast cancer is becoming more individualized with the
recognition of tumor subgroups that respond differently to available therapies.
Breast cancer 1 gene (BRCA1)-deficient tumors are usually of the basal subtype
and associated with poor survival rates, highlighting the need for more effective
therapy.
METHODS: We investigated a mouse model that closely mimics breast cancer arising 
in BRCA1-mutation carriers to better understand the molecular mechanism of tumor 
progression and tested whether targeting of the Polycomb-group protein EZH2 would
be a putative therapy for BRCA1-deficient tumors.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis demonstrated that EZH2 is overexpressed in
BRCA1-deficient mouse mammary tumors. By immunohistochemistry we show that an
increase in EZH2 protein levels is also evident in tumors from BRCA1-mutation
carriers. EZH2 is responsible for repression of genes driving differentiation and
could thus be involved in the undifferentiated phenotype of these tumors.
Importantly, we show that BRCA1-deficient cancer cells are selectively dependent 
on their elevated EZH2 levels. In addition, a chemical inhibitor of EZH2,
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep), is about 20-fold more effective in killing
BRCA1-deficient cells compared to BRCA1-proficient mammary tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate by specific knock-down experiments that EZH2
overexpression is functionally relevant in BRCA1-deficient breast cancer cells.
The effectiveness of a small molecule inhibitor indicates that EZH2 is a
druggable target. The overexpression of EZH2 in all basal-like breast cancers
warrants further investigation of the potential for targeting the genetic make-up
of this particular breast cancer type.

PMCID: PMC2750125
PMID: 19709408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Aug 20;2:55. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-55.

Anti-oncogenic and pro-differentiation effects of clorgyline, a monoamine oxidase
A inhibitor, on high grade prostate cancer cells.

Zhao H(1), Flamand V, Peehl DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA. hongjuan@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Monoamine oxidase A (MAO-A), a mitochondrial enzyme that degrades
monoamines including neurotransmitters, is highly expressed in basal cells of the
normal human prostatic epithelium and in poorly differentiated (Gleason grades 4 
and 5), aggressive prostate cancer (PCa). Clorgyline, an MAO-A inhibitor, induces
secretory differentiation of normal prostate cells. We examined the effects of
clorgyline on the transcriptional program of epithelial cells cultured from high 
grade PCa (E-CA).
METHODS: We systematically assessed gene expression changes induced by clorgyline
in E-CA cells using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Genes
differentially expressed in treated and control cells were identified by
Significance Analysis of Microarrays. Expression of genes of interest was
validated by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The expression of 156 genes was significantly increased by clorgyline at
all time points over the time course of 6 - 96 hr identified by Significance
Analysis of Microarrays (SAM). The list is enriched with genes repressed in 7 of 
12 oncogenic pathway signatures compiled from the literature. In addition, genes 
downregulated >or= 2-fold by clorgyline were significantly enriched with those
upregulated by key oncogenes including beta-catenin and ERBB2, indicating an
anti-oncogenic effect of clorgyline. Another striking effect of clorgyline was
the induction of androgen receptor (AR) and classic AR target genes such as
prostate-specific antigen together with other secretory epithelial cell-specific 
genes, suggesting that clorgyline promotes differentiation of cancer cells.
Moreover, clorgyline downregulated EZH2, a critical component of the Polycomb
Group (PcG) complex that represses the expression of differentiation-related
genes. Indeed, many genes in the PcG repression signature that predicts PCa
outcome were upregulated by clorgyline, suggesting that the
differentiation-promoting effect of clorgyline may be mediated by its
downregulation of EZH2.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that inhibitors of MAO-A, already in clinical use
to treat depression, may have potential application as therapeutic PCa drugs by
inhibiting oncogenic pathway activity and promoting differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2736984
PMID: 19691856  [PubMed]


175. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(20):5488-504. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01657-08. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

Hyperactivated NF-{kappa}B and AP-1 transcription factors promote highly
accessible chromatin and constitutive transcription across the interleukin-6 gene
promoter in metastatic breast cancer cells.

Ndlovu MN(1), Van Lint C, Van Wesemael K, Callebert P, Chalbos D, Haegeman G,
Vanden Berghe W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Signal Transduction, Department
of Physiology, University of Ghent, K. L. Ledeganckstraat 35, Ghent, Belgium.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6), involved in cancer-related inflammation, acts as an
autocrine and paracrine growth factor, which promotes angiogenesis, metastasis,
and subversion of immunity, and changes the response to hormones and to
chemotherapeutics. We explored transcription mechanisms involved in differential 
IL-6 gene expression in breast cancer cells with different metastatic properties.
In weakly metastatic MCF7 cells, histone H3 K9 methylation, HP1 binding, and weak
recruitment of AP-1 Fra-1/c-Jun, NF-kappaB p65 transcription factors, and
coactivators is indicative of low chromatin accessibility and gene transcription 
at the IL-6 gene promoter. In highly metastatic MDA-MB231 cells, strong DNase,
MNase, and restriction enzyme accessibility, as well potent constitutive
transcription of the IL-6 gene promoter, coincide with increased H3 S10 K14
phosphoacetylation and promoter enrichment of AP-1 Fra-1/c-Jun and NF-kappaB p65 
transcription factors and MSK1, CBP/p300, Brg1, and Ezh2 cofactors.
Complementation, silencing, and kinase inhibitor experiments further demonstrate 
involvement of AP-1 Fra-1/c-Jun and NF-kappaB p65/RelB members, but not of the
alpha estrogen receptor in promoting chromatin accessibility and transcription
across the IL-6 gene promoter in metastatic breast cancer cells. Finally, the
natural withanolide Withaferin A was found to repress IL-6 gene transcription in 
metastatic breast cancer cells upon dual inhibition of NF-kappaB and AP-1 Fra-1
transcription factors and silencing of IL-6 promoter chromatin accessibility.

PMCID: PMC2756884
PMID: 19687301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Pathol. 2009 Sep;175(3):1246-54. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.090042. Epub 2009 
Aug 6.

Targeted overexpression of EZH2 in the mammary gland disrupts ductal
morphogenesis and causes epithelial hyperplasia.

Li X(1), Gonzalez ME, Toy K, Filzen T, Merajver SD, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1500 E.
Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The Polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), which has roles
during development of numerous tissues, is a critical regulator of cell type
identity. Overexpression of EZH2 has been detected in invasive breast carcinoma
tissue samples and is observed in human breast tissue samples of morphologically 
normal lobules up to 12 years before the development of breast cancer. The
function of EZH2 during preneoplastic progression in the mammary gland is
unknown. To investigate the role of EZH2 in the mammary gland, we targeted the
expression of EZH2 to mammary epithelial cells using the mouse mammary tumor
virus long terminal repeat. EZH2 overexpression resulted in aberrant terminal end
bud architecture. By the age of 4 months, 100% of female mouse mammary tumor
virus-EZH2 virgin mice developed intraductal epithelial hyperplasia resembling
the human counterpart accompanied by premature differentiation of ductal
epithelial cells and up-regulation of the luminal marker GATA-3. In addition,
remodeling of the mammary gland after parturition was impaired and EZH2
overexpression caused delayed involution. Mechanistically, we found that EZH2
physically interacts with beta-catenin, inducing beta-catenin nuclear
accumulation in mammary epithelial cells and activating Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling. The biological significance of these data to human hyperplasias is
demonstrated by EZH2 up-regulation and colocalization with beta-catenin in human 
intraductal epithelial hyperplasia, the earliest histologically identifiable
precursor of breast carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2731143
PMID: 19661437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Leukemia. 2009 Nov;23(11):2129-38. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.161. Epub 2009 Aug 6.

Gene expression profiling of isolated tumour cells from anaplastic large cell
lymphomas: insights into its cellular origin, pathogenesis and relation to
Hodgkin lymphoma.

Eckerle S(1), Brune V, Döring C, Tiacci E, Bohle V, Sundström C, Kodet R, Paulli 
M, Falini B, Klapper W, Chaubert AB, Willenbrock K, Metzler D, Bräuninger A,
Küppers R, Hansmann ML.

Author information: 
(1)Senckenberg Institute for Pathology, University of Frankfurt, Medical School, 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a main type of T-cell lymphomas and
comprises three distinct entities: systemic anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)
positive, systemic ALK(-) and cutaneous ALK(-) ALCL (cALCL). Little is known
about their pathogenesis and their cellular origin, and morphological and
immunophenotypical overlap exists between ALK(-) ALCL and classical Hodgkin
lymphoma (cHL). We conducted gene expression profiling of microdissected lymphoma
cells of five ALK(+) and four ALK(-) systemic ALCL, seven cALCL and sixteen cHL, 
and of eight subsets of normal T and NK cells. The analysis supports a derivation
of ALCL from activated T cells, but the lymphoma cells acquired a gene expression
pattern hampering an assignment to a CD4(+), CD8(+) or CD30(+) T-cell origin.
Indeed, ALCL display a down-modulation of many T-cell characteristic molecules.
All ALCL types show significant expression of NFkappaB target genes and
upregulation of genes involved in oncogenesis (e.g. EZH2). Surprisingly, few
genes are differentially expressed between systemic and cALCL despite their
different clinical behaviour, and between ALK(-) ALCL and cHL despite their
different cellular origin. ALK(+) ALCL are characterized by expression of genes
regulated by pathways constitutively activated by ALK. This study provides
multiple novel insights into the molecular biology and pathogenesis of ALCL.

PMID: 19657361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Blood. 2009 Sep 24;114(13):2733-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213496. Epub 2009 
Jul 28.

Combined epigenetic therapy with the histone methyltransferase EZH2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A and the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat against
human AML cells.

Fiskus W(1), Wang Y, Sreekumar A, Buckley KM, Shi H, Jillella A, Ustun C, Rao R, 
Fernandez P, Chen J, Balusu R, Koul S, Atadja P, Marquez VE, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta, GA30912, USA.

The polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 2 contains 3 core proteins, EZH2, SUZ12,
and EED, in which the SET (suppressor of variegation-enhancer of zeste-trithorax)
domain of EZH2 mediates the histone methyltransferase activity. This induces
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3, regulates the expression of HOX genes,
and promotes proliferation and aggressiveness of neoplastic cells. In this study,
we demonstrate that treatment with the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) depletes EZH2 levels, and inhibits trimethylation of 
lysine 27 on histone H3 in the cultured human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) HL-60 
and OCI-AML3 cells and in primary AML cells. DZNep treatment induced p16, p21,
p27, and FBXO32 while depleting cyclin E and HOXA9 levels. Similar findings were 
observed after treatment with small interfering RNA to EZH2. In addition, DZNep
treatment induced apoptosis in cultured and primary AML cells. Furthermore,
compared with treatment with each agent alone, cotreatment with DZNep and the
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat caused more depletion of EZH2,
induced more apoptosis of AML, but not normal CD34(+) bone marrow progenitor
cells, and significantly improved survival of nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency mice with HL-60 leukemia. These findings indicate that the
combination of DZNep and panobinostat is effective and relatively selective
epigenetic therapy against AML cells.

PMCID: PMC2756128
PMID: 19638619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Blood. 2009 Oct 15;114(16):3422-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-200170. Epub 2009 
Jul 23.

Epigenetic regulation of killer immunoglobulin-like receptor expression in T
cells.

Li G(1), Yu M, Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Kathleen B. and Mason I. Lowance Center for Human Immunology and Rheumatology,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Oct 15;114(16):3360-1.

With increasing age, T cells gain expression of killer immunoglobulin-like
receptors (KIRs) that transmit negative signals and dampen the immune response.
KIR expression is induced in CD4 and CD8 T cells by CpG DNA demethylation
suggesting epigenetic control. To define the mechanisms that underlie the
age-associated preferential KIR expression in CD8 T cells, we examined KIR2DL3
promoter methylation patterns. With age, CD8 T cells developed a patchy and
stochastic promoter demethylation even in cells that did not express the
KIR2DL3-encoded CD158b protein; complete demethylation of the minimal KIR2DL3
promoter was characteristic for CD158b-expressing cells. In contrast, the
promoter in CD4 T cells was fully methylated irrespective of age. The selectivity
for CD8 T cells correlated with lower DNMT1 recruitment to the KIR2DL3 promoter
which further diminished with age. In contrast, binding of the polycomb protein
EZH2 known to be involved in DNMT1 recruitment was not different. Our data
suggest that CD8 T cells endure increasing displacement of DNMT1 from the KIR
promoter with age, possibly because of an active histone signature. The ensuing
partial demethylation lowers the threshold for transcriptional activation and
renders CD8 T cells more susceptible to express KIR, thereby contributing to the 
immune defect in the elderly.

PMCID: PMC2765678
PMID: 19628706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cell Cycle. 2009 Aug;8(15):2313-4. Epub 2009 Aug 15.

The tumor suppressor microRNA-101 becomes an epigenetic player by targeting the
polycomb group protein EZH2 in cancer.

Friedman JM, Jones PA, Liang G.

PMCID: PMC2846299
PMID: 19625769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):791-8.

[Epigenetic analyses of brain tumor stem cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Natsume A(1), Kondo Y, Wakabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

It has been reported that cancer initiating cells (cancer stem cells, CSCS) are
present in human neoplasia. Although it is known that stem cells play a role in
tumorigenesis, the early epigenetic events involved in the development of
malignant precursors remain unknown. Here, we reviewed the epigenetic
modifications involved in the induction of human brain tumors, particularly
focusing on polycomb-repressive complex-mediated histone (H3) lysine (K) 27
tri-methylation (K27-3Me) and other DNA methylation patterns, which are known to 
act as transcriptional silencing machineries for tumor-suppressor genes, in brain
tumor stem cells (BTSCs). Among the histone modifications associated with
H3K27-3Me, the potential role of EZH2 histone methyltransferase, which is the
catalytic subunit of polycomb repressive complex 2, in the formation of brain
tumors has been discussed. In addition, we considered the prospects for
developing epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 19618856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Neurosci. 2009 Jul 15;29(28):8884-96. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0968-09.2009.

BMI1 sustains human glioblastoma multiforme stem cell renewal.

Abdouh M(1), Facchino S, Chatoo W, Balasingam V, Ferreira J, Bernier G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montréal,
Québec H1T 2M4, Canada.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most common and aggressive types of
brain tumors. In GBM, a subpopulation of CD133-positive cancer initiating cells
displays stem cell characteristics. The Polycomb group (PcG) and oncogene BMI1 is
part of the Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) that regulates gene expression
by modifying chromatin organization. Here we show that BMI1 is expressed in human
GBM tumors and highly enriched in CD133-positive cells. Stable BMI1 knockdown
using short hairpin RNA-expressing lentiviruses resulted in inhibition of
clonogenic potential in vitro and of brain tumor formation in vivo. Cell biology 
studies support the notion that BMI1 prevents CD133-positive cell apoptosis
and/or differentiation into neurons and astrocytes, depending on the cellular
context. Gene expression analyses suggest that BMI1 represses alternate tumor
suppressor pathways that attempt to compensate for INK4A/ARF/P53 deletion and
PI(3)K/AKT hyperactivity. Inhibition of EZH2, the main component of the PRC2,
also impaired GBM tumor growth. Our results reveal that PcG proteins are involved
in GBM tumor growth and required to sustain cancer initiating stem cell renewal.

PMID: 19605626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 11;284(37):24981-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.011973. Epub 2009
Jul 14.

Defective chromatin structure in somatic cell cloned mouse embryos.

Zhang M(1), Wang F, Kou Z, Zhang Y, Gao S.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100094,
China.

Epigenetic reprogramming plays a central role in the development of cloned
embryos generated by somatic cell nuclear transfer, and it is believed that
aberrant reprogramming leads to the abnormal development of most cloned embryos. 
Recent studies show that trimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3) contributes to the
maintenance of embryonic stem cell pluripotency because the differentiation genes
are always occupied by nucleosomes trimethylated at H3K27, which represses gene
expression. Here, we provide evidence that differential H3K27me3 modification
exists between normal fertilization-produced blastocysts and somatic cell nuclear
transfer cloned blastocysts; H3K27me3 was specifically found in cells of the
inner cell mass (ICM) of normal blastocysts, whereas there was no modification of
H3K27me3 in the ICM of cloned blastocysts. Subsequently, we demonstrated that the
differentiation-related genes, which are marked by H3K27me3 in embryonic stem
cells, were expressed at significantly higher levels in cloned embryos than in
normal embryos. The polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) component genes (Eed,
Ezh2, and Suz12), which are responsible for the generation of H3K27me3, were
expressed at lower levels in the cloned embryos. Our results suggest that reduced
expression of PRC2 component genes in cloned embryos results in defective
modification of H3K27me3 to the differentiation-related genes in pluripotent ICM 
cells. This results in premature expression of developmental genes and death of
somatic cloned embryos shortly after implantation. Taken together, these studies 
suggest that H3K27me3 might be an important epigenetic marker with which to
evaluate the developmental potential of cloned embryos.

PMCID: PMC2757202
PMID: 19602512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2009 Jul;41(7):588-93.

Regulation of CD11b transcription by decreasing PRC2 and increased acH4 level
during ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation.

Tang H(1), Chen F, Tan Q, Tan S, Liu L, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha
410008, China.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which mediates trimethylation of lysine 27 
on histone H3 (K27me3), plays an important role in many types of stem cell
differentiation. Here, we try to reveal how PRC2, PRC2-mediated repressive
histone marker H3K27me3, and active histone marker histone H4 acetylation (acH4) 
regulate the CD11b transcription during alltrans retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced
HL-60 leukemia cell differentiation. By using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and western blot analysis, we found that the mRNA and
protein expression levels of two members of PRC2 were decreased during
ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation, respectively. When treated with ATRA for 72
h, the EZH2 and SUZ12 mRNA levels were decreased to 35% and 38% of the control
group, respectively. At the same time, the granulocytic mature surface marker
CD11b expression was increased significantly at mRNA level detected by qPCR and
protein level detected by flow cytometry. By using chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay, we compared the local changes in SUZ12 binding and PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 
at the promoter of CD11b during ATRA-induced HL-60 differentiation. Both the
levels of SUZ12 binding and PRC2-mediated H3K27me3 at the promoter of CD11b were 
decreased for 4.1 and 3.8 folds, respectively. And we also found the increase in 
the acH4 level up to 4 folds after 72 h of ATRA treatment. These results
suggested that the histone modification including PRC2-mediated repressive
histone marker H3K27me3 and active histone marker acH4 may involve in CD11b
transcription during HL-60 leukemia cells reprogramming to terminal
differentiation.

PMID: 19578722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. EMBO Rep. 2009 Aug;10(8):881-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2009.102. Epub 2009 Jul 3.

Epigenetic reprogramming during wound healing: loss of polycomb-mediated
silencing may enable upregulation of repair genes.

Shaw T(1), Martin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol,
Bristol, UK. tshaw@sgul.ac.uk

Tissue repair is a complex process that requires wound-edge cells to proliferate 
and migrate, which in turn necessitates induction of a large repair
transcriptome. Epigenetic modifications have emerged as crucial regulators of
gene expression. Here, we ask whether epigenetic reprogramming might contribute
to the concerted induction of repair genes by wound-edge cells. Polycomb group
proteins (PcGs) co-operatively silence genes by laying down repressive marks such
as histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), which can be removed by
specific demethylases. We show that PcGs Eed, Ezh2 and Suz12 are significantly
downregulated during murine skin repair, whereas the newly described demethylases
Jmjd3 and Utx are markedly upregulated. Correspondingly, we find a striking
reduction of repressive H3K27me3 in the wound epidermis. Quantitative chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies have revealed that there is less Eed bound to the
regulatory regions of two paradigm wound-induced genes, Myc and Egfr, suggesting 
that loss of polycomb-mediated silencing might contribute to the induction of
repair genes.

PMCID: PMC2726669
PMID: 19575012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Jul;18(7):2137-44. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-1223. Epub 2009 Jun 30.

Genetic variants and prostate cancer risk: candidate replication and exploration 
of viral restriction genes.

Breyer JP(1), McReynolds KM, Yaspan BL, Bradley KM, Dupont WD, Smith JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0275, USA.

The genetic variants underlying the strong heritable component of prostate cancer
remain largely unknown. Genome-wide association studies of prostate cancer have
yielded several variants that have significantly replicated across studies,
predominantly in cases unselected for family history of prostate cancer.
Additional candidate gene variants have also been proposed, many evaluated within
familial prostate cancer study populations. Such variants hold great potential
value for risk stratification, particularly for early-onset or aggressive
prostate cancer, given the comorbidities associated with current therapies. Here,
we investigate a Caucasian study population of 523 independent familial prostate 
cancer cases and 523 age-matched controls without a personal or family history of
prostate cancer. We replicate identified associations at genome-wide association 
study loci 8q24, 11q13, and 2p15 (P = 2.9 x 10(-4) to P = 4.7 x 10(-5)), showing 
study population power. We also find evidence to support reported associations at
candidate genes RNASEL, EZH2, and NKX3-1 (P = 0.031 to P = 0.0085). We further
explore a set of candidate genes related to RNASEL and to its role in retroviral 
restriction, identifying nominal associations at XPR1 and RBM9. The effects at
8q24 seem more pronounced for those diagnosed at an early age, whereas at 2p15
and RNASEL the effects were more pronounced at a later age. However, these trends
did not reach statistical significance. The effects at 2p15 were statistically
significantly more pronounced for those diagnosed with aggressive disease.

PMCID: PMC2813685
PMID: 19567509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Lab Invest. 2009 Sep;89(9):1018-31. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2009.65. Epub 2009 Jun
29.

Papillary hyperplasia of the gallbladder in pancreaticobiliary maljunction
represents a senescence-related lesion induced by lysolecithin.

Yamaguchi J(1), Sasaki M, Harada K, Zen Y, Sato Y, Ikeda H, Itatsu K, Yokoyama Y,
Ando H, Ohta T, Kubota A, Shimizu K, Nimura Y, Nagino M, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Cellular senescence, an irreversible growth arrest, is considered to play as
safeguard against malignant progression, though such a mechanism is speculative
in human carcinogenesis. In gallbladder carcinoma, cholecystolithiasis and
pancreaticobiliary maljunction (PBM) are major risk factors. Here, by using 113
surgically resected gallbladders and cultures of human gallbladder epithelial
cells (HGECs) and gallbladder carcinoma cell line (TGBC2TKB), we examined
carcinogenesis with respect to cellular senescence. Among 15 cases of PBM in
which carcinoma was found in 4 cases, nonneoplastic gallbladder mucosa showed
diffuse papillary hyperplasia (PHP). PHP was not found in gallbladders with
cholecystolithiasis. Interestingly, PHP exhibited senescent features such as
expression of p16(INK4A) and low cell proliferative activity. In contrast, EZH2, 
a polycomb group protein, was overexpressed in intraepithelial neoplasm and
carcinoma in gallbladders with cholecystolithiasis. In PBM, EZH2 was expressed
only in carcinoma foci but not in PHP. Cultured HGECs treated with lysolecithin, 
the level of which is elevated in gallbladder bile of PBM, showed increased
expression of p16(INK4A) and senescence-associated beta-galactosidase.
Conversely, enforced overexpression of EZH2 in senescent HGECs reduced p16(INK4A)
expression. A knockdown of EZH2 in cultured TGBC2TKB cells increased p16(INK4a)
expression. In conclusion, PHP in PBM may act as a barrier to malignant
transformation for decades. EZH2 may be responsible for the escape from cellular 
senescence followed by malignant transformation in the gallbladder of PBM.

PMID: 19564843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Nov;76(11):1033-42. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21061.

Differential remodeling of mono- and trimethylated H3K27 during porcine embryo
development.

Park KE(1), Magnani L, Cabot RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907, USA.

Histone methylation plays an important role in regulating chromatin structure and
gene expression. Methylation of the lysine residue 27 of histone H3 (H3K27) is an
epigenetic mark that is closely linked with transcriptional repression; global
patterns of H3K27 methylation undergo dramatic changes during cleavage
development in the mouse. The aim of this study was to characterize the H3K27
methylation pattern in cleavage stage porcine embryos obtained either by in vivo 
or in vitro fertilization or parthenogenetic activation and to determine the
expression patterns of EED, EZH2, and SUZ12 (regulators of H3K27 methylation). We
found that monomethylated H3K27 was detectable in the nuclei of oocytes and
pronuclear, 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, and blastocyst stage embryos. Trimethylated
H3K27 was detectable in the nuclei of GV stage oocytes, the chromosome of MII
stage oocytes and a single pronucleus of the pronuclear stage embryos produced by
fertilization; the signals were faint or absent in nuclei of two-cell through
blastocyst stage embryos. In addition, EED transcripts were increased from the
four-cell stage (P < 0.05) in embryos obtained by in vitro fertilization,
parthenogenetic activation and in vivo fertilization. EZH2 transcript levels were
highest in the GV-stage oocyte (P < 0.05). SUZ12 transcripts were transiently
increased at the four-cell stage (P < 0.05) in parthenogenetic and in vivo
derived embryos. Our results suggest that H3K27 trimethylation is an epigenetic
marker of maternally derived chromatin that is globally remodeled during porcine 
embryogenesis.

PMID: 19536841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 12;4(6):e5884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005884.

The malignant pleural effusion as a model to investigate intratumoral
heterogeneity in lung cancer.

Basak SK(1), Veena MS, Oh S, Huang G, Srivatsan E, Huang M, Sharma S, Batra RK.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Stem Cell Institute, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles Healthcare
System, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Malignant Pleural Effusions (MPE) may be useful as a model to study hierarchical 
progression of cancer and/or intratumoral heterogeneity. To strengthen the
rationale for developing the MPE-model for these purposes, we set out to find
evidence for the presence of cancer stem cells (CSC) in MPE and demonstrate an
ability to sustain intratumoral heterogeneity in MPE-primary cultures. Our
studies show that candidate lung CSC-expression signatures (PTEN, OCT4, hTERT,
Bmi1, EZH2 and SUZ12) are evident in cell pellets isolated from MPE, and
MPE-cytopathology also labels candidate-CSC (CD44, cMET, MDR-1, ALDH)
subpopulations. Moreover, in primary cultures that use MPE as the source of both 
tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME), candidate CSC are maintained
over time. This allows us to live-sort candidate CSC-fractions from the MPE-tumor
mix on the basis of surface markers (CD44, c-MET, uPAR, MDR-1) or differences in 
xenobiotic metabolism (ALDH). Thus, MPE-primary cultures provide an avenue to
extract candidate CSC populations from individual (isogenic) MPE-tumors. This
will allow us to test whether these cells can be discriminated in functional
bioassays. Tumor heterogeneity in MPE-primary cultures is evidenced by variable
immunolabeling, differences in colony-morphology, and differences in
proliferation rates of cell subpopulations. Collectively, these data justify the 
ongoing development of the MPE-model for the investigation of intratumoral
heterogeneity, tumor-TME interactions, and phenotypic validation of candidate
lung CSC, in addition to providing direction for the pre-clinical development of 
rational therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC2697051
PMID: 19536353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Jun;8(6):1579-88. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-09-0013. Epub 
2009 Jun 9.

DZNep is a global histone methylation inhibitor that reactivates developmental
genes not silenced by DNA methylation.

Miranda TB(1), Cortez CC, Yoo CB, Liang G, Abe M, Kelly TK, Marquez VE, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Southern California, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

DNA methylation, histone modifications, and nucleosomal occupancy collaborate to 
cause silencing of tumor-related genes in cancer. The development of drugs that
target these processes is therefore important for cancer therapy. Inhibitors of
DNA methylation and histone deacetylation have been approved by the Food and Drug
Administration for treatment of hematologic malignancies. However, drugs that
target other mechanisms still need to be developed. Recently, 3-deazaneplanocin A
(DZNep) was reported to selectively inhibit trimethylation of lysine 27 on
histone H3 (H3K27me3) and lysine 20 on histone H4 (H4K20me3) as well as
reactivate silenced genes in cancer cells. This finding opens the door to the
pharmacologic inhibition of histone methylation. We therefore wanted to further
study the mechanism of action of DZNep in cancer cells. Western blot analysis
shows that DZNep globally inhibits histone methylation and is not selective. Two 
other drugs, sinefungin and adenosine dialdehyde, have similar effects as DZNep
on H3K27me3. Intriguingly, chromatin immunoprecipitation of various histone
modifications and microarray analysis show that DZNep acts through a different
pathway than 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor. These
observations give us interesting insight into how chromatin structure affects
gene expression. We also determined the kinetics of gene activation to understand
if the induced changes were somatically heritable. We found that upon removal of 
DZNep, gene expression is reduced to its original state. This suggests that there
is a homeostatic mechanism that returns the histone modifications to their
"ground state" after DZNep treatment. Our data show the strong need for further
development of histone methylation inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3186068
PMID: 19509260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 15;15(12):3927-37. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2784. 
Epub 2009 Jun 9.

Cancer DNA methylation: molecular mechanisms and clinical implications.

McCabe MT(1), Brandes JC, Vertino PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology and Hematology, Emory University School of
Medicine and the Emory Winship Cancer Institute, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

DNA methylation plays a crucial role in the regulation of gene expression and
chromatin organization within normal eukaryotic cells. In cancer, however, global
patterns of DNA methylation are altered with global hypomethylation of
repeat-rich intergenic regions and hypermethylation of a subset of CpG-dense
gene-associated regions (CpG islands). Extensive research has revealed the
cellular machinery that catalyzes DNA methylation, as well as several large
protein complexes that mediate the transcriptional repression of hypermethylated 
genes. However, research is only just beginning to uncover the molecular
mechanisms underlying the origins of cancer-specific DNA methylation. Herein, we 
present several recent advances regarding these mechanisms and discuss the
relationship between histone modifications (i.e., H3K4me2/3, H4K16Ac, H3K9me2/3, 
H3K27me3, H4K20me3), chromatin-modifying enzymes (G9a, EZH2, hMOF, SUV4-20H), and
aberrant DNA methylation. Additionally, the role played by inflammation, DNA
damage, and miRNAs in the etiology of aberrant DNA methylation is considered.
Finally, we discuss the clinical implications of aberrant DNA methylation and the
utility of methylated biomarkers in cancer diagnosis and management.

PMCID: PMC2715155
PMID: 19509173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):1991-6. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Epigenetic maintenance of stemness and malignancy in peripheral neuroectodermal
tumors by EZH2.

Burdach S(1), Plehm S, Unland R, Dirksen U, Borkhardt A, Staege MS, Müller-Tidow 
C, Richter GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. somagene@lrz.tum.de

Chromatin modifications are increasingly recognized as a key mechanism in cancer.
The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 (EZH2),
the enzymatic subunit of the polycomb PRC2 complex methylates histone H3K27,
thereby, mediating gene silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in a variety of tumor
tissue including breast and prostate. Ewing tumors (ET), alias peripheral
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly malignant tumors molecularly defined by
ews/ets translocations. We found EWS-FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in vivo.
Other components of the PRC2 complex, like EED or SUZ12 were not deregulated in
ET. Downregulation of EZH2 by RNA interference suppressed tumor development and
metastasis in vivo and microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down revealed an
EZH2-maintained, undifferentiated, reversible phenotype in ET. EZH2 suppression
resulted in a generalized loss of H3K27me3 as well as increase in H3 acetylation.
ChIP-Chip assays for H3K27me3 verified such genes that had specifically lost
H3K27me3 upon EZH2 silencing, suggesting that stemness features are preserved via
epigenetic mechanisms. Taken together, the genetic EWS-FLI1 translocation is
intimately linked to global and gene specific epigenetic alterations in ET
biology. EZH2 mediates neuroectodermal and endothelial embryonal tumor stem cell 
growth and metastatic spread induced by a translocation derived chimeric
transcription factor.

PMID: 19502792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Nov;17(11):1463-70. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.83. Epub 2009
May 27.

Expression of SNURF-SNRPN upstream transcripts and epigenetic regulatory genes
during human spermatogenesis.

Wawrzik M(1), Spiess AN, Herrmann R, Buiting K, Horsthemke B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

The imprinted domain in human 15q11-q13 is controlled by a bipartite imprinting
centre (IC), which overlaps the 5' part of the paternally expressed SNURF-SNRPN
gene. We have recently described two novel genes upstream of SNURF-SNRPN (PWRN1
and PWRN2), which are biallelically expressed in the testis. We have now found
that PWRN1 represents an alternative 5' part of SNURF-SNRPN, and that its
expression in the brain is imprinted. To determine when the locus is activated
during spermatogenesis and which factors are involved in this process, we have
mined gene-expression data of testicular biopsies from men with different types
of spermatogenic failure. Whereas PWRN1-SNURF-SNRPN and PWRN2 are expressed in
post-meiotic germ cells only, a hitherto undetected SNURF-SNRPN upstream
transcript is expressed already at meiosis. Several epigenetic factors (eg, MBD1 
and MBD2 isoforms, MBD3L1, SUVH39H2, BRDT, and EZH2) are upregulated at specific 
stages of spermatogenesis, suggesting that they play an important role in the
epigenetic reprogramming during spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2986690
PMID: 19471314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2009 May 20;4(5):e5622. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005622.

Polycomb mediated epigenetic silencing and replication timing at the INK4a/ARF
locus during senescence.

Agherbi H(1), Gaussmann-Wenger A, Verthuy C, Chasson L, Serrano M, Djabali M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie INSERM-CNRS de Marseille Luminy, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: The INK4/ARF locus encodes three tumor suppressor genes (p15(Ink4b), 
Arf and p16(Ink4a)) and is frequently inactivated in a large number of human
cancers. Mechanisms regulating INK4/ARF expression are not fully characterized.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that in young proliferating embryonic
fibroblasts (MEFs) the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) member EZH2 together 
with PRC1 members BMI1 and M33 are strongly expressed and localized at the
INK4/ARF regulatory domain (RD) identified as a DNA replication origin. When
cells enter senescence the binding to RD of both PRC1 and PRC2 complexes is lost 
leading to a decreased level of histone H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3). This
loss is accompanied with an increased expression of the histone demethylase Jmjd3
and with the recruitment of the MLL1 protein, and correlates with the expression 
of the Ink4a/Arf genes. Moreover, we show that the Polycomb protein BMI1
interacts with CDC6, an essential regulator of DNA replication in eukaryotic
cells. Finally, we demonstrate that Polycomb proteins and associated epigenetic
marks are crucial for the control of the replication timing of the INK4a/ARF
locus during senescence.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified the replication licencing factor CDC6 as a new partner
of the Polycomb group member BMI1. Our results suggest that in young cells
Polycomb proteins are recruited to the INK4/ARF locus through CDC6 and the
resulting silent locus is replicated during late S-phase. Upon senescence, Jmjd3 
is overexpressed and the MLL1 protein is recruited to the locus provoking the
dissociation of Polycomb from the INK4/ARF locus, its transcriptional activation 
and its replication during early S-phase. Together, these results provide a
unified model that integrates replication, transcription and epigenetics at the
INK4/ARF locus.

PMCID: PMC2680618
PMID: 19462008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Dev. 2009 May 15;23(10):1177-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.511109.

Histone demethylase JMJD3 contributes to epigenetic control of INK4a/ARF by
oncogenic RAS.

Barradas M(1), Anderton E, Acosta JC, Li S, Banito A, Rodriguez-Niedenführ M,
Maertens G, Banck M, Zhou MM, Walsh MJ, Peters G, Gil J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College,
London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

The INK4a/ARF tumor suppressor locus, a key executor of cellular senescence, is
regulated by members of the Polycomb group (PcG) of transcriptional repressors.
Here we show that signaling from oncogenic RAS overrides PcG-mediated repression 
of INK4a by activating the H3K27 demethylase JMJD3 and down-regulating the
methyltransferase EZH2. In human fibroblasts, JMJD3 activates INK4a, but not ARF,
and causes p16(INK4a)-dependent arrest. In mouse embryo fibroblasts, Jmjd3
activates both Ink4a and Arf and elicits a p53-dependent arrest, echoing the
effects of RAS in this system. Our findings directly implicate JMJD3 in the
regulation of INK4a/ARF during oncogene-induced senescence and suggest that JMJD3
has the capacity to act as a tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC2685533
PMID: 19451218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Genes Dev. 2009 Apr 15;23(8):975-85. doi: 10.1101/gad.1742509.

Polycomb protein Ezh2 regulates pancreatic beta-cell Ink4a/Arf expression and
regeneration in diabetes mellitus.

Chen H(1), Gu X, Su IH, Bottino R, Contreras JL, Tarakhovsky A, Kim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Proliferation of pancreatic islet beta cells is an important mechanism for
self-renewal and for adaptive islet expansion. Increased expression of the
Ink4a/Arf locus, which encodes the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16(INK4a)
and tumor suppressor p19(Arf), limits beta-cell regeneration in aging mice, but
the basis of beta-cell Ink4a/Arf regulation is poorly understood. Here we show
that Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), a histone methyltransferase and
component of a Polycomb group (PcG) protein complex, represses Ink4a/Arf in islet
beta cells. Ezh2 levels decline in aging islet beta cells, and this attrition
coincides with reduced histone H3 trimethylation at Ink4a/Arf, and increased
levels of p16(INK4a) and p19(Arf). Conditional deletion of beta-cell Ezh2 in
juvenile mice also reduced H3 trimethylation at the Ink4a/Arf locus, leading to
precocious increases of p16(INK4a) and p19(Arf). These mutant mice had reduced
beta-cell proliferation and mass, hypoinsulinemia, and mild diabetes, phenotypes 
rescued by germline deletion of Ink4a/Arf. beta-Cell destruction with
streptozotocin in controls led to increased Ezh2 expression that accompanied
adaptive beta-cell proliferation and re-establishment of beta-cell mass; in
contrast, mutant mice treated similarly failed to regenerate beta cells,
resulting in lethal diabetes. Our discovery of Ezh2-dependent beta-cell
proliferation revealed unique epigenetic mechanisms underlying normal beta-cell
expansion and beta-cell regenerative failure in diabetes pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2675862
PMID: 19390090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Hum Pathol. 2009 Sep;40(9):1304-11. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2009.01.017. Epub 2009
Apr 22.

Distinct expression of polycomb group proteins EZH2 and BMI1 in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Yonemitsu Y(1), Imazeki F, Chiba T, Fukai K, Nagai Y, Miyagi S, Arai M, Aoki R,
Miyazaki M, Nakatani Y, Iwama A, Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba 260-8670, Japan.

Polycomb gene products play a crucial role in the development of highly malignant
phenotypes and aggressive cancer progression in a variety of cancers; however,
their role in hepatocellular carcinoma remains unclear. First, we analyzed the
impact of EZH2 and BMI1 modulation on cell growth of HepG2 cells.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetr
azolium assays revealed marked growth inhibition after EZH2 or BMI1 knockdown. In
addition, simultaneous knockdown of these 2 genes further augmented cell growth
inhibitory effects. Next, we conducted immunohistochemical assessment of 86
hepatocellular carcinoma surgical specimens, evaluating the correlation between
EZH2 and BMI1 protein expression and clinicopathologic features. High-level EZH2 
and BMI1 expression was detected in 57 (66.3%) and 52 tumor tissues (60.5%),
respectively. Among these, 48 tumor tissues (55.8%) showed colocalization of EZH2
and BMI1 in almost all tumor cells. The cumulative recurrence rate, but not
survival rate, was significantly higher in patients positive for EZH2 (P = .029) 
and BMI1 (P = .039) than in their negative counterparts, as determined by
Kaplan-Meier analysis. These data indicate that EZH2 and BMI1 may cooperate in
initiation and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 19386347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3570-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2807. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

Tobacco smoke induces polycomb-mediated repression of Dickkopf-1 in lung cancer
cells.

Hussain M(1), Rao M, Humphries AE, Hong JA, Liu F, Yang M, Caragacianu D, Schrump
DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1201, USA.

Limited information is available about epigenetic mechanisms by which cigarette
smoke enhances the initiation and progression of lung cancer. To examine this
issue, A549 and Calu-6 lung cancer cells were cultured in normal media with or
without tobacco smoke condensate (TSC) under clinically relevant exposure
conditions. Ten-day TSC exposure dramatically increased the tumorigenicity of
lung cancer cells in nude mice. Microarray and quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) experiments revealed that this phenomenon coincided
with diminished expression of Dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1). Western blot, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, methylation-specific PCR, and pyrosequencing experiments
showed that repression of Dkk-1 coincided with decreased H4K16Ac, increased
H3K27me3, and recruitment of SirT1, EZH2, SUZ12, and Bmi1 without DNA
hypermethylation within the Dkk-1 promoter despite prolonged TSC exposures.
Removal of TSC from culture media resulted in loss of promoter-associated
polycomb repressor complexes and reexpression of Dkk-1. siRNA-mediated knockdown 
of EZH2 and SirT1 partially abrogated TSC-mediated inhibition of Dkk-1
expression. Western blot and quantitative RT-PCR array experiments showed that
TSC exposure as well as knockdown of Dkk-1 activated Wnt signaling and
significantly up-regulated Wnt5a in lung cancer cells. Knockdown of Dkk-1
recapitulated the dramatic protumorigenic effects of TSC exposure in Calu-6
cells. Despite the transient nature of Dkk-1 repression following TSC exposure in
vitro, Dkk-1 remained silenced in tumor xenografts derived from TSC-treated
Calu-6 cells. Collectively, these data provide evidence that cigarette smoke
directly engages polycomb machinery to activate a signaling network implicated in
maintenance of cancer stem cells.

PMID: 19351856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5011. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005011. Epub 2009 Apr 2.

CDKN1C (p57) is a direct target of EZH2 and suppressed by multiple epigenetic
mechanisms in breast cancer cells.

Yang X(1), Karuturi RK, Sun F, Aau M, Yu K, Shao R, Miller LD, Tan PB, Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency
for Science, Technology and Research), Biopolis, Singapore.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2009;4(4). doi:
10.1371/annotation/e70583a2-3581-4848-b1e3-b518ac07d3a6.

CDKN1C (encoding tumor suppressor p57(KIP2)) is a cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitor whose family members are often transcriptionally downregulated in human
cancer via promoter DNA methylation. In this study, we show that CDKN1C is
repressed in breast cancer cells mainly through histone modifications. In
particular, we show that CDKN1C is targeted by histone methyltransferase
EZH2-mediated histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3), and can be strongly
activated by inhibition of EZH2 in synergy with histone deacetylase inhibitor.
Consistent with the overexpression of EZH2 in a variety of human cancers
including breast cancer, CDKN1C in these cancers is downregulated, and breast
tumors expressing low levels of CDKN1C are associated with a poor prognosis. We
further show that assessing both EZH2 and CDKN1C expression levels as a
measurement of EZH2 pathway activity provides a more predictive power of disease 
outcome than that achieved with EZH2 or CDKN1C alone. Taken together, our study
reveals a novel epigenetic mechanism governing CDKN1C repression in breast
cancer. Importantly, as a newly identified EZH2 target with prognostic value, it 
has implications in patient stratification for cancer therapeutic targeting
EZH2-mediated gene repression.

PMCID: PMC2659786
PMID: 19340297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Cell. 2009 Mar 20;136(6):1122-35. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.12.043.

Ezh2 orchestrates gene expression for the stepwise differentiation of
tissue-specific stem cells.

Ezhkova E(1), Pasolli HA, Parker JS, Stokes N, Su IH, Hannon G, Tarakhovsky A,
Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Mar 20;136(6):992-4.

Although in vitro studies of embryonic stem cells have identified polycomb
repressor complexes (PRCs) as key regulators of differentiation, it remains
unclear as to how PRC-mediated mechanisms control fates of multipotent
progenitors in developing tissues. Here, we show that an essential PRC component,
Ezh2, is expressed in epidermal progenitors but diminishes concomitant with
embryonic differentiation and with postnatal decline in proliferative activity.
We show that Ezh2 controls proliferative potential of basal progenitors by
repressing the Ink4A-Ink4B locus and tempers the developmental rate of
differentiation by preventing premature recruitment of AP1 transcriptional
activator to the structural genes that are required for epidermal
differentiation. Together, our studies reveal that PRCs control epigenetic
modifications temporally and spatially in tissue-restricted stem cells. They
maintain their proliferative potential and globally repressing undesirable
differentiation programs while selectively establishing a specific terminal
differentiation program in a stepwise fashion.

PMCID: PMC2716120
PMID: 19303854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5324-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810759106. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

EZH2 is a mediator of EWS/FLI1 driven tumor growth and metastasis blocking
endothelial and neuro-ectodermal differentiation.

Richter GH(1), Plehm S, Fasan A, Rössler S, Unland R, Bennani-Baiti IM, Hotfilder
M, Löwel D, von Luettichau I, Mossbrugger I, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Kovar H,
Staege MS, Müller-Tidow C, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Technische Universität München and Pediatric Oncology Center, 81664
Munich, Germany.

Ewing tumors (ET) are highly malignant, localized in bone or soft tissue, and are
molecularly defined by ews/ets translocations. DNA microarray analysis revealed a
relationship of ET to both endothelium and fetal neural crest. We identified
expression of histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 
(EZH2) to be increased in ET. Suppressive activity of EZH2 maintains stemness in 
normal and malignant cells. Here, we found EWS/FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in
vivo, and induced EZH2 expression in ET and mesenchymal stem cells.
Down-regulation of EZH2 by RNA interference in ET suppressed oncogenic
transformation by inhibiting clonogenicity in vitro. Similarly, tumor development
and metastasis was suppressed in immunodeficient Rag2(-/-)gamma(C)(-/-) mice.
EZH2-mediated gene silencing was shown to be dependent on histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity. Subsequent microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down,
HDAC-inhibitor treatment and confirmation in independent assays revealed an
undifferentiated phenotype maintained by EZH2 in ET. EZH2 regulated stemness
genes such as nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR), as well as genes involved in
neuroectodermal and endothelial differentiation (EMP1, EPHB2, GFAP, and GAP43).
These data suggest that EZH2 might have a central role in ET pathology by shaping
the oncogenicity and stem cell phenotype of this tumor.

PMCID: PMC2656557
PMID: 19289832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cancer Biol Ther. 2009 May;8(10):939-50. Epub 2009 May 18.

Panobinostat treatment depletes EZH2 and DNMT1 levels and enhances decitabine
mediated de-repression of JunB and loss of survival of human acute leukemia
cells.

Fiskus W(1), Buckley K, Rao R, Mandawat A, Yang Y, Joshi R, Wang Y, Balusu R,
Chen J, Koul S, Joshi A, Upadhyay S, Atadja P, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)MCG Cancer Center, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA.

The PRC2 complex protein EZH2 is a histone methyltransferase that is known to
bind and recruit DNMT1 to the DNA to modulate DNA methylation. Here, we
determined that the pan-HDAC inhibitor panobinostat (LBH589) treatment depletes
DNMT1 and EZH2 protein levels, disrupts the interaction of DNMT1 with EZH2, as
well as de-represses JunB in human acute leukemia cells. Similar to treatment
with the hsp90 inhibitor 17-DMAG, treatment with panobinostat also inhibited the 
chaperone association of heat shock protein 90 with DNMT1 and EZH2, which
promoted the proteasomal degradation of DNMT1 and EZH2. Unlike treatment with the
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine, which demethylates JunB promoter DNA,
panobinostat treatment mediated chromatin alterations in the JunB promoter.
Combined treatment with panobinostat and decitabine caused greater attenuation of
DNMT1 and EZH2 levels than either agent alone, which was accompanied by more JunB
de-repression and loss of clonogenic survival of K562 cells. Co-treatment with
panobinostat and decitabine also caused more loss of viability of primary AML but
not normal CD34(+) bone marrow progenitor cells. Collectively, these findings
indicate that co-treatment with panobinostat and decitabine targets multiple
epigenetic mechanisms to de-repress JunB and exerts antileukemia activity against
human acute myeloid leukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC2775142
PMID: 19279403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2623-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3114. Epub
2009 Mar 3.

The putative tumor suppressor microRNA-101 modulates the cancer epigenome by
repressing the polycomb group protein EZH2.

Friedman JM(1), Liang G, Liu CC, Wolff EM, Tsai YC, Ye W, Zhou X, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediates epigenetic gene silencing by
trimethylating histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) and is known to aberrantly silence
tumor suppressor genes in cancer. EZH2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2, enhances
tumorigenesis and is commonly overexpressed in several types of cancer. Our
microRNA profiling of bladder transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) patient samples
revealed that microRNA-101 (miR-101) is down-regulated in TCC, and we showed that
miR-101 inhibits cell proliferation and colony formation in TCC cell lines.
Furthermore, our results confirm that miR-101 directly represses EZH2 and stable 
EZH2 knockdowns in TCC cell lines create a similar growth suppressive phenotype. 
This suggests that abnormal down-regulation of miR-101 could lead to the
overexpression of EZH2 frequently seen in cancer. We conclude that miR-101 may be
a potent tumor suppressor by altering global chromatin structure through
repression of EZH2.

PMID: 19258506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cancer Res. 2009 Mar 15;69(6):2287-95. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2894. Epub
2009 Feb 24.

miR-205 Exerts tumor-suppressive functions in human prostate through
down-regulation of protein kinase Cepsilon.

Gandellini P(1), Folini M, Longoni N, Pennati M, Binda M, Colecchia M, Salvioni
R, Supino R, Moretti R, Limonta P, Valdagni R, Daidone MG, Zaffaroni N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology and Laboratories, Fondazione Istituto Di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan,
Italy.

Limited information is available concerning the expression and role of microRNAs 
in prostate cancer. In this study, we investigated the involvement of miR-205 in 
prostate carcinogenesis. Significantly lower miR-205 expression levels were found
in cancer than in normal prostate cell lines as well as in tumor compared with
matched normal prostate tissues, with a particularly pronounced reduction in
carcinomas from patients with local-regionally disseminated disease. Restoring
the expression of miR-205 in prostate cancer cells resulted in cell
rearrangements consistent with a mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, such as
up-regulation of E-cadherin and reduction of cell locomotion and invasion, and in
the down-regulation of several oncogenes known to be involved in disease
progression (i.e., interleukin 6, caveolin-1, EZH2). Our evidence suggests that
these events are driven by the concurrent repression of specific predicted
miR-205 targets, namely N-chimaerin, ErbB3, E2F1, E2F5, ZEB2, and protein kinase 
Cepsilon. Strikingly, the latter seemed to play a direct role in regulating
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. In fact, its down-regulation led to a cell 
phenotype largely reminiscent of that of cells ectopically expressing miR-205.
Overall, we showed for the first time that miR-205 exerts a tumor-suppressive
effect in human prostate by counteracting epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and reducing cell migration/invasion, at least in part through the
down-regulation of protein kinase Cepsilon.

PMID: 19244118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Feb 26;10:71. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-71.

Gene set-based module discovery in the breast cancer transcriptome.

Niida A(1), Smith AD, Imoto S, Aburatani H, Zhang MQ, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan. aniida@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Although microarray-based studies have revealed global view of gene
expression in cancer cells, we still have little knowledge about regulatory
mechanisms underlying the transcriptome. Several computational methods applied to
yeast data have recently succeeded in identifying expression modules, which is
defined as co-expressed gene sets under common regulatory mechanisms. However,
such module discovery methods are not applied cancer transcriptome data.
RESULTS: In order to decode oncogenic regulatory programs in cancer cells, we
developed a novel module discovery method termed EEM by extending a previously
reported module discovery method, and applied it to breast cancer expression
data. Starting from seed gene sets prepared based on cis-regulatory elements,
ChIP-chip data, and gene locus information, EEM identified 10 principal
expression modules in breast cancer based on their expression coherence.
Moreover, EEM depicted their activity profiles, which predict regulatory programs
in each subtypes of breast tumors. For example, our analysis revealed that the
expression module regulated by the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is
downregulated in triple negative breast cancers, suggesting similarity of
transcriptional programs between stem cells and aggressive breast cancer cells.
We also found that the activity of the PRC2 expression module is negatively
correlated to the expression of EZH2, a component of PRC2 which belongs to the
E2F expression module. E2F-driven EZH2 overexpression may be responsible for the 
repression of the PRC2 expression modules in triple negative tumors. Furthermore,
our network analysis predicts regulatory circuits in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that the gene set-based module discovery
approach is a powerful tool to decode regulatory programs in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2674431
PMID: 19243633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Epigenetics. 2009 Feb 16;4(2):100-6. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

The ZNF217 oncogene is a candidate organizer of repressive histone modifiers.

Banck MS(1), Li S, Nishio H, Wang C, Beutler AS, Walsh MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Hematology/Oncology), Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10029, USA. banck.michaela@mayo.edu

The zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) is an important oncogene based on the high
frequency of amplification and overexpression in many cancer types, but its
molecular mode of gene regulation is poorly understood. We purified a complex of 
nuclear ZNF217-binding proteins by affinity chromatography and identified its
components by mass spectrometry as Jarid1b/Plu-1, G9a, LSD1, CoREST and CtBP1.
Individual binding of these with ZNF217 was confirmed by co-immunoprecipiation
(IP). Known activities of these proteins suggested a role of the ZNF217 complex
in histone modification. Using in vitro assays the following activities were
demonstrated: Histone H3 lysine 4 trimethyl (H3K4me3) demethylase activity, which
co-fractionated with Jarid1b/Plu-1 in anion-exchange chromatography; H3K9
methylation, the known principal activity of G9a; and H3K27 methylation. The
latter suggested EZH2 as another ZNF217 binding candidate, which could be
confirmed by co-IP. Taken together, these findings suggest that ZNF217 assembles 
a distinct set of histone modifying proteins at target DNA sites that act
synergistically in transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2929765
PMID: 19242095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 24;106(8):2641-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813139106. Epub 2009 Feb 6.

Ndy1/KDM2B immortalizes mouse embryonic fibroblasts by repressing the Ink4a/Arf
locus.

Tzatsos A(1), Pfau R, Kampranis SC, Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111,
USA.

The histone H3 demethylase Not dead yet-1 (Ndy1/KDM2B) is a physiological
inhibitor of senescence. Here, we show that Ndy1 is down-regulated during
senescence in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and that it represses the
Ink4a/Arf locus. Ndy1 counteracts the senescence-associated down-regulation of
Ezh2, a component of polycomb-repressive complex (PRC) 2, via a JmjC
domain-dependent process leading to the global and Ink4a/Arf locus-specific
up-regulation of histone H3K27 trimethylation. The latter promotes the Ink4a/Arf 
locus-specific binding of Bmi1, a component of PRC1. Ndy1, which interacts with
Ezh2, also binds the Ink4a/Arf locus and demethylates the locus-associated
histone H3K36me2 and histone H3K4me3. The combination of histone modifications
driven by Ndy1 interferes with the binding of RNA Polymerase II, resulting in the
transcriptional silencing of the Ink4a/Arf locus and contributing to the Ndy1
immortalization phenotype. Other studies show that, in addition to inhibiting
replicative senescence, Ndy1 inhibits Ras oncogene-induced senescence via a
similar molecular mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2650317
PMID: 19202064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cell Cycle. 2009 Feb 15;8(4):556-9. Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Repressing the repressor: a new mode of MYC action in lymphomagenesis.

Sander S(1), Bullinger L, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The MYC oncogene is often mutated or amplified in human tumors resulting in
increased activity of the transcription factor. Recent evidence suggested that
MYC not only regulates expression of protein-coding genes directly, but also
controls expression of miRNAs thereby using a second mode to impact on gene
expression programs. The importance of miRNAs in MYC-driven tumorigenesis has
been enlightened by studying cell line and murine lymphoma models with
conditional expression of MYC. The application of microarray technology revealed 
both MYC-induced and MYC-repressed miRNAs. A miRNA consistently repressed by MYC 
in multiple tumors was miR-26a indicating that this miRNA might have strong tumor
suppressor function for MYC-induced lymphomas. Indeed, ectopic miR-26a expression
in MYC-dependent cells resulted in attenuated proliferation and impaired cell
cycle progression. When the effector pathway for miR-26a was elucidated, the
Polycomb complex protein EZH2, a global regulator of gene expression, was
identified as a direct target. The suppression of miR-26a mediated attenuation of
EZH2 expression by MYC was shown to play a critical role in lymphomagenesis.
Thus, MYC-induced oncogenesis does not only depend on direct targeting of
protein-coding genes, but also on modulating them via deregulation of their
targeting miRNAs, thereby significantly impacting lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 19197161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):525-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.031328. Epub 2009 Jan 14.

The long noncoding RNA Kcnq1ot1 organises a lineage-specific nuclear domain for
epigenetic gene silencing.

Redrup L(1), Branco MR, Perdeaux ER, Krueger C, Lewis A, Santos F, Nagano T, Cobb
BS, Fraser P, Reik W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Genetics and Imprinting, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, UK.

Long noncoding RNAs are implicated in a number of regulatory functions in
eukaryotic genomes. The paternally expressed long noncoding RNA (ncRNA) Kcnq1ot1 
regulates epigenetic gene silencing in an imprinted gene cluster in cis over a
distance of 400 kb in the mouse embryo, whereas the silenced region extends over 
780 kb in the placenta. Gene silencing by the Kcnq1ot1 RNA involves repressive
histone modifications, including H3K9me2 and H3K27me3, which are partly brought
about by the G9a and Ezh2 histone methyltransferases. Here, we show that Kcnq1ot1
is transcribed by RNA polymerase II, is unspliced, is relatively stable and is
localised in the nucleus. Analysis of conditional Dicer mutants reveals that the 
RNAi pathway is not involved in gene silencing in the Kcnq1ot1 cluster. Instead, 
using RNA/DNA FISH we show that the Kcnq1ot1 RNA establishes a nuclear domain
within which the genes that are epigenetically inactivated in cis are frequently 
found, whereas nearby genes that are not regulated by Kcnq1ot1 are localised
outside of the domain. The Kcnq1ot1 RNA domain is larger in the placenta than in 
the embryo, consistent with more genes in the cluster being silenced in the
placenta. Our results show for the first time that autosomal long ncRNAs can
establish nuclear domains, which might create a repressive environment for
epigenetic silencing of adjacent genes. Long ncRNAs in imprinting clusters and
the Xist RNA on the inactive X chromosome thus appear to regulate epigenetic gene
silencing by similar mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2685953
PMID: 19144718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jan 1;8(1):172-5. Epub 2009 Jan 30.

Deregulated expression of miR-26a and Ezh2 in rhabdomyosarcoma.

Ciarapica R, Russo G, Verginelli F, Raimondi L, Donfrancesco A, Rota R, Giordano 
A.

PMID: 19106613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(6):R109. doi: 10.1186/bcr2214. Epub 2008 Dec 19.

EZH2 and BMI1 inversely correlate with prognosis and TP53 mutation in breast
cancer.

Pietersen AM(1), Horlings HM, Hauptmann M, Langerød A, Ajouaou A,
Cornelissen-Steijger P, Wessels LF, Jonkers J, van de Vijver MJ, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 
121, Amsterdam, 1066X, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: PolycombGroup (PcG) proteins maintain gene repression through
histone modifications and have been implicated in stem cell regulation and
cancer. EZH2 is part of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) and trimethylates
H3K27. This histone mark recruits the BMI1-containing PRC1 that silences the
genes marked by PRC2. Based on their role in stem cells, EZH2 and BMI1 have been 
predicted to contribute to a poor outcome for cancer patients.
METHODS: We have analysed the expression of EZH2 and BMI1 in a well-characterised
dataset of 295 human breast cancer samples.
RESULTS: Interestingly, although EZH2 overexpression correlates with a poor
prognosis in breast cancer, BMI1 overexpression correlates with a good outcome.
Although this may reflect transformation of different cell types, we also
observed a functional difference. The PcG-target genes INK4A and ARF are not
expressed in tumours with high BMI1, but they are expressed in tumours with EZH2 
overexpression. ARF expression results in tumour protein P53 (TP53) activation,
and we found a significantly higher proportion of TP53 mutations in tumours with 
high EZH2. This may explain why tumours with high EZH2 respond poorly to therapy,
in contrast to tumours with high BMI1.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data highlight that whereas EZH2 and BMI1 may function 
in a 'linear' pathway in normal development, their overexpression has different
functional consequences for breast tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2656906
PMID: 19099573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 2009 Feb 12;28(6):843-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.433. Epub 2008 Dec 15.

Downregulation of EZH2 decreases growth of estrogen receptor-negative invasive
breast carcinoma and requires BRCA1.

Gonzalez ME(1), Li X, Toy K, DuPrie M, Ventura AC, Banerjee M, Ljungman M,
Merajver SD, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Increased levels of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a critical regulator of
cellular memory, are associated with negative estrogen receptor (ER) expression
and disease progression in breast cancer. High levels of EZH2 signal the presence
of metastasis and poor outcome in breast cancer patients. To test the hypothesis 
that deregulation of EZH2 contributes to ER-negative breast cancer progression,
EZH2 expression was inhibited in ER-negative breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231 and
CAL51 using a lentivirus system. EZH2 knockdown decreased proliferation and
delayed the G(2)/M cell-cycle transition, although not affecting apoptosis. In
vivo, EZH2 downregulation significantly decreased breast xenograft growth and
improved survival. EZH2 knockdown upregulated BRCA1 protein. Of note, BRCA1
knockdown was sufficient to rescue the effects of EZH2 downregulation on
proliferation, G(2)/M arrest, and on the levels of hyperphosphorylated mitotic
Cdc25C and Cyclin B1 proteins, crucial for entry into mitosis. Invasive
ER-negative breast carcinomas show significant overexpression of EZH2 and
downregulation of BRCA1 proteins. Taken together, we show that EZH2 is important 
in ER-negative breast cancer growth in vivo and in vitro, and that BRCA1 is
required for the proliferative effects of EZH2. Blockade of EZH2 may provide a
prime target to prevent and/or halt ER-negative breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2643353
PMID: 19079346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Histopathology. 2008 Dec;53(6):658-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.03184.x.

Deregulated expression of p16INK4a and p53 pathway members in benign and
malignant myoepithelial tumours of the salivary glands.

Vékony H(1), Röser K, Löning T, Raaphorst FM, Leemans CR, Van der Waal I,
Bloemena E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery/Oral Pathology, Academic Centre
for Dentistry, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS: Myoepithelial salivary gland tumours are uncommon and follow an
unpredictable biological course. The aim was to examine their molecular
background to acquire a better understanding of their clinical behaviour.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of protein (E2F1, p16(INK4a), p53, cyclin D1,
Ki67 and Polycomb group proteins BMI-1, MEL-18 and EZH2) was investigated in 49
benign and 30 primary malignant myoepithelial tumours and five histologically
benign recurrences by immunohistochemistry and the findings correlated with
histopathological characteristics. Benign tumours showed a higher percentage of
cells with expression of p16(INK4a) pathway members [p16(INK4a) and E2F1 (both P 
< 0.001), and cyclin D1, P = 0.002] compared with normal salivary gland.
Furthermore, malignant tumours expressed p53 (P = 0.003) and EZH2 (P = 0.09) in a
higher percentage. Recurrences displayed more p53 + tumour cells (P = 0.02) than 
benign primaries. Amongst the benign tumours, the clear cell type had the highest
proliferation fraction (P = 0.05) and a higher percentage of EZH2 was detected in
the plasmacytoid cell type (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to demonstrate that deregulation of the
p16(INK4a) senescence pathway is involved in the development of myoepithelial
tumours. We propose that additional inactivation of p53 in malignant primaries
and benign recurrences contributes to myoepithelial neoplastic transformation and
aggressive tumour growth.

PMID: 19076682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec 2;6(12):2911-27. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060306.

PcG proteins, DNA methylation, and gene repression by chromatin looping.

Tiwari VK(1), McGarvey KM, Licchesi JD, Ohm JE, Herman JG, Schübeler D, Baylin
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2008 Dec;6(12):e313.

Many DNA hypermethylated and epigenetically silenced genes in adult cancers are
Polycomb group (PcG) marked in embryonic stem (ES) cells. We show that a large
region upstream ( approximately 30 kb) of and extending approximately 60 kb
around one such gene, GATA-4, is organized-in Tera-2 undifferentiated embryonic
carcinoma (EC) cells-in a topologically complex multi-loop conformation that is
formed by multiple internal long-range contact regions near areas enriched for
EZH2, other PcG proteins, and the signature PcG histone mark, H3K27me3. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated depletion of EZH2 in undifferentiated Tera-2
cells leads to a significant reduction in the frequency of long-range
associations at the GATA-4 locus, seemingly dependent on affecting the H3K27me3
enrichments around those chromatin regions, accompanied by a modest increase in
GATA-4 transcription. The chromatin loops completely dissolve, accompanied by
loss of PcG proteins and H3K27me3 marks, when Tera-2 cells receive
differentiation signals which induce a approximately 60-fold increase in GATA-4
expression. In colon cancer cells, however, the frequency of the long-range
interactions are increased in a setting where GATA-4 has no basal transcription
and the loops encompass multiple, abnormally DNA hypermethylated CpG islands, and
the methyl-cytosine binding protein MBD2 is localized to these CpG islands,
including ones near the gene promoter. Removing DNA methylation through genetic
disruption of DNA methyltransferases (DKO cells) leads to loss of MBD2 occupancy 
and to a decrease in the frequency of long-range contacts, such that these now
more resemble those in undifferentiated Tera-2 cells. Our findings reveal
unexpected similarities in higher order chromatin conformation between
stem/precursor cells and adult cancers. We also provide novel insight that
PcG-occupied and H3K27me3-enriched regions can form chromatin loops and
physically interact in cis around a single gene in mammalian cells. The loops
associate with a poised, low transcription state in EC cells and, with the
addition of DNA methylation, completely repressed transcription in adult cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC2592355
PMID: 19053175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cancer Res. 2008 Dec 1;68(23):9964-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1134.

Activation of the enhancer of zeste homologue 2 gene by the human papillomavirus 
E7 oncoprotein.

Holland D(1), Hoppe-Seyler K, Schuller B, Lohrey C, Maroldt J, Dürst M,
Hoppe-Seyler F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers (F065), German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3721.

The malignant phenotype of human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cancer cells is
maintained by the activity of the viral E6 and E7 genes. Here, we identified the 
polycomb group gene enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) as a novel downstream
target for the viral oncogenes in HPV-transformed cells. EZH2 expression was
activated by HPV16 E7 at the transcriptional level via E7-mediated release of E2F
from pocket proteins. RNA interference analyses showed that continuous EZH2
expression is required for the proliferation of HPV-positive tumor cells by
stimulating cell cycle progression at the G1-S boundary. In addition to its
growth-promoting activity, EZH2 also contributed to the apoptotic resistance of
cervical cancer cells. Furthermore, we found that HPV-positive dysplastic and
tumorigenic cervical lesions were characterized by high levels of EZH2 protein in
vivo. We conclude that the E7 target gene EZH2 is a major determinant for the
proliferation of HPV-positive cancer cells and contributes to their apoptotic
resistance. Moreover, EZH2 may serve as a novel therapeutic target for the
treatment of cervical cancer.

PMID: 19047178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Dec 4;3(6):577-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.11.007.

An EZ mark to miss.

Ho L(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA.

Ezh2, the methyltransferase within Polycomb Repressive II Complexes, was thought 
to be essential for all H3K27me3 marks in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Recently
in Molecular Cell, Shen and colleagues (2008) revealed that EZH2 is dispensable
for ESC derivation and self-renewal, and that EZH1 may unexpectedly compensate
for its loss.

PMCID: PMC2704610
PMID: 19041770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Hepatol. 2009 Feb;50(2):323-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.07.037. Epub 2008 Oct 
16.

Sustained JNK1 activation is associated with altered histone H3 methylations in
human liver cancer.

Chang Q(1), Zhang Y, Beezhold KJ, Bhatia D, Zhao H, Chen J, Castranova V, Shi X, 
Chen F.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536,
USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Aberrant c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation has been
linked to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in mouse models. It remains unclear
whether JNK activation plays an important role in human HCC and, if so, how JNK
signaling contributes to the initiation or progression of HCC.
METHODS: The JNK activation, global gene expression, and the status of histone H3
methylations were measured in 31 primary human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
samples paired with the adjacent non-cancerous (ANC) tissues.
RESULTS: Enhanced JNK1 activation was noted in 17 out of 31 HCC samples (55%)
relative to the corresponding ANC tissues, whereas JNK2 activation was roughly
equal between HCC and ANC tissues. This enhancement in JNK1 activation is
associated with an increased tumor size and a lack of encapsulation of the
tumors. In addition, an association of JNK1 activation with the histone H3
lysines 4 and 9 tri-methylation was observed in the HCC tissues, which leads to
an elevated expression of genes regulating cell growth and a decreased expression
of the genes for cell differentiation and the p450 family members in HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: These results, thus, suggest that JNK1 plays important roles in the 
development of human HCC partially through the epigenetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4417500
PMID: 19041150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Cell. 2008 Nov 21;32(4):503-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.11.004.

Ezh1 and Ezh2 maintain repressive chromatin through different mechanisms.

Margueron R(1), Li G, Sarma K, Blais A, Zavadil J, Woodcock CL, Dynlacht BD,
Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, New York University Medical School, 522 First
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Polycomb group proteins are critical to maintaining gene repression established
during Drosophila development. Part of this group forms the PRC2 complex
containing Ez that catalyzes di- and trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 27
(H3K37me2/3), marks repressive to transcription. We report that the mammalian
homologs Ezh1 and Ezh2 form similar PRC2 complexes but exhibit contrasting
repressive roles. While PRC2-Ezh2 catalyzes H3K27me2/3 and its knockdown affects 
global H3K27me2/3 levels, PRC2-Ezh1 performs this function weakly. In accordance,
Ezh1 knockdown was ineffectual on global H3K27me2/3 levels. Instead, PRC2-Ezh1
directly and robustly represses transcription from chromatinized templates and
compacts chromatin in the absence of the methyltransferase cofactor SAM, as
evidenced by electron microscopy. Ezh1 targets a subset of Ezh2 genes, yet Ezh1
is more abundant in nonproliferative adult organs while Ezh2 expression is
tightly associated with proliferation, as evidenced when analyzing aging mouse
kidney. These results might reflect subfunctionalization of a PcG protein during 
evolution.

PMCID: PMC3641558
PMID: 19026781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Cell. 2008 Nov 21;32(4):491-502. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.10.016.

EZH1 mediates methylation on histone H3 lysine 27 and complements EZH2 in
maintaining stem cell identity and executing pluripotency.

Shen X(1), Liu Y, Hsu YJ, Fujiwara Y, Kim J, Mao X, Yuan GC, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Children's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Trimethylation on H3K27 (H3K27me3) mediated by Polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2) has been linked to embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity and pluripotency.
EZH2, the catalytic subunit of PRC2, has been reported as the sole histone
methyltransferase that methylates H3K27 and mediates transcriptional silencing.
Analysis of Ezh2(-/-) ESCs suggests existence of an additional enzyme(s)
catalyzing H3K27 methylation. We have identified EZH1, a homolog of EZH2 that is 
physically present in a noncanonical PRC2 complex, as an H3K27 methyltransferase 
in vivo and in vitro. EZH1 colocalizes with the H3K27me3 mark on chromatin and
preferentially preserves this mark on development-related genes in Ezh2(-/-)
ESCs. Depletion of Ezh1 in cells lacking Ezh2 abolishes residual methylation on
H3K27 and derepresses H3K27me3 target genes, demonstrating a role of EZH1 in
safeguarding ESC identity. Ezh1 partially complements Ezh2 in executing
pluripotency during ESC differentiation, suggesting that cell-fate transitions
require epigenetic specificity.

PMCID: PMC2630502
PMID: 19026780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Science. 2008 Dec 12;322(5908):1695-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1165395. Epub 2008
Nov 13.

Genomic loss of microRNA-101 leads to overexpression of histone methyltransferase
EZH2 in cancer.

Varambally S(1), Cao Q, Mani RS, Shankar S, Wang X, Ateeq B, Laxman B, Cao X,
Jing X, Ramnarayanan K, Brenner JC, Yu J, Kim JH, Han B, Tan P, Kumar-Sinha C,
Lonigro RJ, Palanisamy N, Maher CA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a mammalian histone methyltransferase that 
contributes to the epigenetic silencing of target genes and regulates the
survival and metastasis of cancer cells. EZH2 is overexpressed in aggressive
solid tumors by mechanisms that remain unclear. Here we show that the expression 
and function of EZH2 in cancer cell lines are inhibited by microRNA-101
(miR-101). Analysis of human prostate tumors revealed that miR-101 expression
decreases during cancer progression, paralleling an increase in EZH2 expression. 
One or both of the two genomic loci encoding miR-101 were somatically lost in
37.5% of clinically localized prostate cancer cells (6 of 16) and 66.7% of
metastatic disease cells (22 of 33). We propose that the genomic loss of miR-101 
in cancer leads to overexpression of EZH2 and concomitant dysregulation of
epigenetic pathways, resulting in cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2684823
PMID: 19008416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jan 27;100(2):240-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604771. Epub 2008 Nov
11.

Concepts of epigenetics in prostate cancer development.

Cooper CS(1), Foster CS.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, 
Surrey, UK. colin.cooper@icr.ac.uk

Substantial evidence now supports the view that epigenetic changes have a role in
the development of human prostate cancer. Analyses of the patterns of epigenetic 
alteration are providing important insights into the origin of this disease and
have identified specific alterations that may serve as useful diagnostic and
prognostic biomarkers. Examination of cancer methylation patterns supports a stem
cell origin of prostate cancer. It is well established that methylation of GSTpi 
is a marker of prostate cancer, and global patterns of histone marking appear to 
be linked to cancer prognosis with levels of acetylated histones H3K9, H3K18, and
H4K12, and of dimethylated H4R3 and H3K4, dividing low-grade prostate cancer
(Gleason 6 or less) into two prognostically separate groups. Elevated levels of
several components of the polycomb group protein complex, EZH2, BMI1, and RING1, 
can also act as biomarkers of poor clinical outcome. Many components of the
epigenetic machinery, including histone deacetylase (whose expression level is
linked to the TMPRSS2:ERG translocation) and the histone methylase EZH2, are
potential therapeutic targets. The recent discovery of the role of small RNAs in 
governing the epigenetic status of individual genes offers exciting new
possibilities in therapeutics and chemoprevention.

PMCID: PMC2634711
PMID: 19002169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;14(21):6790-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-1013.

Regulation of pancreatic tumor cell proliferation and chemoresistance by the
histone methyltransferase enhancer of zeste homologue 2.

Ougolkov AV(1), Bilim VN, Billadeau DD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology Research, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

PURPOSE: Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a histone methyltransferase, plays
a key role in transcriptional repression through chromatin remodeling. Our
objectives were to determine the expression pattern of EZH2 and to assess the
anticancer effect of EZH2 depletion in pancreatic cancer cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Immunohistochemistry and cytosolic/nuclear fractionation
were done to determine the expression pattern of EZH2 in normal pancreas and
human pancreatic tumors. We used RNA interference, Western blotting, reverse
transcription-PCR, and chromatin immunoprecipitation to study the effect of EZH2 
depletion on pancreatic cancer cell proliferation and survival.
RESULTS: We detected nuclear overexpression of EZH2 in pancreatic cancer cell
lines and in 71 of 104 (68%) cases of human pancreatic adenocarcinomas. EZH2
nuclear accumulation was more frequent in poorly differentiated pancreatic
adenocarcinomas (31 of 34 cases; P<0.001). We found that genetic depletion of
EZH2 results in reexpression of p27(Kip1) and decreased pancreatic cancer cell
proliferation. Moreover, we showed that EZH2 depletion sensitized pancreatic
cancer cells to doxorubicin and gemcitabine, which leads to a significant
induction of apoptosis, suggesting that the combination of EZH2 inhibitors and
standard chemotherapy could be a superior potential treatment for pancreatic
cancer.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show nuclear accumulation of EZH2 as a hallmark of
poorly differentiated pancreatic adenocarcinoma; identify the tumor suppressor
p27(Kip1) as a new target gene of EZH2; show that EZH2 nuclear overexpression
contributes to pancreatic cancer cell proliferation; and suggest EZH2 as a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC2690708
PMID: 18980972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cancer Cell Int. 2008 Nov 3;8:15. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-8-15.

Deregulation of histone lysine methyltransferases contributes to oncogenic
transformation of human bronchoepithelial cells.

Watanabe H(1), Soejima K, Yasuda H, Kawada I, Nakachi I, Yoda S, Naoki K,
Ishizaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. Hideo_Watanabe@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Alterations in the processing of the genetic information in
carcinogenesis result from stable genetic mutations or epigenetic modifications. 
It is becoming clear that nucleosomal histones are central to proper gene
expression and that aberrant DNA methylation of genes and histone methylation
plays important roles in tumor progression. To date, several histone lysine
methyltransferases (HKMTs) have been identified and histone lysine methylation is
now considered to be a critical regulator of transcription. However, still
relatively little is known about the role of HKMTs in tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: We observed differential HKMT expression in a lung cancer model in which
normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells expressing telomerase, SV40 large 
T antigen, and Ras were immortal, formed colonies in soft agar, and expressed
specific HKMTs for H3 lysine 9 and 27 residues but not for H3 lysine 4 residue.
Modifications in the H3 tails affect the binding of proteins to the histone tails
and regulate protein function and the position of lysine methylation marks a gene
to be either activated or repressed. In the present study, suppression by siRNA
of HKMTs (EZH2, G9A, SETDB1 and SUV39H1) that are over-expressed in immortalized 
and transformed cells lead to reduced cell proliferation and much less
anchorage-independent colony growth. We also found that the suppression of H3-K9,
G9A and SUV39H1 induced apoptosis and the suppression of H3-K27, EZH2 caused G1
arrest.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate the potential of these HKMTs in addition to the 
other targets for epigenetics such as DNMTs and HDACs to be interesting
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC2584620
PMID: 18980680  [PubMed]


224. Science. 2008 Oct 31;322(5902):750-6. doi: 10.1126/science.1163045.

Polycomb proteins targeted by a short repeat RNA to the mouse X chromosome.

Zhao J(1), Sun BK, Erwin JA, Song JJ, Lee JT.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To equalize X-chromosome dosages between the sexes, the female mammal inactivates
one of her two X chromosomes. X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is initiated by
expression of Xist, a 17-kb noncoding RNA (ncRNA) that accumulates on the X in
cis. Because interacting factors have not been isolated, the mechanism by which
Xist induces silencing remains unknown. We discovered a 1.6-kilobase ncRNA (RepA)
within Xist and identified the Polycomb complex, PRC2, as its direct target. PRC2
is initially recruited to the X by RepA RNA, with Ezh2 serving as the RNA binding
subunit. The antisense Tsix RNA inhibits this interaction. RepA depletion
abolishes full-length Xist induction and trimethylation on lysine 27 of histone
H3 of the X. Likewise, PRC2 deficiency compromises Xist up-regulation. Therefore,
RepA, together with PRC2, is required for the initiation and spread of XCI. We
conclude that a ncRNA cofactor recruits Polycomb complexes to their target locus.

PMCID: PMC2748911
PMID: 18974356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;10(11):1291-300. doi: 10.1038/ncb1787. Epub 2008 Oct 19.

A model for transmission of the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark.

Hansen KH(1), Bracken AP, Pasini D, Dietrich N, Gehani SS, Monrad A, Rappsilber
J, Lerdrup M, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research & Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes
Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen N., Denmark. klaus.hansen@bric.dk

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;10(12):1484.

Organization of chromatin by epigenetic mechanisms is essential for establishing 
and maintaining cellular identity in developing and adult organisms. A key
question that remains unresolved about this process is how epigenetic marks are
transmitted to the next cell generation during cell division. Here we provide a
model to explain how trimethylated Lys 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3), which is
catalysed by the EZH2-containing Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), is
maintained in proliferating cells. We show that the PRC2 complex binds to the
H3K27me3 mark and colocalizes with this mark in G1 phase and with sites of
ongoing DNA replication. Efficient binding requires an intact trimeric PRC2
complex containing EZH2, EED and SUZ12, but is independent of the catalytic SET
domain of EZH2. Using a heterologous reporter system, we show that transient
recruitment of the PRC2 complex to chromatin, upstream of the transcriptional
start site, is sufficient to maintain repression through endogenous PRC2 during
subsequent cell divisions. Thus, we suggest that once the H3K27me3 is
established, it recruits the PRC2 complex to maintain the mark at sites of DNA
replication, leading to methylation of H3K27 on the daughter strands during
incorporation of newly synthesized histones. This mechanism ensures maintenance
of the H3K27me3 epigenetic mark in proliferating cells, not only during DNA
replication when histones synthesized de novo are incorporated, but also outside 
S phase, thereby preserving chromatin structure and transcriptional programs.

PMID: 18931660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 21;105(42):16230-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0808830105. Epub 2008 Oct 13.

MicroRNA-directed transcriptional gene silencing in mammalian cells.

Kim DH(1), Saetrom P, Snøve O Jr, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences and Division of Molecular Biology,
Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 1450 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level in
the cytoplasm, but recent findings suggest additional roles for miRNAs in the
nucleus. To address whether miRNAs might transcriptionally silence gene
expression, we searched for miRNA target sites proximal to known gene
transcription start sites in the human genome. One conserved miRNA, miR-320, is
encoded within the promoter region of the cell cycle gene POLR3D in the antisense
orientation. We provide evidence of a cis-regulatory role for miR-320 in
transcriptional silencing of POLR3D expression. miR-320 directs the association
of RNA interference (RNAi) protein Argonaute-1 (AGO1), Polycomb group (PcG)
component EZH2, and tri-methyl histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) with the POLR3D
promoter. Our results suggest the existence of an epigenetic mechanism of
miRNA-directed transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC2571020
PMID: 18852463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Dev Cell. 2008 Nov;15(5):668-79. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.08.015. Epub 2008 Oct
9.

Polycomb group proteins Ezh2 and Rnf2 direct genomic contraction and imprinted
repression in early mouse embryos.

Terranova R(1), Yokobayashi S, Stadler MB, Otte AP, van Lohuizen M, Orkin SH,
Peters AH.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66,
CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Nov;15(5):637-8.

Genomic imprinting regulates parental-specific expression of particular genes and
is required for normal mammalian development. How imprinting is established
during development is, however, largely unknown. To address this question, we
studied the mouse Kcnq1 imprinted cluster at which paternal-specific silencing
depends on expression of the noncoding RNA Kcnq1ot1. We show that Kcnq1ot1 is
expressed from the zygote stage onward and rapidly associates with chromatin
marked by Polycomb group (PcG) proteins and repressive histone modifications,
forming a discrete repressive nuclear compartment devoid of RNA polymerase II, a 
configuration also observed at the Igf2r imprinted cluster. In this compartment, 
the paternal Kcnq1 cluster exists in a three-dimensionally contracted state. In
vivo the PcG proteins Ezh2 and Rnf2 are independently required for genomic
contraction and imprinted silencing. We propose that the formation of a
parental-specific higher-order chromatin organization renders imprint clusters
competent for monoallelic silencing and assign a central role to PcG proteins in 
this process.

PMID: 18848501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 2008 Dec 11;27(58):7274-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.333. Epub 2008 Sep
22.

Repression of E-cadherin by the polycomb group protein EZH2 in cancer.

Cao Q(1), Yu J, Dhanasekaran SM, Kim JH, Mani RS, Tomlins SA, Mehra R, Laxman B, 
Cao X, Yu J, Kleer CG, Varambally S, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a critical component of the
polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is involved in gene silencing and
histone H3 lysine 27 methylation. EZH2 has a master regulatory function in
controlling such processes as stem cell differentiation, cell proliferation,
early embryogenesis and X chromosome inactivation. Although benign epithelial
cells express very low levels of EZH2, increased levels of EZH2 have been
observed in aggressive solid tumors such as those of the prostate, breast and
bladder. The mechanism by which EZH2 mediates tumor aggressiveness is unclear.
Here, we demonstrate that EZH2 mediates transcriptional silencing of the tumor
suppressor gene E-cadherin by trimethylation of H3 lysine 27. Histone deacetylase
inhibitors can prevent EZH2-mediated repression of E-cadherin and attenuate cell 
invasion, suggesting a possible mechanism that may be useful for the development 
of therapeutic treatments. Taken together, these observations provide a novel
mechanism of E-cadherin regulation and establish a functional link between
dysregulation of EZH2 and repression of E-cadherin during cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2690514
PMID: 18806826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Reproduction. 2008 Dec;136(6):777-85. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0045. Epub 2008 Sep 10.

Polycomb gene expression and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation changes during
bovine preimplantation development.

Ross PJ(1), Ragina NP, Rodriguez RM, Iager AE, Siripattarapravat K,
Lopez-Corrales N, Cibelli JB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of, Animal Science Physiology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Trimethylation of histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) is established by polycomb
group genes and is associated with stable and heritable gene silencing. The aim
of this study was to characterize the expression of polycomb genes and the
dynamics of H3K27me3 during bovine oocyte maturation and preimplantation
development. Oocytes and in vitro-produced embryos were collected at different
stages of development. Polycomb gene expression was analyzed by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. Global H3K27me3 levels were
determined by semiquantitative immunofluorescence. Transcripts for EZH2, EED, and
SUZ12 were detected at all stages analyzed, with EZH2 levels being the highest of
the three at early stages of development. By the time the embryo reached the
blastocyst stage, the level of PcG gene mRNA levels significantly increased.
Immunofluorescence staining indicated nuclear expression of EZH2 at all stages
while nuclear localized EED and SUZ12 were only evident at the morula and
blastocyst stages. Semiquantitative analysis of H3K27me3 levels showed that
nuclear fluorescence intensity was the highest in immature oocytes, which
steadily decreased after fertilization to reach a nadir at the eight-cell stage, 
and then increased at the blastocyst stage. These results suggest that the
absence of polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins localized to the nucleus of
early embryos could be responsible for the gradual decrease in H3K27me3 during
early preimplantation development.

PMID: 18784248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Jun;18(5):725-36. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0189.

Histone H3 modifications associated with differentiation and long-term culture of
mesenchymal adipose stem cells.

Noer A(1), Lindeman LC, Collas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

Long-term culture of mesenchymal stem cells leads to a loss of differentiation
capacity, the molecular mechanism of which remains not understood. We show here
that expansion of adipose stem cells (ASCs) to late passage (replicative
senescence) is associated with promoter-specific and global changes in epigenetic
histone modifications. In undifferentiated ASCs, inactive adipogenic and myogenic
promoters are enriched in a repressive combination of trimethylated H3K4 (H3K4m3)
and H3K27m3 in the absence of H3K9m3, a heterochromatin mark. Sequential
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicate that H3K4m3 and H3K27m3 co-occupy a
fraction of nucleosomes on some but not all lineage-specific promoters examined. 
However in cultured primary keratinocytes, adipogenic and myogenic promoters are 
enriched in trimethylated H3K4, K27, and K9, illustrating two distinct epigenetic
states of inactive promoters related to potential for activation. H3K4m3 and
H3K27m3 stably mark promoters during long-term ASC culture indicating that loss
of differentiation capacity is not due to alterations in these histone
modifications on these loci. Adipogenic differentiation in early passage results 
in H3K27 demethylation and H3K9 acetylation specifically on adipogenic promoters.
On induction of differentiation in late passage, however, transcriptional
upregulation is impaired, H3K27 trimethylation is maintained and H3K9 acetylation
is inhibited on promoters. In addition, the polycomb proteins Ezh2 and Bmi1 are
targeted to promoters. This correlates with global cellular Ezh2 increase and
H3K9 deacetylation. Promoter targeting by Ezh2 and Bmi1 in late passage ASCs
suggests the establishment of a polycomb-mediated epigenetic program aiming at
repressing transcription.

PMID: 18771397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Mol Med Rep. 2008 Sep-Oct;1(5):633-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000004.

High expression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 indicates poor prognosis in
patients with soft tissue sarcomas.

Yamaga K(1), Osaki M, Kidani K, Shomori K, Yoshida H, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organ Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.
yamake0921@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a member of the polycomb group of genes, is
associated with malignancy in several human cancers. The purpose of this study
was to examine the association between EZH2 expression and clinicopathological
factors as compared to Ki-67 expression in human soft tissue sarcomas. Expression
of EZH2 and Ki-67 was immunohistochemically determined in paraffin-embedded
sections from 104 soft tissue sarcomas. High expression of both EZH2 and Ki-67
was significantly correlated with distant metastasis (P<0.01), histologic grade
(P<0.01) and poor prognosis (P<0.01), but not with clinicopathological factors
such as age, sex, and tumor location and size. Although EZH2 expression was
significantly correlated with Ki-67 expression (rs=0.65, P<0.01), multivariate
analysis showed that high expression of EZH2, but not of Ki-67, was an
independent factor of poor prognosis (relative risk = 2.79; P=0.02). These data
suggest that expression of EZH2 is a novel and reliable prognostic marker of
human soft tissue sarcomas.

PMID: 21479461  [PubMed]


232. Mutat Res. 2008 Dec 1;647(1-2):21-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.07.010. Epub 2008
Aug 3.

Roles of the EZH2 histone methyltransferase in cancer epigenetics.

Simon JA(1), Lange CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
simon004@umn.edu

EZH2 is the catalytic subunit of Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), which is a
highly conserved histone methyltransferase that targets lysine-27 of histone H3. 
This methylated H3-K27 chromatin mark is commonly associated with silencing of
differentiation genes in organisms ranging from plants to flies to humans.
Studies on human tumors show that EZH2 is frequently over-expressed in a wide
variety of cancerous tissue types, including prostate and breast. Although the
mechanistic contributions of EZH2 to cancer progression are not yet determined,
functional links between EZH2-mediated histone methylation and DNA methylation
suggest partnership with the gene silencing machinery implicated in tumor
suppressor loss. Here we review the basic molecular biology of EZH2 and the
findings that implicate EZH2 in different cancers. We also discuss EZH2
connections to other silencing enzymes, such as DNA methyltransferases and
histone deacetylases, and we consider progress on deciphering mechanistic
consequences of EZH2 overabundance and its potential roles in tumorigenesis.
Finally, we review recent findings that link EZH2 roles in stem cells and cancer,
and we consider prospects for integrating EZH2 blockade into strategies for
developing epigenetic therapies.

PMID: 18723033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Blood. 2008 Nov 15;112(10):4202-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-147645. Epub 2008 
Aug 19.

MYC stimulates EZH2 expression by repression of its negative regulator miR-26a.

Sander S(1), Bullinger L, Klapproth K, Fiedler K, Kestler HA, Barth TF, Möller P,
Stilgenbauer S, Pollack JR, Wirth T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The MYC oncogene, which is commonly mutated/amplified in tumors, represents an
important regulator of cell growth because of its ability to induce both
proliferation and apoptosis. Recent evidence links MYC to altered miRNA
expression, thereby suggesting that MYC-regulated miRNAs might contribute to
tumorigenesis. To further analyze the impact of MYC-regulated miRNAs, we
investigated a murine lymphoma model harboring the MYC transgene in a Tet-off
system to control its expression. Microarray-based miRNA expression profiling
revealed both known and novel MYC targets. Among the miRNAs repressed by MYC, we 
identified the potential tumor suppressor miR-26a, which possessed the ability to
attenuate proliferation in MYC-dependent cells. Interestingly, miR-26a was also
found to be deregulated in primary human Burkitt lymphoma samples, thereby
probably being of clinical relevance. Although today only few miRNA targets have 
been identified in human disease, we could show that ectopic expression of
miR-26a influenced cell cycle progression by targeting the bona fide oncogene
EZH2, a Polycomb protein and global regulator of gene expression yet unknown to
be regulated by miRNAs. Thus, in addition to directly targeting protein-coding
genes, MYC modulates genes important to oncogenesis via deregulation of miRNAs,
thereby vitally contributing to MYC-induced lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 18713946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS Genet. 2008 Aug 15;4(8):e1000155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000155.

Double strand breaks can initiate gene silencing and SIRT1-dependent onset of DNA
methylation in an exogenous promoter CpG island.

O'Hagan HM(1), Mohammad HP, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America.

Chronic exposure to inducers of DNA base oxidation and single and double strand
breaks contribute to tumorigenesis. In addition to the genetic changes caused by 
this DNA damage, such tumors often contain epigenetically silenced genes with
aberrant promoter region CpG island DNA hypermethylation. We herein explore the
relationships between such DNA damage and epigenetic gene silencing using an
experimental model in which we induce a defined double strand break in an
exogenous promoter construct of the E-cadherin CpG island, which is frequently
aberrantly DNA hypermethylated in epithelial cancers. Following the onset of
repair of the break, we observe recruitment to the site of damage of key proteins
involved in establishing and maintaining transcriptional repression, namely
SIRT1, EZH2, DNMT1, and DNMT3B, and the appearance of the silencing histone
modifications, hypoacetyl H4K16, H3K9me2 and me3, and H3K27me3. Although in most 
cells selected after the break, DNA repair occurs faithfully with preservation of
activity of the promoter, a small percentage of the plated cells demonstrate
induction of heritable silencing. The chromatin around the break site in such a
silent clone is enriched for most of the above silent chromatin proteins and
histone marks, and the region harbors the appearance of increasing DNA
methylation in the CpG island of the promoter. During the acute break, SIRT1
appears to be required for the transient recruitment of DNMT3B and subsequent
methylation of the promoter in the silent clones. Taken together, our data
suggest that normal repair of a DNA break can occasionally cause heritable
silencing of a CpG island-containing promoter by recruitment of proteins involved
in silencing. Furthermore, with contribution of the stress-related protein SIRT1,
the break can lead to the onset of aberrant CpG island DNA methylation, which is 
frequently associated with tight gene silencing in cancer.

PMCID: PMC2491723
PMID: 18704159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Blood. 2008 Nov 1;112(9):3889-99. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-161901. Epub 2008
Aug 8.

The role of the polycomb complex in silencing alpha-globin gene expression in
nonerythroid cells.

Garrick D(1), De Gobbi M, Samara V, Rugless M, Holland M, Ayyub H, Lower K,
Sloane-Stanley J, Gray N, Koch C, Dunham I, Higgs DR.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.

Although much is known about globin gene activation in erythroid cells,
relatively little is known about how these genes are silenced in nonerythroid
tissues. Here we show that the human alpha- and beta-globin genes are silenced by
fundamentally different mechanisms. The alpha-genes, which are surrounded by
widely expressed genes in a gene dense region of the genome, are silenced very
early in development via recruitment of the Polycomb (PcG) complex. By contrast, 
the beta-globin genes, which lie in a relatively gene-poor chromosomal region,
are not bound by this complex in nonerythroid cells. The PcG complex seems to be 
recruited to the alpha-cluster by sequences within the CpG islands associated
with their promoters; the beta-globin promoters do not lie within such islands.
Chromatin associated with the alpha-globin cluster is modified by histone
methylation (H3K27me3), and silencing in vivo is mediated by the localized
activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs). The repressive (PcG/HDAC) machinery is 
removed as hematopoietic progenitors differentiate to form erythroid cells. The
alpha- and beta-globin genes thus illustrate important, contrasting mechanisms by
which cell-specific hematopoietic genes (and tissue-specific genes in general)
may be silenced.

PMCID: PMC2572806
PMID: 18689541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Stem Cells. 2008 Nov;26(11):2875-83. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0121. Epub 2008 
Aug 7.

Differentiation of neural stem cells into oligodendrocytes: involvement of the
polycomb group protein Ezh2.

Sher F(1), Rössler R, Brouwer N, Balasubramaniyan V, Boddeke E, Copray S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen,
The Netherlands.

The mechanisms underlying the regulation of neural stem cell (NSC) renewal and
maintenance of their multipotency are still not completely understood.
Self-renewal of stem cells in general implies repression of genes that encode for
cell lineage differentiation. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2) is a Polycomb
group protein involved in stem cell renewal and maintenance by inducing gene
silencing via histone methylation and deacetylation. To establish the role of
Ezh2 in the maintenance and differentiation of NSCs, we have examined the
expression of Ezh2 in NSCs isolated from embryonic (embryonic day 14) mice during
proliferation and differentiation in vitro. Our results show that Ezh2 is highly 
expressed in proliferating NSCs. In accordance with its suggested role as a
transcription repressor, the expression of Ezh2 decreased when the NSCs
differentiated into neurons and was completely suppressed during differentiation 
into astrocytes. Surprisingly, Ezh2 remained highly expressed in NSCs that
differentiated into an oligodendrocytic cell lineage, starting from
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) up to the immature (premyelinating)
oligodendrocyte stage. To further establish the role of Ezh2 in NSC
differentiation, we silenced and induced overexpression of the Ezh2 gene in NSCs.
High levels of Ezh2 in differentiating NSCs appeared to be associated with an
increase in oligodendrocytes and a reduction in astrocytes, whereas low levels of
Ezh2 led to completely opposite effects. The increase in the number of
oligodendrocytes induced by enhanced expression of Ezh2 could be ascribed to
stimulation of OPC proliferation although stimulation of oligodendrocyte
differentiation cannot be excluded. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest
is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 18687996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Urologe A. 2008 Sep;47(9):1208-11. doi: 10.1007/s00120-008-1837-8.

[Molecular genetic markers for prostate cancer. Evidence in fine needle biopsies 
for improved confirmation of the diagnosis].

[Article in German]

Schneider S(1), Voigt S, Füssel S, Lohse-Fischer A, Tomasetti S, Haase M, Koch R,
Baretton GB, Grimm MO, Wirth M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Urologie, Technische Universität, Dresden, Deutschland.

Selected transcript markers as well as their combinations were analyzed on
minimal prostate tissue specimens with regard to their diagnostic potential.
Artificial prostate biopsies from RPE explants were used for evaluation and
optimization of the techniques used followed by application to diagnostic
prostate needle core biopsies. Minimal prostate specimens were cryopreserved and 
processed with standardized methods. The RNA amount of a half of each biopsy was 
sufficient for the analysis of 11 marker genes and one reference gene (TBP) using
quantitative PCR assays.The relative transcript amounts obtained were included in
several analyses including calculations for each single marker gene like median
overexpression rate as well as marker combinations. Two optimized mathematical
models based on relative expression levels of EZH2, hepsin, PCA3, prostein, and
TRPM8 were evaluated with regard to their diagnostic potential. Compared to
single marker analyses these models show higher sensitivity and specificity for
prostate cancer detection.Thus biomolecular prostate cancer identification may
represent a suitable diagnostic tool to supplement conventional techniques on
prostate biopsies. Furthermore, an extension of this approach to PCa prognosis
and the transfer to urine samples appear very promising.

PMID: 18679647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2008 Jul;33(7):618-22.

[Expression of enhancer of zesle homolog 2 and phosphatase and tension homolog
and its clinicopathological significance in benign and malignant lesion of
gallbladder].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu DC(1), Yang ZL, Yang LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Surgery , Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the expressive level of enhancer of zesle homolog 2 (EZH2) 
and phosphatase and tension homolog (PTEN), and to explore its
clinicopathological significance in benign and malignant lesion of gallbladder.
METHODS: EnVision immunohistochemical method was used to detect the expressive
levels of EZH2 and PTEN in routinely paraffin-embedded sections in the resected
specimens of gallbladder adenocarcinoma (n = 108), peritumoral tissues (n = 46), 
adenomatous polyp(n = 15), and chronic cholecystitis (n = 35).
RESULTS: The positive rate of EZH2 was significantly higher in gallbladder
adenocarcinoma than that in peritumoral tissues (chi(2) = 24.49, P < 0.01),
adenomatous polyp(chi(2) = 11.68, P < 0.01), and chronic cholecystitis (chi(2) = 
31.62, P < 0.01). The benign lesions in the positive cases of EZH2 and (or) the
negative ones of PTEN showed the moderately- or severely- atypical hyperplasia of
gallbladder epithelium. The positive rate of PTEN was significantly lower in
gallbladder adenocarcinoma than that in peritumoral tissues(n = 20.20, P < 0.01),
adenomatous polyp(chi(2)=10.81, P<0.01), and chronic cholecystitis (n = 29.83, P 
< 0.01).The positive rates of EZH2 were significantly lower in the
highly-differentiated adenocarcinoma, the maximal diameter of mass < 2 cm,
non-metastasis of lymphnodes, and non-infiltration of regional tissues than those
in the moderately or low-differentiated adenocarcinoma, the maximal diameter > or
= 2 cm, metastasis of lymphnode, and infiltration of regional tissues (P < 0.05
or P < 0.01). High inconsistency was found between the expression of EZH2 and
PTEN in gallbladder adenocarcinoma (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Expression of EZH2 and/or PTEN might be important biological markers 
in the carcinogenesis, progression, biological behaviors and prognosis of
gallbladder adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 18667776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Sep;6(9):1403-12.

Expression changes in EZH2, but not in BMI-1, SIRT1, DNMT1 or DNMT3B are
associated with DNA methylation changes in prostate cancer.

Hoffmann MJ(1), Engers R, Florl AR, Otte AP, Muller M, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Urology; Heinrich Heine University; Düsseldorf, Germany

The polycomb proteins BMI-1, EZH2, and SIRT1 are characteristic components of the
PRC1, PRC2, and PRC4 repressor complexes, respectively, that modify chromatin.
Moreover, EZH2 may influence DNA methylation by direct interaction with DNA
methyltransferases. EZH2 expression increases during prostate cancer progression,
whereas BMI-1 and SIRT1 are not well investigated. Like EZH2 expression, DNA
methylation alterations escalate in higher stage prostate cancers, raising the
question whether these epigenetic changes are related. Expression of EZH2, BMI-1,
SIRT1, and the DNA methyltransferases DNMT1 and DNMT3B measured by qRT-PCR in 47 
primary prostate cancers was compared to APC, ASC, GSTP1, RARB2, and RASSF1A
hypermethylation and LINE-1 hypomethylation. SIRT1 and DNMT3B were overexpressed 
in cancerous over benign tissues, whereas BMI-1 was rather downregulated and
DNMT1 significantly diminished. Nevertheless, cancers with higher DNMT1 and BMI-1
expression had worse clinical characteristics, as did those with elevated EZH2.
In particular, above median DNMT1 expression predicted a worse prognosis. EZH2
and SIRT1 overexpression were well correlated with increased MKI67.
Immunohistochemistry confirmed limited EZH2 and heterogeneous DNMT3B
overexpression and explained the decrease in BMI-1 by pronounced heterogeneity
among tumor cells. EZH2 overexpression, specifically among all factors
investigated, was associated with more frequent hypermethylation, in particular
of GSTP1 and RARB2, and also with LINE-1 hypomethylation. Our data reveal complex
changes in the composition of polycomb repressor complexes in prostate cancer.
Heterogeneously expressed BMI-1 and slightly increased EZH2 may characterize less
malignant cancers, whereas more aggressive cases express both at higher levels.
SIRT1 appears to be generally increased in prostate cancers. Intriguingly, our
data suggest a direct influence of increased EZH2 on altered DNA methylation
patterns in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18637271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 16;3(7):e2704. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002704.

The polycomb repressive complex 2 is a potential target of SUMO modifications.

Riising EM(1), Boggio R, Chiocca S, Helin K, Pasini D.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) functions as a
transcriptional repressor through a mechanism that involves methylation of
Histone H3 at lysine 27. The PRC2 complex activity is essential for cellular
proliferation, development, and cell fate decisions. PRC2 target genes include
important regulators of development and proliferation as well as tumor suppressor
genes. Consistent with this, the activity of several Polycomb group (PcG)
proteins is deregulated in human cancer suggesting an important role for PcGs in 
tumor development. Whereas the downstream functions of PcGs are well
characterized, the mechanisms of their recruitment to target genes and the
regulation of their activity are not fully understood.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we show that the two PRC2 components SUZ12 and EZH2 are 
sumoylated in vitro and in vivo. Among several putative sumoylation sites we have
mapped the major site of SUZ12 sumoylation. Furthermore, we show that SUZ12
interacts with the E2-conjugating enzyme UBC9 both in vitro and in vivo and that 
mutation of the SUZ12 sumoylation site does not abolish this binding. Finally, we
provide evidence that the E3-ligase PIASXbeta interacts and enhances the
sumoylation of SUZ12 in vivo suggesting that PIASXbeta could function as an
E3-ligase for SUZ12.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data identify sumoylation as a novel
post-translational modification of components of the PRC2 complex, which could
suggest a potential new mechanism to modulate PRC2 repressive activity. Further
work aimed to identify the physiological conditions for these modifications will 
be required to understand the role of SUZ12 and EZH2 sumoylation in PcG-mediated 
epigenetic regulation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC2442188
PMID: 18628979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Cancer. 2008 Oct 1;123(7):1545-50. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23683.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 gene contributes to cell proliferation and
apoptosis resistance in renal cell carcinoma cells.

Wagener N(1), Holland D, Bulkescher J, Crnkovic-Mertens I, Hoppe-Seyler K,
Zentgraf H, Pritsch M, Buse S, Pfitzenmaier J, Haferkamp A, Hohenfellner M,
Hoppe-Seyler F.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center, Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers
(F065), Heidelberg, Germany.

The enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) gene has been recently linked to human
malignancies where it may serve as a new target for cancer therapy. Here, we
analyzed EZH2 expression in primary renal cell carcinoma (RCC) specimens and in
nontumorous tissue samples from adult kidney. EZH2 transcripts were detectable in
all RCC specimens examined. Expression levels were significantly higher in tumor 
tissue (p < or = 0.0001) than in samples from normal adult kidney. Moreover,
inhibition of endogenous EZH2 expression in RCC cell lines by RNA interference
(RNAi) led to reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis in RCC cells. These
data show that EZH2 is overexpressed in RCC. Furthermore, they indicate that the 
EZH2 gene plays a role for both the proliferation and the apoptosis resistance of
RCC cells. Targeted inhibition of EZH2 could therefore represent a novel strategy
to improve the therapeutic response of RCC.

PMID: 18623083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oral Oncol. 2009 Jan;45(1):39-46. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2008.03.016. Epub
2008 Jul 10.

High expression of EZH2 is associated with tumor proliferation and prognosis in
human oral squamous cell carcinomas.

Kidani K(1), Osaki M, Tamura T, Yamaga K, Shomori K, Ryoke K, Ito H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organ Pathology, Department of Microbiology and Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, Tottori University, 86 Nishi-cho, Yonago, Tottori 683-8503, Japan.
k.kidani@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a member of the polycomb group of genes and
is important in cell cycle regulation. Overexpression of EZH2 protein has been
associated with biological malignancy of prostate cancer and several other
cancers. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of EZH2
protein in human oral normal mucosa, dysplasia and oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) with clinicopathological profiles. EZH2 expression was assessed by Western
blotting and immunohistochemistry in 3 OSCC cell lines, 10 normal mucosae, 50
dysplasias and 102 OSCCs. The labeling indices (LIs) of EZH2, Ki-67, P53, and the
apoptotic index (AI) were evaluated by immunohistochemistry and the terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated dUTP-digoxigenin nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) method. Western blot analysis detected EZH2 protein as a single band at
91kDa in the 3 OSCC cell lines, but it was almost absent in non-tumoral oral
mucosae. The LI of EZH2 was highest in the OSCCs, followed by the dysplasias
(p<0.05) and normal mucosae (p<0.05) with significant difference. The LI of EZH2 
correlated with the clinical stage, tumor size, lymph node metastasis and LIs of 
Ki-67 and P53, but not with the AI in OSCCs, and inversely correlated with the
histological differentiation of OSCCs. The survival rate calculated by the
Kaplan-Meier method revealed that OSCC patients with higher EZH2 expression
showed poorer prognosis than those with a lower EZH2 expression (p<0.01). These
results suggest that overexpression of EZH2 is correlated with malignant
potential and poor prognosis in OSCCs. EZH2 might serve as a novel biomarker for 
predicting prognosis in patients with OSCCs.

PMID: 18619895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer Invest. 2008 Aug;26(7):725-33. doi: 10.1080/07357900801941845.

Bladder cancer initiating cells (BCICs) are among EMA-CD44v6+ subset: novel
methods for isolating undetermined cancer stem (initiating) cells.

Yang YM(1), Chang JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Uropathology, Tianjin Institute of Urologic Surgery, The Second
Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, TianJin, PR China.

Bladder cancer stem (initiating) cell has not been isolated now, and no one
verified its persistence experimentally. The aim of this study was to conclude
the persistence of bladder cancer stem (initiating) cell in human primary bladder
cancer and investigate the possibility of EMA(-) CD44v6(+) as markers of bladder 
cancer stem (initiating) cell. Genes differentially expressed between normal
urothelium and low malignant bladder cancer were identified by DNA array assay.
Overpressed stem cell related genes, Bmi-1 and EZH2, were verified by
immunohistochemistry. Side population cells in bladder cancer were found under
fluorescence microscope. The value of 28 potential surface markers of bladder
cancer stem (initiating) cell for isolating them were judged by
immunohistochemistry. Both EMA(-) and CD44v6(+) cells located in basal layer
(potential location of stem cells). After gathering the CD44v6(+) cells and
EMA(-) cells by magnetic cell sorting, their ability for colony-forming,
self-renewal and extensive proliferation were assayed by cells culture. Both
EMA(-) cells and CD44v6(+) cells posses the ability for colony-forming,
self-renewal and proliferation. We conclude the persistence of bladder cancer
stem (initiating) cell. Bladder cancer stem (initiating) cell might be among
EMA(-) CD44v6(+) subset. Our strategies for isolating bladder cancer stem
(initiating) cell might be useful for isolating other undetermined epithelial
cancer stem cell, especially those in well-differentiated cancers.

PMID: 18608209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Lab Invest. 2008 Aug;88(8):873-82. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.52. Epub 2008 Jun 
30.

The overexpression of polycomb group proteins Bmi1 and EZH2 is associated with
the progression and aggressive biological behavior of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Sasaki M(1), Ikeda H, Itatsu K, Yamaguchi J, Sawada S, Minato H, Ohta T, Nakanuma
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Polycomb-group proteins Bmi1 and EZH2 are involved in the malignant
transformation and biological aggressiveness of several human carcinomas. We
herein examined the significance of the Bmi1 and EZH2 expression in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and its preneoplastic lesions, dysplastic nodules.
The expression of Bmi1 and EZH2 were examined immunohistochemically in HCC (n=27)
and dysplastic nodules (n=14), and combined hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma
(HC-CC) (n=14). The effect of Bmi1 and EZH2 knockdown was examined in cultured
HCC cells (HuH7 and HepG2) using siRNA. It was determined that Bmi1 was
constantly expressed in cholangiocytes, but not in hepatocytes, and EZH2 was
detected in neither cholangiocytes nor hepatocytes. Bmi1 and EZH2 were
overexpressed in HCC and more extensively in HC-CC (P<0.01). Interestingly, Bmi1 
and EZH2 were not overexpressed in the dysplastic nodules. The expression of Bmi1
and EZH2 was heterogeneous and associated with vascular infiltration, the
histological grades, and the cell proliferation activity in HCC and HC-CC. In
cultured carcinoma cells overexpressing Bmi1 and EZH2, knockdown of Bmi1 and EZH2
resulted in decreased cell proliferation activities. Therefore, the
overexpression of polycomb-group proteins Bmi1 and EZH2 is associated with the
malignant progression of HCC, thereby reflecting the aggressive biological
behavior in HCC and HC-CC.

PMID: 18591938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 24;105(25):8685-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711758105. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Reciprocal patterns of methylation of H3K36 and H3K27 on proximal vs. distal IgVH
genes are modulated by IL-7 and Pax5.

Xu CR(1), Schaffer L, Head SR, Feeney AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, DNA Array Core Facility, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 16;105(50):20044.

The usage of >100 functional murine Ig heavy chain V(H) genes, when rearranged to
D(H)J(H) genes, generates a diverse antibody repertoire. The V(H) locus
encompasses 2.5 Mb, and rearrangement of V(H) genes in the D(H)-distal half of
the locus are controlled very differently from the V(H) genes in the proximal end
of the locus. The rearrangement of distal but not proximal V(H) genes is impaired
in mice deficient in the cytokine IL-7 or its receptor, in the transcription
factor Pax5, or in Ezh2, a histone methyltransferase for Lys-27 of histone H3
(H3K27). The relative role of IL-7, Pax5, and Ezh2 in regulating distal vs.
proximal V(H) rearrangement is not clear. Here, we show by ChIP and ChIP-on-chip 
that the active histone modification H3K36me2 is most highly associated with
distal V(H) segments and the repressive histone modification H3K27me3 is
exclusively present on proximal V(H) segments. We observed an absence of H3K27me3
in fetal pro-B cells, which predominantly rearrange proximal V(H) genes. Absence 
of IL-7 signaling reduces H3K36me2, and overexpression of IL-7 increases
H3K36me2. In contrast, the major effect of the absence of Pax5 is the reduction
in H3K27me3. Our data indicate that the cytokine IL-7 and the transcription
factor Pax5 influence the rearrangement of the two regions of the V(H) locus by
differentially modulating two reciprocal histone modifications during B
lymphocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2438410
PMID: 18562282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Aug;28(15):4772-81. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00323-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
2.

Polycomb complex 2 is required for E-cadherin repression by the Snail1
transcription factor.

Herranz N(1), Pasini D, Díaz VM, Francí C, Gutierrez A, Dave N, Escrivà M,
Hernandez-Muñoz I, Di Croce L, Helin K, García de Herreros A, Peiró S.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Recerca en Càncer, IMIM-Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcriptional factor Snail1 is a repressor of E-cadherin (CDH1) gene
expression essential for triggering epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Snail1
represses CDH1, directly binding its promoter and inducing the synthesis of the
Zeb1 repressor. In this article, we show that repression of CDH1 by Snail1, but
not by Zeb1, is dependent on the activity of Polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2). Embryonic stem (ES) cells null for Suz12, one of the components of PRC2, 
show higher levels of Cdh1 mRNA than control ES cells. In tumor cells,
interference of PRC2 activity prevents the ability of Snail1 to downregulate CDH1
and partially derepresses CDH1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
that Snail1 increases the binding of Suz12 to the CDH1 promoter and the
trimethylation of lysine 27 in histone H3. Moreover, Snail1 interacts with Suz12 
and Ezh2, as shown by coimmunoprecipitation experiments. In conclusion, these
results demonstrate that Snail1 recruits PRC2 to the CDH1 promoter and requires
the activity of this complex to repress E-cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC2493371
PMID: 18519590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Genome Res. 2008 Jul;18(7):1171-9. doi: 10.1101/gr.073452.107. Epub 2008 May 23.

A novel 6C assay uncovers Polycomb-mediated higher order chromatin conformations.

Tiwari VK(1), Cope L, McGarvey KM, Ohm JE, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

We describe construction of a novel modification, "6C," of chromatin looping
assays that allows specific proteins that may mediate long-range chromatin
interactions to be defined. This approach combines the standard looping
approaches previously defined with an immunoprecipitation step to investigate
involvement of the specific protein. The efficacy of this approach is
demonstrated by using a Polycomb group (PcG) protein, Enhancer of Zeste (EZH2),
as an example of how our assay might be used. EZH2, as a protein of the PcG
complex, PRC2, has an important role in the propagation of epigenetic memory
through deposition of the repressive mark, histone H3, lysine 27, tri-methylation
(H3K27me3). Using our new 6C assay, we show how EZH2 is a direct mediator of
long-range intra- and interchromosomal interactions that can regulate
transcriptional down-regulation of multiple genes by facilitating physical
proximities between distant chromatin regions, thus targeting sites within to PcG
machinery.

PMCID: PMC2493406
PMID: 18502945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):560-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-117820. Epub 2008 May 
23.

Steel factor coordinately regulates the molecular signature and biologic function
of hematopoietic stem cells.

Kent DG(1), Dykstra BJ, Cheyne J, Ma E, Eaves CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) regenerated in vivo display sustained differences
in their self-renewal and differentiation activities. Variations in Steel factor 
(SF) signaling are known to affect these functions in vitro, but the cellular and
molecular mechanisms involved are not understood. To address these issues, we
evaluated highly purified HSCs maintained in single-cell serum-free cultures
containing 20 ng/mL IL-11 plus 1, 10, or 300 ng/mL SF. Under all conditions, more
than 99% of the cells traversed a first cell cycle with similar kinetics. After 8
hours in the 10 or 300 ng/mL SF conditions, the frequency of HSCs remained
unchanged. However, in the next 8 hours (ie, 6 hours before any cell divided),
HSC integrity was sustained only in the 300 ng/mL SF cultures. The cells in these
cultures also contained significantly higher levels of Bmi1, Lnk, and Ezh2
transcripts but not of several other regulators. Assessment of 21 first division 
progeny pairs further showed that only those generated in 300 ng/mL SF cultures
contained HSCs and pairs of progeny with similar differentiation programs were
not observed. Thus, SF signaling intensity can directly and coordinately alter
the transcription factor profile and long-term repopulating ability of quiescent 
HSCs before their first division.

PMCID: PMC2481530
PMID: 18502833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Prostate. 2008 Aug 1;68(11):1215-22. doi: 10.1002/pros.20781.

Detailed analysis of histopathological parameters in radical prostatectomy
specimens and PCA3 urine test results.

van Gils MP(1), Hessels D, Hulsbergen-van de Kaa CA, Witjes JA, Jansen CF,
Mulders PF, Rittenhouse HG, Schalken JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Due to the drawbacks of serum prostate-specific antigen, there is an 
ongoing search for new diagnostic and prognostic prostate cancer (PCa) markers.
PCA3 has proven to be of value in the diagnosis of PCa. However, so far few
attempts have been made to investigate the prognostic value of PCA3. Our
objective was to further investigate the prognostic value of PCA3.
METHODS: In this study we correlated the PCA3 score in urinary sediments after
digital rectal examination in 62 men with the classical prognostic parameters
assessed in radical prostatectomy specimens (i.e. Gleason score, pathological
tumor stage and total tumor volume) and moreover, with the expression of three
immunohistochemical markers for PCa biological aggressiveness (i.e. E-cadherin,
alpha-catenin and EZH2). The results from this study serve as a reflection on and
a valuable adjunct to recently published results.
RESULTS: We did not find a significant correlation of the PCA3 score with the
classical prognostic parameters assessed in radical prostatectomy specimens or
the expression of the immunohistochemical markers for PCa biological
aggressiveness. However, we did observe a trend for a higher PCA3 score in
significant PCa versus insignificant PCa, aberrant E-cadherin staining versus
normal E-cadherin staining and increased EZH2 staining versus normal EZH2
staining.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we could not prove the prognostic value of PCA3.
Further research with large numbers of men and adequate follow-up is needed to
provide a definitive answer to the question if PCA3 is not only a diagnostic but 
also a prognostic PCa marker.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18500693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Nat Genet. 2008 Jun;40(6):741-50. doi: 10.1038/ng.159. Epub 2008 May 18.

Gene silencing in cancer by histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation independent of
promoter DNA methylation.

Kondo Y(1), Shen L, Cheng AS, Ahmed S, Boumber Y, Charo C, Yamochi T, Urano T,
Furukawa K, Kwabi-Addo B, Gold DL, Sekido Y, Huang TH, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epigenetic silencing in cancer cells is mediated by at least two distinct histone
modifications, polycomb-based histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27triM) and
H3K9 dimethylation. The relationship between DNA hypermethylation and these
histone modifications is not completely understood. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation microarrays (ChIP-chip) in prostate cancer cells compared to 
normal prostate, we found that up to 5% of promoters (16% CpG islands and 84%
non-CpG islands) were enriched with H3K27triM. These genes were silenced
specifically in prostate cancer, and those CpG islands affected showed low levels
of DNA methylation. Downregulation of the EZH2 histone methyltransferase restored
expression of the H3K27triM target genes alone or in synergy with histone
deacetylase inhibition, without affecting promoter DNA methylation, and with no
effect on the expression of genes silenced by DNA hypermethylation. These data
establish EZH2-mediated H3K27triM as a mechanism of tumor-suppressor gene
silencing in cancer that is potentially independent of promoter DNA methylation.

PMID: 18488029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Stem Cells. 2008 Jul;26(7):1808-17. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0322. Epub 2008
May 8.

Accumulation of malignant renal stem cells is associated with epigenetic changes 
in normal renal progenitor genes.

Metsuyanim S(1), Pode-Shakked N, Schmidt-Ott KM, Keshet G, Rechavi G, Blumental
D, Dekel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Stem Cell Research Institute, Safra
Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Recent studies indicate a dual epigenetic role of the Polycomb group (PcG)
proteins in self-renewal of stem cells and oncogenesis. Their elevation in our
previous human kidney microarray screen led us examine whether they participate
in processes involving normal and malignant renal progenitors. We therefore
analyzed the expression of the PcG genes (EZH2, BMI-1, EED, SUZ12) in relation to
that of the nephric-progenitor genes (WT1, PAX2, SALL1, SIX2, CITED1) using
real-time polymerase chain reaction and methylation assays during renal
development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. Although all of the
nephric-progenitor genes were shown to be developmentally regulated, analysis of 
polycomb gene expression during murine nephrogenesis and in an in vitro induction
model of the nephrogenic mesenchyme indicated dynamic regulation only for EZH2 in
the normal renal progenitor population. In contrast, induction of adult kidney
regeneration by ischemia/reperfusion injury resulted primarily in rapid elevation
of BMI-1, whereas EZH2 was silenced. Analysis of renal tumorigenesis in stem
cell-like tumor xenografts established by serial passage of Wilms' tumor (WT) in 
immunodeficient mice showed cooperative upregulation of all PcG genes. This was
accompanied by upregulation of WT1, PAX2, and SALL1 but downregulation of SIX2.
Accordingly, methylation-specific quantitative polymerase chain reaction
demonstrated promoter hypomethylation of WT1, PAX2, and SIX2 in primary WT and
fetal kidneys, whereas progressive WT xenografts showed hypermethylation of SIX2,
possibly leading to loss of renal differentiation. PcG genes vary in expression
during renal development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. We suggest a link
between polycomb activation and epigenetic alterations of the renal progenitor
population in initiation and progression of renal cancer.

PMID: 18467665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3590-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn243. Epub 2008 May
6.

Cooperation between EZH2, NSPc1-mediated histone H2A ubiquitination and Dnmt1 in 
HOX gene silencing.

Wu X(1), Gong Y, Yue J, Qiang B, Yuan J, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; National Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

An intricate interplay between DNA methylation and polycomb-mediated gene
silencing has been highlighted recently. Here we provided evidence that Nervous
System Polycomb 1 (NSPc1), a BMI1 homologous polycomb protein, plays important
roles in promoting H2A ubiquitination and cooperates with DNA methylation in HOX 
gene silencing. We showed that NSPc1 stimulates H2A ubiquitination in vivo and in
vitro through direct interaction with both RING2 and H2A. RT-PCR analysis
revealed that loss of NSPc1, EZH2 or DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), or
inhibition of DNA methylation in HeLa cells de-represses the expression of HOXA7.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that NSPc1, EZH2 and
Dnmt1 bind to the promoter of HOXA7, which is frequently hypermethylated in
tumors. Knockdown of NSPc1 results in significant reduction of H2A ubiquitination
and DNA demethylation as well as Dnmt1 dissociation in the HOXA7 promoter.
Meanwhile Dnmt1 deficiency affects NSPc1 recruitment and H2A ubiquitination,
whereas on both cases EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation remains unaffected. When
EZH2 was depleted, however, NSPc1 and Dnmt1 enrichment was abolished concomitant 
with local reduction of H3K27 trimethylation, H2A ubiquitination and DNA
methylation. Taken together, our findings indicated that NSPc1-mediated H2A
ubiquitination and DNA methylation, both being directed by EZH2, are
interdependent in long-term target gene silencing within cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2441805
PMID: 18460542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 4;283(27):18905-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709322200. Epub 2008 
May 2.

Polycomb group protein-associated chromatin is reproduced in post-mitotic G1
phase and is required for S phase progression.

Aoto T(1), Saitoh N, Sakamoto Y, Watanabe S, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form two distinct complexes, PRC1 and PRC2, to
regulate developmental target genes by maintaining the epigenetic state in cells.
PRC2 methylates histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3K27), and PRC1 then recognizes
methyl-H3K27 to form repressive chromatin. However, it remains unknown how PcG
proteins maintain stable and plastic chromatin during cell division. Here we
report that PcG-associated chromatin is reproduced in the G(1) phase in
post-mitotic cells and is required for subsequent S phase progression. In
dividing cells, H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27Me(3)) marked mitotic chromosome arms 
where PRC2 (Suz12 and Ezh2) co-existed, whereas PRC1 (Bmi1 and Pc2) appeared in
distinct foci in the pericentromeric regions. As each PRC complex was
increasingly assembled from mitosis to G(1) phase, PRC1 formed H3K27Me(3)-based
chromatin intensively during middle and late G(1) phase; this chromatin was
highly resistant to in situ nuclease treatment. Thus, the transition from mitosis
to G(1) phase is crucial for PcG-mediated chromatin inheritance. Knockdown of
Suz12 markedly reduced the amount of H3K27Me(3) on mitotic chromosomes, and as a 
consequence, PRC1 foci were not fully transmitted to post-mitotic daughter cells.
S phase progression was markedly delayed in these Suz12-knockdown cells. The fact
that PcG-associated chromatin is reproduced during post-mitotic G(1) phase
suggests the possibility that PcG proteins enable their target chromatin to be
remodeled in response to stimuli in the G(1) phase.

PMID: 18453536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Dec;47(12):925-33. doi: 10.1002/mc.20446.

Disturbance of circadian gene expression in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lin YM(1), Chang JH, Yeh KT, Yang MY, Liu TC, Lin SF, Su WW, Chang JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Institute of Clinical Research, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Circadian rhythm plays an important role in the regulation of digestive system.
The human circadian rhythm is controlled by at least nine circadian genes. The
aims of this study are to understand the expression of the circadian genes
between hepatocellular carcinoma tissues and nontumor tissues, and to explore the
possible mechanism(s) contributing to the difference. We analyzed differential
expression of the 9 circadian genes in 46 hepatocellular carcinoma and paired
noncancerous tissues by real-time quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical
detection. We also tested the possible regulatory mechanism(s) by direct
sequencing and methylation PCR analysis. Our results showed that decreased
expression levels of PER1, PER2, PER3, CRY2, and TIM in hepatocellular carcinomas
were observed. Decreased-expression of these genes was not caused by genetic
mutations, but by several factors, such as promoter methylation, overexpression
of EZH2 or other factors. The down expression of more circadian genes may result 
in disturbance of cell cycle, and it is correlated with the tumor size.
Downregulation of circadian genes results in disturbance of circadian rhythm in
hepatocellular carcinoma which may disrupt the control of the central pacemaker
and benefit selective survival of cancerous cells and promote carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18444243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 20;283(25):17324-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800224200. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) down-regulates RUNX3 by increasing histone
H3 methylation.

Fujii S(1), Ito K, Ito Y, Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer
Center at Kashiwa, 6-5-1, Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-857 7 Japan.

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) occurs in various
malignancies and is associated with a poor prognosis, especially because of
increased cancer cell proliferation. In this study we found an inverse
correlation between EZH2 and RUNX3 gene expression in five cancer cell lines,
i.e. gastric, breast, prostate, colon, and pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed an association between EZH2 bound to
the RUNX3 gene promoter, and trimethylated histone H3 at lysine 27, and HDAC1
(histone deacetylase 1) bound to the RUNX3 gene promoter in cancer cells. RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of EZH2 resulted in a decrease in H3K27
trimethylation and unbound HDAC1 and an increase in expression of the RUNX3 gene.
Restoration of RUNX3 expression was not associated with any change in DNA
methylation status in the RUNX3 promoter region. RUNX3 was repressed by histone
deacetylation and hypermethylation of a CpG island in the promoter region and
restored by trichostatin A or/and 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Immunofluorescence
staining confirmed restoration of expression of the RUNX3 protein after knockdown
of EZH2 and its restoration resulted in decreased cell proliferation. In vivo, an
inverse relationship between expression of the EZH2 and RUNX3 proteins was
observed at the individual cell level in gastric cancer patients in the absence
of DNA methylation in the RUNX3 promoter region. The results showed that RUNX3 is
a target for repression by EZH2 and indicated an underlying mechanism of the
functional role of EZH2 overexpression on cancer cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2427338
PMID: 18430739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Gene Ther. 2008 Sep;15(9):563-75. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2008.24. Epub 2008 Apr 
18.

A chimeric fusion of the hASH1 and EZH2 promoters mediates high and specific
reporter and suicide gene expression and cytotoxicity in small cell lung cancer
cells.

Poulsen TT(1), Pedersen N, Juel H, Poulsen HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Biology, Finsen Center, National University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Transcriptionally targeted gene therapy is a promising experimental modality for 
treatment of systemic malignancies such as small cell lung cancer (SCLC). We have
identified the human achaete-scute homolog 1 (hASH1) and enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) genes as highly upregulated in SCLC compared to a panel of
representative normal tissues. Here, we evaluate the use of regulatory regions
from the hASH1- and EZH2-promoter regions alone and in combination for suicide
gene therapy of SCLC. Two hASH1-promoter regions comprising 0.3 and 0.7 kb
immediately upstream of (and including) the transcription start site were tested.
Both constructs induced reporter gene activity (up to sevenfold SV40-promoter
activity) in all tested classic (hASH1 positive) SCLC and in two hASH1-negative
SCLC cell lines, whereas gene activity was low or absent (<4% of SV40 activity)
in one hASH1-negative SCLC and in all control cell lines tested. To evaluate its 
therapeutic potential, the 0.7 kb hASH1 proximal-promoter region was evaluated
for cytotoxicity in a suicide gene assay. The construct induced SCLC cytotoxicity
at levels equivalent to those observed with the SV40 promoter, while control
cells remained unaffected by the treatment. Analogously, a 1.1 kb EZH2-promoter
region was evaluated by reporter and suicide gene assays. The EZH2 promoter
potently induced reporter gene activity in SCLC (up to 25-fold of SV40 activity) 
while moderate reporter activity (up to 12% of SV40 activity), was detected in
the control cells. However, in the suicide gene assay both control and SCLC cells
demonstrated sensitivity indicating lack of promoter specificity. Finally, we
fused the 0.7 kb hASH1 promoter to the EZH2 promoter generating a chimeric
hASH1EZH2 regulatory construct. The chimeric promoter demonstrated increased
activity in SCLC cells compared to the hASH1 promoter alone while retaining
specificity in control cells. The hASH1EZH2 promoter thus constitutes a promising
transcriptional regulator for SCLC gene therapy.

PMID: 18421308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Eur J Haematol. 2008 Aug;81(2):112-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2008.01083.x.
Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Gene expression profiling of Polycomb, Hox and Meis genes in patients with acute 
myeloid leukaemia.

Grubach L(1), Juhl-Christensen C, Rethmeier A, Olesen LH, Aggerholm A, Hokland P,
Ostergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

The Polycomb group (PcG) of genes is important for differentiation and cell-cycle
regulation and is aberrantly expressed in several cancers. To analyse the role of
deregulated PcG genes in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), we determined by RQ-PCR
the expression of the PcG genes BMI-1, MEL18, SCML2, YY1 and EZH2, and the
downstream PcG targets HOXA4, HOXA9 and MEIS1 in diagnostic bone marrow samples
from 126 AML patients. There was a general overexpression of the genes in AML
patients compared to 20 healthy donors, except of HOXA4 and MEL18, which both
displayed a wide range of expression levels within the AML subgroups. Among the
AML patients with normal karyotype, a low HOXA4 level was associated with a
shorter overall survival (P = 0.005). In addition, expression levels of MEL18 and
EZH2 were significantly (P < 0.025) higher in patients with complex karyotype and
lower in CBF-mutated patients. The t(8;21) vs. inv(16) positive patients showed
significantly different expression of SCML2, BMI-1, YY1, HOXA9 and MEIS1 (P < or 
= 0.01). Comparisons between the PcG and PcG-regulated genes and a number of
clinical and molecular data revealed correlations to genes involved in DNA
methylation (DNMT1, DNMT3B), apoptosis (BAX, CASPASE 3) and multidrug-resistance 
(MDR1, MRP ) (P < 0.01). In conclusion, our data suggest that the role of PcG and
PcG-regulated genes in leukaemogenesis varies between, as well as within
karyotypic subgroups.

PMID: 18410541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. BJU Int. 2008 Aug;102(3):364-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2008.07627.x. Epub 2008
Apr 11.

Application of transcript profiling in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded
diagnostic prostate cancer needle biopsies.

Rogerson L(1), Darby S, Jabbar T, Mathers ME, Leung HY, Robson CN, Sahadevan K,
O'Toole K, Gnanapragasam VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Nothern Institute for Cancer Research, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the feasibility of transcript profiling in diagnostic
formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) biopsies for prostate cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Laser-capture microdissection (LCM) was used to
microdissect glandular epithelium as well as stromal tissue in archival prostate 
needle biopsies. Optimized RNA extraction, reverse transcription and real-time
PCR (QPCR) protocols were used to detect transcript expression. RNA degradation
effects were assessed using hydrolysed cell line RNA and matched xenograft FFPE
and frozen tumours.
RESULTS: LCM and RNA extraction was achieved in all biopsies from a pilot cohort 
of five patients. cDNA produced was successfully used to detect expression of
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, RPL13, prostate-specific antigen,
vimentin, inhibitor of differentiation/DNA binding 1 (Id-1) and polycomb group
protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) transcripts. In the cell line and
xenograft models, we investigated the effect of RNA degradation on transcript
quantification by QPCR. In both models normalization of transcript quantity with 
a housekeeping gene resulted in restored expression in all degraded samples to
within a 50% difference of control samples. Using an extended cohort of 29
biopsies, we tested application in detecting differences in EZH2 and Id-1
expression between malignant and benign epithelium. The results confirmed that
our technique was capable of quantifying significant differences in expression
between malignant and benign epithelium consistent with the reported trends.
CONCLUSION: This study reports the use of standard FFPE needle biopsies for
transcript profiling and supports the concept of molecular prognostic studies in 
tissue acquired at diagnosis in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18410440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. World J Urol. 2008 Oct;26(5):431-6. doi: 10.1007/s00345-008-0260-5. Epub 2008 Apr
12.

What is the molecular pathology of low-risk prostate cancer?

Samaratunga H(1), Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Sullivan Nicolaides Pathology, 134
Whitmore Street, Taringa, Brisbane, QLD, 4068, Australia.
hema_samaratunga@snp.com.au

OBJECTIVES: Low-risk prostate cancer is defined as a clinical T1c or T2a tumor
with a Gleason score of </=6 and PSA <10 ng/ml. This is a pretreatment diagnosis 
and the patient can turn out to have either significant or insignificant disease.
With methods currently available in practice it may not be possible to
differentiate between these groups. Numerous molecular pathological changes have 
been described in prostate carcinoma. This review was to evaluate which of these 
changes may be useful to distinguish the group of patients likely to have
significant carcinoma within the low risk category.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The literature on molecular pathology of prostate cancer
was reviewed using MEDLINE and reference lists of relevant publications focusing 
on early and late molecular events and available molecular biomarkers in prostate
cancer.
RESULTS: There are a variety of molecular markers with the potential to be
clinically utilized for assessment of low risk prostate cancer. One of the most
promising is TMPRSS2: ETS fusion, which is a homogeneous event occurring early in
prostate carcinogenesis. Other promising markers include p27, EZH2 and c-MYC.
CONCLUSIONS: FISH analysis or RT-PCR based assays to detect TMPRSS2: ETS fusion
and immunohistochemical assessment of p27, EZH2 and c-MYC may become useful
ancillary tests in patients with low risk prostate cancer. Some serum biomarkers 
have promise for future use. Large prospective studies followed by clinical
trials are necessary before these molecular markers could be integrated into
clinical practice.

PMID: 18408932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2008 Apr 15;182(2):103-10. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2008.01.006.

Expression changes of CAV1 and EZH2, located on 7q31 approximately q36, are
rarely related to genomic alterations in primary prostate carcinoma.

Bachmann N(1), Haeusler J, Luedeke M, Kuefer R, Perner S, Assum G, Paiss T,
Hoegel J, Vogel W, Maier C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081 Ulm, Germany.

The chromosomal region 7q was repeatedly found to be rearranged in prostate
carcinoma. It harbors several well described candidate tumor suppressor and
oncogenes. We addressed two genes with opposite roles in cancer; CAV1, a putative
tumor suppressor gene at 7q31, and EZH2 at 7q36, which is believed to promote
tumor progression. Our primary aim was to assess their expression changes in
primary tumors, and then to elucidate the underlying mechanism, assuming that
genomic alterations of either locus could affect the other gene as well. In 35
prostate tumor samples, compared with adjacent tissues, CAV1 was overall
downregulated (P < 10(-06)), whereas EZH2 was significantly overexpressed (P <
10(-06)). The observed dysregulations were coincident in nearly 70% of the cases.
Copy number changes occurred in few tumors. Loss of CAV1 DNA was only marginally 
associated with reduced expression (P = 0.07), however, and genomic amplification
of EZH2 could not explain its upregulation. Through bisulfite sequencing of four 
tumor samples, CpG-hypermethylation was verified as an alternative mechanism for 
CAV1 silencing, as reported previously. Moreover, it could also be involved in
the reactivation of EZH2.

PMID: 18406871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Can J Urol. 2008 Apr;15(2):3967-74.

The importance of determining the aggressiveness of prostate cancer using serum
and tissue molecular markers.

Kehinde EO(1), Maghrebi MA, Anim JT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait
University, Kuwait.

Incidental prostate cancer (PCa) has been demonstrated at autopsy in about 80% of
men aged 80 years and above and also in 10%-15% of younger men aged 30-50 years
in the United States. These data imply a wide variation in aggressiveness of
prostate cancer, from indolent tumors to aggressive cancers that kill the
patients. The use of prostate specific antigen (PSA) in screening for PCa may
detect even indolent disease for which radical prostatectomy may not be
necessary. Currently available criteria such as histological grade, PSA level,
stage of the disease do not always predict outcome. Furthermore, only about 80%
of men with metastatic PCa will respond to first line hormone manipulation and
once the patient develops hormone resistant prostate cancer (HRPCa), survival
remains poor. Recent genomic and proteomic studies have provided many novel
molecular markers that may help to redefine prognostic parameters. This paper is 
a review of studies using these novel markers in order to determine whether
prostate cancer patients with the following characteristics have more aggressive 
cancer than those without: a) high serum levels of cathepsin B, survivin, Her - 2
/ neu, IGFBP-2; b) low serum stefin A, IGFBP-3, c) positive immuno-staining of
primary tumors for Her-2/neu, survivin and cathepsin B / stefin A ratio > 1 and
d) gene expression of AMACR, HER-2/neu, high Bcl-2: Bax ratio and EZH2 in cancer 
cells. These markers have been chosen for review because they are among the most 
promising markers emerging currently.

PMID: 18405443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Stem Cells. 2008 Jun;26(6):1496-505. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0102. Epub 2008 
Apr 10.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 is dispensable for maintenance of embryonic stem
cell pluripotency.

Chamberlain SJ(1), Yee D, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) methylates histone H3 tails at lysine 27 and
is essential for embryonic development. The three core components of PRC2, Eed,
Ezh2, and Suz12, are also highly expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells, where
they are postulated to repress developmental regulators and thereby prevent
differentiation to maintain the pluripotent state. We performed gene expression
and chimera analyses on low- and high-passage Eed(null) ES cells to determine
whether PRC2 is required for the maintenance of pluripotency. We report here that
although developmental regulators are overexpressed in Eed(null) ES cells, both
low- and high-passage cells are functionally pluripotent. We hypothesize that
they are pluripotent because they maintain expression of critical pluripotency
factors. Given that EED is required for stability of EZH2, the catalytic subunit 
of the complex, these data suggest that PRC2 is not necessary for the maintenance
of the pluripotent state in ES cells. We propose a positive-only model of
embryonic stem cell maintenance, where positive regulation of pluripotency
factors is sufficient to mediate stem cell pluripotency. Disclosure of potential 
conflicts of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMCID: PMC2630378
PMID: 18403752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Rheumatol. 2008 May;35(5):804-10. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Abnormal histone modification patterns in lupus CD4+ T cells.

Hu N(1), Qiu X, Luo Y, Yuan J, Li Y, Lei W, Zhang G, Zhou Y, Su Y, Lu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate alterations in histone modifications in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation in CD4+ T
cells from 20 SLE patients and 10 healthy control subjects were assayed using the
EpiQuik global histone H3/H4 acetylation and H3K4/H3K9 methylation assay kits.
mRNA levels of 12 members of 3 classes of chromatin modifier genes were measured 
by real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Global histone H3 and H4 hypoacetylation was observed in active lupus
CD4+ T cells compared with controls (p = 0.002 and p = 0.009, respectively). The 
degree of histone H3 acetylation correlated negatively with increased disease
activity in lupus patients as measured by SLEDAI (r = -0.889, p = 0.044). We
found global histone H3K9 hypomethylation in both active and inactive lupus CD4+ 
T cells, compared with controls (p = 0.001, p = 0.003, respectively). However,
global levels of H3K4 methylation were not different between patients and
controls. SIRT1 mRNA levels were significantly increased in active lupus CD4+ T
cells compared with controls (p < 0.001), while mRNA levels of CREBBP, P300,
HDAC2, HDAC7, SUV39H2, and EZH2 were significantly downregulated in patients with
active lupus (p < 0.001, p < 0.001, p = 0.01, p < 0.001, p = 0.003, p = 0.001,
respectively).
CONCLUSION: Histone modifications appear abnormal in CD4+ T cells in SLE.

PMID: 18398941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Pathol. 2008 Jun;215(2):175-83. doi: 10.1002/path.2345.

Over-expression of polycomb group protein EZH2 relates to decreased expression of
p16 INK4a in cholangiocarcinogenesis in hepatolithiasis.

Sasaki M(1), Yamaguchi J, Itatsu K, Ikeda H, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Polycomb group protein EZH2 and Bmi1 are reportedly involved in the progression
of malignant tumours. We examined the participation of EZH2 in multi-step
cholangiocarcinogenesis in hepatolithiasis with respect to tumour suppressor gene
p16 INK4a. We examined 20 hepatolithiatic livers with intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and 10 histologically normal livers. Neoplastic biliary 
lesions were classified into biliary intraepithelial neoplasm (BilIN-1, 2 and 3) 
and invasive carcinoma. We selected 15 foci of invasive carcinoma, 8 BilIN-3
(carcinoma in situ), 12 BilIN-2 (high-grade dysplasia), 32 BilIN-1 (low-grade
dysplasia) and 37 non-neoplastic biliary epithelia from these livers. Expression 
of p16 INK4a, EZH2 and Bmi1 were surveyed in these foci. P16 INK4a promoter
methylation was examined in microdissected tissues. Taking advantage of two cell 
lines of CC (HuCTT-1 and TFK-1) and small interfering RNA (siRNA), the effects of
the knockdown of EZH2 on p16 INK4a methylation of CC cells were examined.
Expression of p16 INK4a, which was frequent in BilIN1, was decreased in BilIN-2/3
and invasive carcinoma, while EZH2 expression showed step-wise increase from
BilIN-1, -2 and -3 to invasive carcinoma (p < 0.01). P16 INK4a promoter
hypermethylation was related to aberrant expression of EZH2. The knockdown of
EZH2 in cultured CC cells decreased p16 INK4a methylation and decreased binding
of EZH2 to the p16 INK4a gene promoter. The latter suggested that direct binding 
of EZH2 is involved in the regulation of the p16 INK4a gene. Our data suggest
that over-expression of EZH2 may induce hypermethylation of p16 INK4a promoter
followed by decreased expression of p16 INK4a in the multi-step
cholangiocarcinogenesis through intraepithelial neoplasm in hepatolithiasis.

Copyright (c) 2008 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published
by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18393368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2176-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1761.

EWS-FLI-1 expression triggers a Ewing's sarcoma initiation program in primary
human mesenchymal stem cells.

Riggi N(1), Suvà ML, Suvà D, Cironi L, Provero P, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Stehle
JC, Baumer K, Kindler V, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) express the EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene generated 
by the chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). Expression of the EWS-FLI-1
fusion protein in a permissive cellular environment is believed to play a key
role in ESFT pathogenesis. However, EWS-FLI-1 induces growth arrest or apoptosis 
in differentiated primary cells, and the identity of permissive primary human
cells that can support its expression and function has until now remained
elusive. Here we show that expression of EWS-FLI-1 in human mesenchymal stem
cells (hMSC) is not only stably maintained without inhibiting proliferation but
also induces a gene expression profile bearing striking similarity to that of
ESFT, including genes that are among the highest ESFT discriminators. Expression 
of EWS-FLI-1 in hMSCs may recapitulate the initial steps of Ewing's sarcoma
development, allowing identification of genes that play an important role early
in its pathogenesis. Among relevant candidate transcripts induced by EWS-FLI-1 in
hMSCs, we found the polycomb group gene EZH2, which we show to play a critical
role in Ewing's sarcoma growth. These observations are consistent with our recent
findings using mouse mesenchymal progenitor cells and provide compelling evidence
that hMSCs are candidate cells of origin of ESFT.

PMID: 18381423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cancer Sci. 2008 Apr;99(4):738-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00743.x.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 downregulates E-cadherin by mediating histone H3
methylation in gastric cancer cells.

Fujii S(1), Ochiai A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, Research Center for Innovative Oncology, National Cancer
Center at Kashiwa, 6-5-1 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8577, Japan.
aochiai@east.ncc.go.jp

Overexpression of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), an epigenetic repressor,
occurs in various malignancies and is associated with poor prognosis; however,
the functional role of EZH2 overexpression in cancer versus non-cancerous tissue 
remains unclear. In this study, we found an inverse correlation between EZH2 and 
E-cadherin gene expression in gastric cancer cells. Knockdown of EZH2 by short
interfering RNA in gastric cancer cells resulted in a restoration of the
E-cadherin gene. We showed that the EZH2 complex existed with histone H3 and
Lys27, which were methylated on E-cadherin promoter regions in gastric cancer
cells. The restoration of E-cadherin was not involved in the change of the DNA
methylation status in the E-cadherin promoter region. Immunofluorescence staining
confirmed the expression of E-cadherin protein present in the cell membrane was
restored after knockdown of EZH2, resulting in changing the cancer phenotype,
such as its invasive capacity. In vivo, the relationship of inverse expression
between EZH2 protein and E-cadherin protein was observed at the individual
cellular level in gastric cancer tissue. This study provides into the mechanisms 
underlying the functional role of EZH2 overexpression in gastric cancer cells and
a new modality of regulation of E-cadherin expression in silencing mechanisms of 
tumor suppressor genes. Our present study paves the way for exploring the
blockade of EZH2 overexpression as a novel approach to treating cancer.

PMID: 18377425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Clin Pathol. 2008 Jun;61(6):744-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2007.054262. Epub 2008 Mar 
6.

High expression of Polycomb group protein EZH2 predicts poor survival in salivary
gland adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Vékony H(1), Raaphorst FM, Otte AP, van Lohuizen M, Leemans CR, van der Waal I,
Bloemena E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery/Oral Pathology, Academic Centre
for Dentistry (ACTA), VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
h.vekony@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: The prognosis of adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC), a malignant salivary
gland tumour, depends on clinicopathological parameters. To decipher the
biological behaviour of ACC, and to identify patients at risk of developing
metastases, additional markers are needed.
METHODS: Expression of the cell cycle proteins p53, cyclin D1, p16(INK4a), E2F1
and Ki-67, together with the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins BMI-1, MEL-18, EZH2
and EED was investigated immunohistochemically 21 formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded primary ACCs in relation to tumour characteristics.
RESULTS: ACC revealed significantly increased expression of the cell cycle
proteins compared to normal salivary tissue (n = 17). Members of the two PcG
complexes displayed mutually exclusive expression in normal salivary gland
tissue, with BMI-1 and MEL-18 being abundantly present. In ACC, this expression
pattern was disturbed, with EZH2 and EED showing significantly increased
expression levels. In univariate analysis, presence of recurrence, poor
differentiation and high EZH2 levels (>25% immunopositivity) significantly
correlated with unfavourable outcome. ACCs with high proliferative rate (>25%
Ki-67 immunopositivity) significantly correlated with high levels of EZH2 and
p16. Only the development of recurrence was an independent prognostic factor of
survival in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of PcG complexes and of essential cell cycle proteins is 
highly deregulated in ACC. Also, EZH2 expression has prognostic relevance in this
malignancy.

PMID: 18326020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Nat Genet. 2008 Apr;40(4):411-20. doi: 10.1038/ng.99. Epub 2008 Mar 2.

PRC1 and Suv39h specify parental asymmetry at constitutive heterochromatin in
early mouse embryos.

Puschendorf M(1), Terranova R, Boutsma E, Mao X, Isono K, Brykczynska U, Kolb C, 
Otte AP, Koseki H, Orkin SH, van Lohuizen M, Peters AH.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66,
CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.

In eukaryotes, Suv39h H3K9 trimethyltransferases are required for pericentric
heterochromatin formation and function. In early mouse preimplantation embryos,
however, paternal pericentric heterochromatin lacks Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 and
downstream marks. Here we demonstrate Ezh2-independent targeting of maternally
provided polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) components to paternal
heterochromatin. In Suv39h2 maternally deficient zygotes, PRC1 also associates
with maternal heterochromatin lacking H3K9me3, thereby revealing hierarchy
between repressive pathways. In Rnf2 maternally deficient zygotes, the PRC1
complex is disrupted, and levels of pericentric major satellite transcripts are
increased at the paternal but not the maternal genome. We conclude that in early 
embryos, Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 constitutes the dominant maternal
transgenerational signal for pericentric heterochromatin formation. In absence of
this signal, PRC1 functions as the default repressive back-up mechanism. Parental
epigenetic asymmetry, also observed along cleavage chromosomes, is resolved by
the end of the 8-cell stage--concurrent with blastomere polarization--marking the
end of the maternal-to-embryonic transition.

PMID: 18311137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Cancer J. 2008 Jan-Feb;14(1):46-53. doi: 10.1097/PPO.0b013e318162108a.

Posttranscription regulation of prostate cancer growth.

Shen L(1), Pili R.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.

Advances in the understanding of the molecular mechanisms implicated in prostate 
cancer progression have allowed identification of many potential therapeutic gene
targets that are involved in apoptosis, growth factors, cell signaling, and the
androgen receptor. A critical factor responsible for the malignant progression of
prostate cancer is the abnormal expression and function of specific proteins.
From the transcription of mRNA to the translation of proteins and their function,
several steps can be exploited as "drugable" targets. In this article we will
review some of the key molecular targets and posttranscriptional strategies that 
are currently being tested both preclinically and clinically as targeted
therapeutic approach for prostate cancer. Most of the targets mentioned in this
review involve the prostate cancer signal transduction cascade, and their
functions include prosurvival, antiapoptosis, and proangiogenesis. We will focus 
in particular on the emerging role of the "chromatin modifiers," histone
deacetylase inhibitors, not only in transcriptional gene regulation but also in
posttranscriptional protein modifications as a tool for therapeutic intervention 
in prostate cancer.

PMID: 18303483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Virol J. 2008 Feb 27;5:32. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-5-32.

Mapping of immunogenic and protein-interacting regions at the surface of the
seven-bladed beta-propeller domain of the HIV-1 cellular interactor EED.

Rakotobe D(1), Violot S, Hong SS, Gouet P, Boulanger P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Virologie & Pathologie Humaine, Université Lyon I & CNRS
FRE-3011, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, 7 rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon Cedex 
08, France. dinaraktb@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: The human EED protein, a member of the superfamily of Polycomb group 
proteins, is involved in multiple cellular protein complexes. Its C-terminal
domain, which is common to the four EED isoforms, contains seven repeats of a
canonical WD-40 motif. EED is an interactor of three HIV-1 proteins, matrix (MA),
integrase (IN) and Nef. An antiviral activity has been found to be associated
with isoforms EED3 and EED4 at the late stage of HIV-1 replication, due to a
negative effect on virus assembly and genomic RNA packaging. The aim of the
present study was to determine the regions of the EED C-terminal core domain
which were accessible and available to protein interactions, using
three-dimensional (3D) protein homology modelling with a WD-40 protein of known
structure, and epitope mapping of anti-EED antibodies.
RESULTS: Our data suggested that the C-terminal domain of EED was folded as a
seven-bladed beta-propeller protein. During the completion of our work,
crystallographic data of EED became available from co-crystals of the EED
C-terminal core with the N-terminal domain of its cellular partner EZH2. Our
3D-model was in good congruence with the refined structural model determined from
crystallographic data, except for a unique alpha-helix in the fourth beta-blade. 
More importantly, the position of flexible loops and accessible beta-strands on
the beta-propeller was consistent with our mapping of immunogenic epitopes and
sites of interaction with HIV-1 MA and IN. Certain immunoreactive regions were
found to overlap with the EZH2, MA and IN binding sites, confirming their
accessibility and reactivity at the surface of EED. Crystal structure of EED
showed that the two discrete regions of interaction with MA and IN did not
overlap with each other, nor with the EZH2 binding pocket, but were contiguous,
and formed a continuous binding groove running along the lateral face of the
beta-propeller.
CONCLUSION: Identification of antibody-, MA-, IN- and EZH2-binding sites at the
surface of the EED isoform 3 provided a global picture of the immunogenic and
protein-protein interacting regions in the EED C-terminal domain, organized as a 
seven-bladed beta-propeller protein. Mapping of the HIV-1 MA and IN binding sites
on the 3D-model of EED core predicted that EED-bound MA and IN ligands would be
in close vicinity at the surface of the beta-propeller, and that the occurrence
of a ternary complex MA-EED-IN would be possible.

PMCID: PMC2292171
PMID: 18302803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(8):2718-31. doi: 10.1128/MCB.02017-07. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Ezh2 requires PHF1 to efficiently catalyze H3 lysine 27 trimethylation in vivo.

Sarma K(1), Margueron R, Ivanov A, Pirrotta V, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, NYU School of Medicine-Smilow Research
Center, Biochemistry Department, 522 First Avenue, 2nd Floor, Room 211, New York,
NY 10016, USA.

The mammalian Polycomblike protein PHF1 was previously shown to interact with the
Polycomb group (PcG) protein Ezh2, a histone methyltransferase whose activity is 
pivotal in sustaining gene repression during development and in adulthood. As
Ezh2 is active only when part of the Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRC2-PRC4),
we examined the functional role of its interaction with PHF1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that PHF1 resides along with Ezh2 at
Ezh2-regulated genes such as the HoxA loci and the non-Hox MYT1 and WNT1 genes.
Knockdown of PHF1 or of Ezh2 led to up-regulated HoxA gene expression.
Interestingly, depletion of PHF1 did correlate with reduced occupancy of Bmi-1, a
PRC1 component. As expected, knockdown of Ezh2 led to reduced levels of its
catalytic products H3K27me2/H3K27me3. However, reduced levels of PHF1 also led to
decreased global levels of H3K27me3. Notably, the levels of H3K27me3 decreased
while those of H3K27me2 increased at the up-regulated HoxA loci tested.
Consistent with this, the addition of PHF1 specifically stimulated the ability of
Ezh2 to catalyze H3K27me3 but not H3K27me1/H3K27me2 in vitro. We conclude that
PHF1 modulates the activity of Ezh2 in favor of the repressive H3K27me3 mark.
Thus, we propose that PHF1 is a determinant in PcG-mediated gene repression.

PMCID: PMC2293112
PMID: 18285464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 9;283(19):13471-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709886200. Epub 2008 
Feb 19.

Unconventional association of the polycomb group proteins with cytokine genes in 
differentiated T helper cells.

Jacob E(1), Hod-Dvorai R, Schif-Zuck S, Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel.

The cytokine transcription profiles of developing T helper 1 and T helper 2 cells
are imprinted and induced appropriately following stimulation of differentiated
cells. Epigenetic regulation combines several mechanisms to ensure the
inheritance of transcriptional programs. We found that the expression of the
polycomb group proteins, whose role in maintaining gene silencing is well
documented, was induced during development in both T helper lineages.
Nevertheless, the polycomb proteins, YY1, Mel-18, Ring1A, Ezh2, and Eed, bound to
the Il4 and Ifng loci in a differential pattern. In contrast to the prevailing
dogma, the binding activity of the polycomb proteins in differentiated T helper
cells was associated with cytokine transcription. The polycomb proteins bound to 
the cytokine genes under resting conditions, and their binding was induced
dynamically following stimulation. The recruitment of the polycomb proteins
Mel-18 and Ezh2 to the cytokine promoters was inhibited in the presence of
cyclosporine A, suggesting the involvement of NFAT. Considering their binding
pattern at the cytokine genes and their known function in higher order folding of
regulatory elements, we propose a model whereby the polycomb proteins, in some
contexts, positively regulate gene expression by mediating long-distance
chromosomal interactions.

PMID: 18285333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Apr 1;314(6):1193-201. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.012. Epub 
2008 Jan 26.

Ras regulation of DNA-methylation and cancer.

Patra SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics Research, Kalyani (B-7/183), Nadia, West Bengal, India.
skpatra_99@yahoo.com

Genome wide hypomethylation and regional hypermethylation of cancer cells and
tissues remain a paradox, though it has received a convincing confirmation that
epigenetic switching systems, including DNA-methylation represent a fundamental
regulatory mechanism that has an impact on genome maintenance and gene
transcription. Methylated cytosine residues of vertebrate DNA are transmitted by 
clonal inheritance through the strong preference of DNA methyltransferase, DNMT1,
for hemimethylated-DNA. Maintenance of methylation patterns is necessary for
normal development of mice, and aberrant methylation patterns are associated with
many human tumours. DNMT1 interacts with many proteins during cell cycle
progression, including PCNA, p53, EZH2 and HP1. Ras family of GTPases promotes
cell proliferation by its oncogenic nature, which transmits signals by multiple
pathways in both lipid raft dependent and independent fashion.
DNA-methylation-mediated repression of DNA-repair protein O6-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) gene and increased rate of K-Ras mutation at codon for
amino acids 12 and 13 have been correlated with a secondary role for Ras-effector
homologues (RASSFs) in tumourigenesis. Lines of evidence suggest that
DNA-methylation associated repression of tumour suppressors and apoptotic genes
and ceaseless proliferation of tumour cells are regulated in part by
Ras-signaling. Control of Ras GTPase signaling might reduce the aberrant
methylation and accordingly may reduce the risk of cancer development.

PMID: 18282569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11;283(15):9836-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709614200. Epub 2008 
Feb 15.

MicroRNA-26a targets the histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2
during myogenesis.

Wong CF(1), Tellam RL.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, 306 Carmody Road, 
St. Lucia 4067, QLD, Australia.

MicroRNA (miRNA) are important regulators of many biological processes, but the
targets for most miRNA are still poorly defined. In this study, we profiled the
expression of miRNA during myogenesis, from proliferating myoblasts through to
terminally differentiated myotubes. Microarray results identified six
significantly differentially expressed miRNA that were more than 2-fold different
in myotubes. From this list, miRNA-26a (miR-26a), an up-regulated miRNA, was
further examined. Overexpression of miR-26a in murine myogenic C2C12 cells
induced creatine kinase activity, an enzyme that markedly increases during
myogenesis. Further, myoD and myogenin mRNA expression levels were also
up-regulated. These results suggest that increased expression of miR-26a promotes
myogenesis. Through a bioinformatics approach, we identified the histone
methyltransferase, Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), as a potential target of
miR-26a. Overexpression of miR-26a suppressed the activity of a luciferase
reporter construct fused with the 3'-untranslated region of Ezh2. In addition,
miR-26a overexpression decreased Ezh2 mRNA expression. These results reveal a
model of regulation during myogenesis whereby the up-regulation of miR-26a acts
to post-transcriptionally repress Ezh2, a known suppressor of skeletal muscle
cell differentiation.

PMID: 18281287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Histopathology. 2008 Feb;52(3):370-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2007.02957.x.

Independent prognostic value of the basal-like phenotype of breast cancer and
associations with EGFR and candidate stem cell marker BMI-1.

Arnes JB(1), Collett K, Akslen LA.

Author information: 
(1)The Gade Institute, Section for Pathology, University of Bergen, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

AIMS: To study the relationship between basal-like breast cancers, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) and candidate stem cell markers (BMI-1, EZH2,
Oct-4) in a population-based setting.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was evaluated in a series of 190 breast
cancers. Basal-like phenotype (BLP) 1-5 was found in 4.3-14.3% of cases. EGFR was
expressed in 9% of cases and associated with cytokeratin (CK) 5 and P-cadherin
positivity, but not with survival; 28% of CK5+ cases were EGFR+. On multivariate 
analysis, basal-like differentiation and lymph node status were independent
prognostic factors of comparable strength. BMI-1 positivity (42.6%) was
associated with absence of basal-like features, oestrogen receptor positivity and
low Ki67, but not related to survival. BMI was not associated with EZH2
expression, and these markers tended to show opposite associations with other
variables, suggesting different roles in breast cancer. Oct-4 expression was not 
detected in this series.
CONCLUSIONS: Basal-like features and lymph node status were strong and
independent prognostic factors in this population-based series of breast cancer. 
Neither EGFR nor BMI-1 had significant prognostic impact, whereas EZH2 expression
was associated with decreased survival. BMI-1 was inversely related to basal-like
factors, and a stem cell phenotype of the basal-like subgroup could not be
verified by this marker.

PMID: 18269588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS Genet. 2008 Feb;4(2):e30. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0040030.

X chromosome activity in mouse XX primordial germ cells.

Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM(1), Hayashi K, Shovlin TC, Mifsud W, Surani MA, McLaren
A.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. smc80@cam.ac.uk

In the early epiblast of female mice, one of the two X chromosomes is randomly
inactivated by a Xist-dependent mechanism, involving the recruitment of Ezh2-Eed 
and the subsequent trimethylation of histone 3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3). We
demonstrate that this random inactivation process applies also to the primordial 
germ cell (PGC) precursors, located in the proximal region of the epiblast. PGC
specification occurs at about embryonic day (E)7.5, in the extraembryonic
mesoderm, after which the germ cells enter the endoderm of the invaginating
hindgut. As they migrate towards the site of the future gonads, the XX PGCs
gradually lose the H3K27me3 accumulation on the silent X chromosome. However,
using a GFP transgene inserted into the X chromosome, we observed that the XX
gonadal environment (independently of the gender) is important for the
substantial reactivation of the inactive X chromosome between E11.5 and E13.5,
but is not required for X-chromosome reactivation during the derivation of
pluripotent embryonic germ cells. We describe in detail one of the key events
during female PGC development, the epigenetic reprogramming of the X chromosome, 
and demonstrate the role of the XX somatic genital ridge in this process.

PMCID: PMC2233679
PMID: 18266475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Sep;47(9):701-6. doi: 10.1002/mc.20413.

Loss of trimethylation at lysine 27 of histone H3 is a predictor of poor outcome 
in breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers.

Wei Y(1), Xia W, Zhang Z, Liu J, Wang H, Adsay NV, Albarracin C, Yu D, Abbruzzese
JL, Mills GB, Bast RC Jr, Hortobagyi GN, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27) by the EZH2 complex is an
epigenetic mark that mediates gene silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in many
cancers and correlates with poor prognosis in both breast and prostate cancers.
However, the status of H3K27 methylation and its clinical implication in cancer
patients have not been reported. We thus examined trimethylation of H3K27
(H3K27me3) by immunohistochemistry and its association with clinical variables
and prognosis in breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers. We found that H3K27me3 
expression was significantly lower in breast, ovarian and pancreatic cancers than
in normal tissues (62% in breast cancer vs. 88% in normal breast tissue, P =
0.001; 38.4% in ovarian cancer vs. 83.3% in normal ovarian tissue, P < 0.05; and 
26% in pancreatic cancer vs. 89% in normal pancreatic tissue, P < 0.001).
H3K27me3 expression showed significant prognostic impact in breast, ovarian and
pancreatic cancers in univariate survival analyses. In all three cancer types,
patients with low expression of H3K27me3 had significantly shorter overall
survival time when compared with those with high H3K27me3 expression. In a
multivariate model, H3K27me3 expression was an independent prognostic value for
overall survival in all three cancer types. These results suggest that H3K27me3
expression is a prognostic indicator for clinical outcome in patients with
breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancers.

PMCID: PMC2580832
PMID: 18176935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jan;13(1):69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2007.12.005.

Epigenetic-mediated dysfunction of the bone morphogenetic protein pathway
inhibits differentiation of glioblastoma-initiating cells.

Lee J(1), Son MJ, Woolard K, Donin NM, Li A, Cheng CH, Kotliarova S, Kotliarov Y,
Walling J, Ahn S, Kim M, Totonchy M, Cusack T, Ene C, Ma H, Su Q, Zenklusen JC,
Zhang W, Maric D, Fine HA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2008 Jan;13(1):3-4.

Despite similarities between tumor-initiating cells with stem-like properties
(TICs) and normal neural stem cells, we hypothesized that there may be
differences in their differentiation potentials. We now demonstrate that both
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)-mediated and ciliary neurotrophic factor
(CNTF)-mediated Jak/STAT-dependent astroglial differentiation is impaired due to 
EZH2-dependent epigenetic silencing of BMP receptor 1B (BMPR1B) in a subset of
glioblastoma TICs. Forced expression of BMPR1B either by transgene expression or 
demethylation of the promoter restores their differentiation capabilities and
induces loss of their tumorigenicity. We propose that deregulation of the BMP
developmental pathway in a subset of glioblastoma TICs contributes to their
tumorigenicity both by desensitizing TICs to normal differentiation cues and by
converting otherwise cytostatic signals to proproliferative signals.

PMCID: PMC2835498
PMID: 18167341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Yonsei Med J. 2007 Dec 31;48(6):1009-14.

Identification of enhancer of zeste homolog 2 expression in peripheral
circulating tumor cells in metastatic prostate cancer patients: a preliminary
study.

Cho KS(1), Oh HY, Lee EJ, Hong SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Urological Science Institute, Brain Korea 21 Project
for Medical Science, College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a kind of transcriptional repressor,
is reportedly over-expressed in metastatic prostate cancer. In this study, we
analyzed EZH2 mRNA in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) in peripheral blood as a
biomarker in patients with metastatic prostate cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ber-EP4 coated immunomagnetic beads were used to harvest
CTCs, and mRNA was isolated by oligo- dT conjugated immunomagnetic beads. Reverse
transcriptase- polymerase chain reaction for EZH2 mRNA was performed and the
expression density was measured. The sensitivity of this test for detection of
EZH2 mRNA was determined by serial dilutions of a human prostate cancer cell
line. Blood samples were collected from 20 patients each with metastatic or
localized prostate cancer and 10 healthy volunteers.
RESULTS: Sensitivity experiments showed that the test was highly sensitive as it 
could detect 10 tumor cells per 5 mL. EZH2 mRNA expression was obtained from
peripheral blood samples of patients and control subjects. EZH2 mRNA expression
density in the metastatic prostate cancer group was significantly higher than in 
the control (p=0.023) and localized prostate cancer groups (p=0.019). There was
no difference between the control and localized prostate cancer groups (p >
0.05).
CONCLUSION: EZH2 mRNA expression in circulating epithelial cells represents a
promising marker for detecting early metastasis in prostate cancer. However, more
specific and sensitive techniques for detection of CTCs are needed to avoid
mononuclear cell contamination.

PMCID: PMC2628187
PMID: 18159594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Prostate. 2008 Feb 15;68(3):255-63.

The Polycomb Group protein EZH2 regulates actin polymerization in human prostate 
cancer cells.

Bryant RJ(1), Winder SJ, Cross SS, Hamdy FC, Cunliffe VT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The Polycomb Group protein EZH2 is implicated in prostate cancer
progression. EZH2 promotes prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasiveness.
We describe a link between EZH2 function and actin polymerization in prostate
cancer cells.
METHODS: Nuclear and cytoplasmic EZH2 expression in benign and malignant prostate
tissue samples was assessed. An association between EZH2 function and actin
polymerization in prostate cancer cells was investigated using siRNA-mediated
knock-down of EZH2. Effects of EZH2 knock-down on actin polymerization dynamics
were analyzed biochemically using immunoblot analysis of cell lysate fractions,
and morphologically using immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: Cytoplasmic EZH2 is expressed at low levels in benign prostate
epithelial cells and over-expressed in prostate cancer cells. Cytoplasmic EZH2
expression levels correlate with nuclear EZH2 expression in prostate cancer
samples. Knock-down of EZH2 in PC3 prostate cancer cells increases the amount of 
F-actin polymerization, cell size, and formation of actin-rich filaments.
CONCLUSIONS: Cytoplasmic EZH2 is over-expressed in prostate cancer cells. EZH2
function promotes a reduction in the pool of insoluble F-actin in invasive
prostate cancer cells. EZH2 may regulate actin polymerization dynamics and
thereby promote prostate cancer cell motility and invasiveness.

PMID: 18095286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1862-72. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Role of hPHF1 in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

Cao R(1), Wang H, He J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are required for maintaining the silent state of
the homeotic genes and other important developmental regulators. The silencing
function of the PcG proteins has been linked to their intrinsic histone modifying
enzymatic activities. The EED-EZH2 complex, containing the core subunits EZH2,
EED, SUZ12, and RbAp48, functions as a histone H3K27-specific methyltransferase. 
Here we describe the identification and characterization of a related EED-EZH2
protein complex which is distinguished from the previous complex by the presence 
of another PcG protein, hPHF1. Consistent with the ability of hPHF1 to stimulate 
the enzymatic activity of the core EED-EZH2 complex in vitro, manipulation of
mPcl1, the mouse counterpart of hPHF1, in NIH 3T3 cells and cells of the mouse
male germ cell line GC1spg results in global alteration of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 
levels and Hox gene expression. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of mPcl1
affects association of the Eed-Ezh2 complex with certain Hox genes, such as
HoxA10, as well as Hox gene expression concomitant with an alteration on the
H3K27me2 levels of the corresponding promoters. Therefore, our results reveal
hPHF1 as a component of a novel EED-EZH2 complex and demonstrate its important
role in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC2258785
PMID: 18086877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Dec 11;104(50):20001-6. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Effects of rearrangement and allelic exclusion of JJAZ1/SUZ12 on cell
proliferation and survival.

Li H(1), Ma X, Wang J, Koontz J, Nucci M, Sklar J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Polycomb group genes (PcGs) have been implicated in cancer based on altered
levels of expression observed in certain tumors and the behavior of cultured
cells containing inserted PcG transgenes. Endometrial stromal tumors provide
evidence for a direct causal relationship because they contain several
chromosomal translocations and resultant gene fusions involving PcGs, the most
common of which joins portions of the JAZF1 gene to the PcGJJAZ1/SUZ12. We show
here that both benign and malignant forms of this tumor have the JAZF1-JJAZ1
fusion but only the malignant form also exhibits exclusion of the unrearranged
JJAZ1 allele. To evaluate the effects of both the JJAZ1/SUZ12 fusion and allelic 
exclusion on functions related to cell growth, we studied HEK293 cells that were 
modified with respect to JJAZ1 expression. We found that the JAZF1-JJAZ1 fusion
restored levels of the polycomb protein EZH2 and histone 3 lysine 27
trimethylation, which were reduced by knockdown of endogenous JJAZ1. At the same 
time, the presence of JAZF1-JJAZ1 markedly inhibited apoptosis and induced above 
normal proliferation rates, although the latter effect occurred only when normal 
JJAZ1 was suppressed. Our findings suggest a genetic pathway for progression of a
benign precursor to a sarcoma involving increased cell survival associated with
acquisition of a PcG rearrangement, followed by accelerated cellular
proliferation upon allelic exclusion of the unrearranged copy of that gene.
Furthermore, these results indicate the likely functional importance of allelic
exclusion of genes disrupted by chromosomal translocations, as seen in a variety 
of other cancers.

PMCID: PMC2148412
PMID: 18077430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Clin Pract Urol. 2007 Dec;4(12):677-87.

Mechanisms of Disease: biomarkers and molecular targets from microarray gene
expression studies in prostate cancer.

Cooper CS(1), Campbell C, Jhavar S.

Author information: 
(1)Male Urological Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, 
UK. colin.cooper@icr.ac.uk

Molecular biomarkers can serve as useful diagnostic markers, as prognostic
markers for predicting clinical behavior, or as targets for new therapeutic
strategies. Application of expression microarray technology, which allows the
expression of all or most of the genes in the human genome to be analyzed
simultaneously, has dramatically enhanced the discovery of prostate cancer
biomarkers. The diagnostic markers identified include AMACR (alpha-methylacyl CoA
racemase), a protein that has already been translated into clinical use as an aid
in distinguishing prostate cancer from benign disease. Individual genes, such as 
the polycomb gene EZH2 whose expression indicates poor survival, have been
identified. The power of microarray technology is that it has allowed the
identification of gene signatures (each composed of multiple genes) that might
provide improved prediction of clinical outcomes in human prostate cancer. The
development of a new method for analyzing expression microarray data, called
COPA, has led to the discovery of TMPRSS2-ERG gene fusion involvement in the
development of prostate cancer, while expression analysis of castration-resistant
prostate cancer has suggested the use of novel therapeutic approaches for
advanced disease. Despite these successes, there are limitations in the
application of microarray technology to prostate cancer; for example, unlike with
other cancers, this approach has failed to provide a consistent unsupervised
classification of the disease. Overcoming the reasons for these failures
represents a major challenge for future research endeavors.

PMID: 18059348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Cancer Res. 2007 Nov 15;67(22):10657-63.

A polycomb repression signature in metastatic prostate cancer predicts cancer
outcome.

Yu J(1), Yu J, Rhodes DR, Tomlins SA, Cao X, Chen G, Mehra R, Wang X, Ghosh D,
Shah RB, Varambally S, Pienta KJ, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The Polycomb Group (PcG) protein EZH2 is a critical component of a multiprotein
complex that methylates Lys(27) of histone 3 (H3K27), which consequently leads to
the repression of target gene expression. We have previously reported that EZH2
is overexpressed in metastatic prostate cancer and is a marker of aggressive
diseases in clinically localized solid tumors. However, the global set of genes
directly regulated by PcG in tumors is largely unknown, and thus how PcG mediates
tumor progression remains unclear. Herein we mapped genome-wide H3K27 methylation
in aggressive, disseminated human prostate cancer tissues. Integrative analysis
revealed that a significant subset of these genes are also targets of PcG in
embryonic stem cells, and their repression in tumors is associated with poor
prognosis. By stepwise cross-validation, we developed a "Polycomb repression
signature" composed of 14 direct targets of PcG in metastatic tumors. Notably,
solid tumor subtypes in which this gene signature is repressed show poor clinical
outcome in multiple microarray data sets of tumors including breast and prostate 
cancer. Taken together, our results show a fingerprint of PcG-mediated
transcriptional repression in metastatic prostate cancer that is reminiscent of
stem cells and associated with cancer progression. Therefore, PcG proteins play a
central role in the epigenetic silencing of target genes and functionally link
stem cells, metastasis, and cancer survival.

PMID: 18006806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Cell. 2007 Nov;12(5):419-31.

Integrative genomics analysis reveals silencing of beta-adrenergic signaling by
polycomb in prostate cancer.

Yu J(1), Cao Q, Mehra R, Laxman B, Yu J, Tomlins SA, Creighton CJ, Dhanasekaran
SM, Shen R, Chen G, Morris DS, Marquez VE, Shah RB, Ghosh D, Varambally S,
Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Michigan Center for Translational Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Nov;12(5):405-7.

The Polycomb group (PcG) protein EZH2 possesses oncogenic properties for which
the underlying mechanism is unclear. We integrated in vitro cell line, in vivo
tumor profiling, and genome-wide location data to nominate key targets of EZH2.
One of the candidates identified was ADRB2 (Adrenergic Receptor, Beta-2), a
critical mediator of beta-adrenergic signaling. EZH2 is recruited to the ADRB2
promoter and represses ADRB2 expression. ADRB2 inhibition confers cell invasion
and transforms benign prostate epithelial cells, whereas ADRB2 overexpression
counteracts EZH2-mediated oncogenesis. ADRB2 is underexpressed in metastatic
prostate cancer, and clinically localized tumors that express lower levels of
ADRB2 exhibit a poor prognosis. Taken together, we demonstrate the power of
integrating multiple diverse genomic data to decipher targets of disease-related 
genes.

PMID: 17996646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Proteomics. 2007 Dec;7(23):4303-16.

Induction of growth arrest and polycomb gene expression by reversine allows C2C12
cells to be reprogrammed to various differentiated cell types.

Shan SW(1), Tang MK, Chow PH, Maroto M, Cai DQ, Lee KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Basic Medical Science Building, Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Reversine is a small, cell permeable synthetic chemical that has the ability to
reprogram C2C12 myogenic cells to become various differentiated cell types.
However, we still do not know how reversine works or the genes and proteins
involved. Hence, we have used comparative proteomic techniques to address this
issue. We have identified several proteins that were associated with cell cycle
progression which were downregulated by reversine. Simultaneously, there were
proteins associated with the induction of growth arrest that were upregulated.
Consequently, we investigated the effects of reversine on C2C12 cell growth and
established that it inhibited cell growth. Reversine had little affects on cell
survival. We also investigated whether expressions of the polycomb genes,
polycomb repressive complex 1 (PHC1) and Ezh2, were affected by reversine.
Polycomb group genes are normally involved in chromatin based gene silencing. We 
found that PHC1 and Ezh2 expressions were enhanced by reversine and that it
correlated with the inhibition of muscle specific transcriptional factor genes,
myogenin, MyoD, and Myf5. Therefore, we believe that reversine is able to
reprogram C2C12 cells to various differentiated cell types by inducing cell
growth arrest, and promoting PHC1 and Ezh2 expressions.

PMID: 17973295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Int J Cancer. 2008 Feb 1;122(3):595-602.

EZH2, Ki-67 and MCM7 are prognostic markers in prostatectomy treated patients.

Laitinen S(1), Martikainen PM, Tolonen T, Isola J, Tammela TL, Visakorpi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and Tampere University 
Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the prognostic value of Ki-67, EZH2, MCM7
and EIF3S3 in prostatectomy treated patients. A retrospective population-based
material of 249 radical prostatectomy specimens on tissue microarrays was
utilized. The median follow-up of the patients was approximately 5.5 years and
the main end-point was biochemical progression. The expression of Ki-67, EZH2 and
MCM7 was determined by immunohistochemistry and the gene copy number of EIF3S3
was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). In the whole material,
increased immunostainings of EZH2, MCM7 and Ki-67 were significantly associated
with a high Gleason score and a short progression-free survival. In multivariate 
analysis, MCM7 and Ki-67 showed independent prognostic value with relative risks 
(RR) of 2.65 (95%-confidence interval of 1.22-5.70), and 1.85 (1.14-3.01),
respectively. In subgroup analysis of patients, whose treatment was evaluated to 
be truly radical (n = 226), EZH2 (3.14, 1.38-7.16), MCM7 (2.70, 1.16-6.30) and
PSA (1.5, 1.03-2.20) showed independent prognostic value. In subgroup analysis of
cases with a Gleason score <7, low Ki-67 staining was associated with favorable
prognosis with RR of 0.09 (0.01-0.69). In conclusion, Ki-67, EZH2 and MCM7 are
potential prognostic biomarkers in prostatectomy treated patients.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17943722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Structure. 2007 Oct;15(10):1306-15.

Structural basis of EZH2 recognition by EED.

Han Z(1), Xing X, Hu M, Zhang Y, Liu P, Chai J.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing 102206, China.

The WD-repeat domain is a highly conserved recognition module in eukaryotes
involved in diverse cellular processes. It is still not well understood how the
bottom of a WD-repeat domain recognizes its binding partners. The
WD-repeat-containing protein EED is one component of the PRC2 complex that
possesses histone methyltransferase activity required for gene repression. Here
we report the crystal structure of EED in complex with a 30 residue peptide from 
EZH2. The structure reveals that the peptide binds to the bottom of the WD-repeat
domain of EED. The structural determinants of EZH2-EED interaction are present
not only in EZH2 and EZH1 but also in its Drosophila homolog E(Z), suggesting
that the recognition of ESC by E(Z) in Drosophila employs similar structural
motifs. Structure-based mutagenesis identified critical residues from both EED
and EZH2 for their interaction. The structure presented here may provide a
template for understanding of how WD-repeat proteins recognize their interacting 
proteins.

PMID: 17937919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Oncol Rep. 2007 Nov;18(5):1231-7.

New peptides of the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 with the
potential to induce cancer-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes in human leukocyte
antigen-A2+ prostate cancer patients.

Itoh Y(1), Komohara Y, Komatsu N, Minami T, Saito K, Noguchi M, Itoh K, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Fukuoka,
Japan.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is linked to
aggressive prostate cancer and could be an appropriate target in specific
immunotherapy. In this study, we attempted to identify EZH2-derived peptides that
have the potential to generate cancer-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2+ prostate cancer patients. Twelve EZH2-derived
peptides were prepared based on the HLA-A2 binding motif. These peptide
candidates were screened first by their ability to be recognized by
immunoglobulin G (IgG), and then by their ability to induce peptide-specific
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). As a result, five EZH2 peptides recognized by IgG
(EZH2 120-128, EZH2 165-174, EZH2 569-577, EZH2 665-674, and EZH2 699-708) were
frequently detected in the plasma of prostate cancer patients. Among them, the
EZH2 120-128 and EZH2 165-174 peptides effectively induced HLA-A2-restricted and 
cancer-reactive CTLs from prostate cancer patients. The cytotoxicity was mainly
dependent on EZH2 peptide-specific and HLA-A2-restricted CD8+ T cells. These
results indicate that these EZH2 120-128 and EZH2 165-174 peptides could be
promising candidates in peptide-based immunotherapy for HLA-A2+ prostate cancer
patients.

PMID: 17914578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Immunol. 2007 Oct 15;179(8):5317-25.

A role for EZH2 in silencing of IFN-gamma inducible MHC2TA transcription in uveal
melanoma.

Holling TM(1), Bergevoet MW, Wilson L, Van Eggermond MC, Schooten E, Steenbergen 
RD, Snijders PJ, Jager MJ, Van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Immunohematology and Blood
Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

We investigated the contribution of epigenetic mechanisms in MHC2TA
transcriptional silencing in uveal melanoma. Although no correlation was observed
between impaired CIITA transcript levels after IFN-gamma induction and DNA
methylation of MHC2TA promoter IV (CIITA-PIV), an association was found with high
levels of trimethylated histone H3-lysine 27 (3Me-K27-H3) in CIITA-PIV chromatin.
The 3Me-K27-H3 modification correlated with a strong reduction in RNA polymerase 
II-recruitment to CIITA-PIV. Interestingly, we observed that none of these
epigenetic modifications affected recruitment of activating transcription factors
to this promoter. Subsequently, we demonstrated the presence of the histone
methyltransferase EZH2 in CIITA-PIV chromatin, which is known to be a component
of the Polycomb repressive complex 2 and able to triple methylate histone
H3-lysine 27. RNA interference-mediated down-regulation of EZH2 expression
resulted in an increase in CIITA transcript levels after IFN-gamma induction. Our
data therefore reveal that EZH2 contributes to silencing of IFN-gamma-inducible
transcription of MHC2TA in uveal melanoma cells.

PMID: 17911618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nature. 2007 Oct 11;449(7163):689-94. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

A histone H3 lysine 27 demethylase regulates animal posterior development.

Lan F(1), Bayliss PE, Rinn JL, Whetstine JR, Wang JK, Chen S, Iwase S, Alpatov R,
Issaeva I, Canaani E, Roberts TM, Chang HY, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The recent discovery of a large number of histone demethylases suggests a central
role for these enzymes in regulating histone methylation dynamics. Histone H3K27 
trimethylation (H3K27me3) has been linked to polycomb-group-protein-mediated
suppression of Hox genes and animal body patterning, X-chromosome inactivation
and possibly maintenance of embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity. An imbalance of
H3K27 methylation owing to overexpression of the methylase EZH2 has been
implicated in metastatic prostate and aggressive breast cancers. Here we show
that the JmjC-domain-containing related proteins UTX and JMJD3 catalyse
demethylation of H3K27me3/2. UTX is enriched around the transcription start sites
of many HOX genes in primary human fibroblasts, in which HOX genes are
differentially expressed, but is selectively excluded from the HOX loci in ESCs, 
in which HOX genes are largely silent. Consistently, RNA interference inhibition 
of UTX led to increased H3K27me3 levels at some HOX gene promoters. Importantly, 
morpholino oligonucleotide inhibition of a zebrafish UTX homologue resulted in
mis-regulation of hox genes and a striking posterior developmental defect, which 
was partially rescued by wild-type, but not by catalytically inactive, human UTX.
Taken together, these findings identify a small family of H3K27 demethylases with
important, evolutionarily conserved roles in H3K27 methylation regulation and in 
animal anterior-posterior development.

PMID: 17851529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Bull Cancer. 2007 Jul;94(7 Suppl):F77-88.

[Molecular aspects of prostate cancer: recent data from the literature].

[Article in French]

Camparo P(1), Vieillefond A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, Hôpital d'Instruction des
Armées Val-de-Grâce, 74 boulevard de Port-Royal, 75005 Paris. phcamparo@yahoo.fr

A meta-analysis of recent data from the literature underscores the considerable
body of present knowledge concerning prostate carcinogenesis, in part due to the 
numerous molecular biology tools now at our disposal. As concerns early events,
much interest is being paid to modifications in the expression of GSTP1 and
NKX3.1 occurring in totipotent stem cell populations. The discovery of fusion
genes implicating TMPRSS2 and ERG (and, on rare occasions, other ETS family
transcription factors) constitutes a major advance. Under physiological
androgenic stimulation, the presence of these fusion genes leads to
overexpression of genes involved in cell growth and differentiation.
Concomitantly, alterations in numerous signalling pathways (growth factors,
Wnt-beta catenine, PI3K/Akt) are responsible for the onset of an aggressive tumor
phenotype. Hormono-independence is currently explained by an amplification of, or
mutations in, androgenic receptors. These are facilitated by genomic
instabilities linked to alterations in proteins which regulate gene expression,
such as EZH2, and by the influence of the tumor microenvironment. Disturbances in
the interactions between tumor cells and the microenvironment contribute to local
extension of the tumor. Changes in the expression of E-cadherin are responsible
for modifications in cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix. The expression of
metalloproteases and of angiogenic factors favors tumor dissemination. Finally,
the bone tropism in prostate metastases is probably linked to osteomimetic
properties of prostate tumor cells which are capable of expressing certain
proteins involved in bone remodelling, such as Runx-2, BSP (bone sialoprotein)
and BMP (bone morphogenetic protein). Numerous studies remain to be carried out
in order to correlate the identified genetic profiles and molecular anomalies
with tumor prognosis. Nevertheless, the possibility of decrypting these anomalies
for use in therapeutic applications is encouraging.

PMID: 17845997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Sep-Oct;1769(9-10):541-5. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

The transcriptional repression by NIPP1 is mediated by Polycomb group proteins.

Roy N(1), Van Eynde A, Beke L, Nuytten M, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling and Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, KULeuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

NIPP1 is a ubiquitously expressed nuclear protein that represses the
transcription of targeted genes. Here we show that the transcriptional repression
by NIPP1 is alleviated by the RNAi-mediated knockdown of EED and EZH2, two core
components of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2), and by the overexpression
of a catalytically dead mutant of the histone methyltransferase EZH2. NIPP1 is
present in a complex with EED and EZH2 in vivo and has distinct binding sites for
these proteins. These data disclose an essential role for the PRC2 complex in the
transcriptional repression by NIPP1.

PMID: 17804093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Feb;214(2):295-300.

Importance of Ezh2 polycomb protein in tumorigenesis process interfering with the
pathway of growth suppressive key elements.

Tonini T(1), D'Andrilli G, Fucito A, Gaspa L, Bagella L.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

An understanding of the mechanisms that uncover the dynamic changes in the
distribution of the chromatin modifying enzymes and regulatory proteins on their 
target loci could provide further insight into the phenomenon of malignant
transformation. Based on the current available data, it seems more and more clear
that an abnormal expression of Ezh2, a member of the Polycomb group (PcG)
protein, may be involved in the tumorigenesis process, in addition, different
studies identify Ezh2 as a potential marker that distinguish aggressive prostate 
and breast cancer from indolent one. Recent investigation show that ectopic
expression of Ezh2 provides proliferative advantage to primary cells through
interaction with the pathways of key elements that control cell growth arrest and
differentiation, like members of the retinoblastoma (Rb) family. Here, we outline
how these pathways converge and we review the recent advances on the molecular
mechanisms that promote cell cycle progression through deregulation of Ezh2
protein level, providing novel links between cancer progression and chromatin
remodeling machineries.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17786943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Neurosci. 2007 Sep;26(5):1079-90.

Laser capture microdissection and microarray analysis of dividing neural
progenitor cells from the adult rat hippocampus.

Gurok U(1), Loebbert RW, Meyer AH, Mueller R, Schoemaker H, Gross G, Behl B.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Discovery Research, Abbott, Knollstrasse, 67061 Ludwigshafen,
Germany. ulf.gurok@abbott.com

Neural progenitor cells reside in the hippocampus of adult rodents and humans and
generate granule neurons throughout life. Knowledge about the molecular processes
regulating these neurogenic cells is fragmentary. In order to identify genes with
a role in the proliferation of adult neural progenitor cells, a protocol was
elaborated to enable the staining and isolation of such cells under
RNA-preserving conditions with a combination of immunohistochemistry and laser
capture microdissection. We increased proliferation of neural progenitor cells by
electroconvulsive treatment, one of the most effective antidepressant treatments,
and isolated Ki-67-positive cells using this new protocol. RNA amplification via 
in vitro transcription and subsequent microarray analysis revealed over 100 genes
that were differentially expressed in neural progenitor cells due to
electroconvulsive treatment compared to untreated control animals. Some of these 
genes have already been implicated in the functioning of neural progenitor cells 
or have been induced by electroconvulsive treatment; these include brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (Bdnf), PDZ-binding kinase (Pbk) and abnormal spindle-like
microcephaly-associated (Aspm). In addition, genes were identified for which no
role in the proliferation of neurogenic progenitors has been described so far,
such as enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2).

PMID: 17767487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 28;27(10):1449-60. Epub 2007 Sep 3.

The transcriptional repressor NIPP1 is an essential player in EZH2-mediated gene 
silencing.

Nuytten M(1), Beke L, Van Eynde A, Ceulemans H, Beullens M, Van Hummelen P, Fuks 
F, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling & Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.

EZH2 is a Polycomb group (PcG) protein that promotes the late-stage development
of cancer by silencing a specific set of genes, at least in part through
trimethylation of associated histone H3 on Lys 27 (H3K27). Nuclear inhibitor of
protein phosphatase-1 (NIPP1) is a ubiquitously expressed transcriptional
repressor that has binding sites for the EZH2 interactor EED. Here, we examine
the contribution of NIPP1 to EZH2-mediated gene silencing. Studies on
NIPP1-deficient cells disclose a widespread and essential role of NIPP1 in the
trimethylation of H3K27 by EZH2, not only in the onset of this trimethylation
during embryonic development, but also in the maintenance of this repressive mark
in proliferating cells. Consistent with this notion, EZH2 and NIPP1 silence a
common set of genes, as revealed by gene-expression profiling, and NIPP1 is
associated with established Polycomb target genes and with genomic regions that
are enriched in Polycomb targets. Furthermore, most NIPP1 target genes are
trimethylated on H3K27 and the knockdown of either NIPP1 or EZH2 is often
associated with a loss of this modification. Our data reveal that NIPP1 is
required for the global trimethylation of H3K27 and is implicated in gene
silencing by EZH2.

PMID: 17724462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2008 Mar;134(3):331-6. Epub 2007 Aug 11.

Expression of the polycomb group protein EZH2 and its relation to outcome in
patients with urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.

Hinz S(1), Kempkensteffen C, Christoph F, Hoffmann M, Krause H, Schrader M,
Schostak M, Miller K, Weikert S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charité Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12200 Berlin, Germany. stefan.hinz@charite.de

PURPOSE: The polycomb group protein Enhancer of Zeste Homolg 2 (EZH2), a
repressor of gene transcription, has been linked to the progression of various
malignancies. This study was done to examine a potential correlation of EZH2 mRNA
expression with clinicopathological parameters and outcome in patients with
urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the bladder.
METHODS: We determined the relative EZH2 gene expression by quantitative RT-PCR
in tumor specimens from a cohort of 100 patients with UC (mean follow-up 44.2
months). EZH2 expression levels were correlated to pathological tumor features
and outcome.
RESULTS: Enhancer of Zeste Homolg 2 was expressed in 90% of the tumor samples.
Expression levels increased in parallel with tumor stage (P = 0.002). High grade 
UC displayed significantly elevated EZH2 levels compared to low grade disease (P 
< 0.0001). High EZH2 expression was related to an abbreviated time to recurrence 
in muscle invasive carcinomas (pT >/= 2) (P = 0.028). No such correlation was
detected in the group of superficial tumors (pT </= 1) (P = 0.191). High EZH2
expression levels were associated with an increased risk of tumor related death
in the univariate analysis (relative risk, 3.1; P = 0.029). This association
became non-significant when the prognostic effect of tumor stage was considered
in a multivariate model.
CONCLUSIONS: Enhancer of Zeste Homolg 2 expression is related to an aggressive
tumor behavior but due to its strong association with pathological features, EZH2
levels do not provide independent prognostic information.

PMID: 17694325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Aug;177(1):51-4.

PRAME expression is not associated with down-regulation of retinoic acid
signaling in primary acute myeloid leukemia.

Steinbach D(1), Pfaffendorf N, Wittig S, Gruhn B.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital Ulm, Eythstrasse 24, Ulm 89075, Germany.
Daniel@Steinba.ch

The tumor antigen preferentially expressed antigen of melanoma (PRAME) is
frequently overexpressed in a wide variety of malignant diseases, including acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). It was recently shown that PRAME can function as a
repressor of retinoic acid signaling, as indicated by down-regulation of retinoic
acid receptor-beta (RARB) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A).
Another study suggested that PRAME can induce caspase-independent apoptosis via
down-regulation of heat shock 27-kDa protein 1 (HSPB1) and S100 calcium-binding
protein A4 (S100A4). The transcriptional repression of PRAME depends on the
formation of a complex with the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2). To test
whether these mechanisms play an important roll in AML, we analyzed the
expression of PRAME, EZH2, RARB, HSPB1, S100A4, and CDKN1A by real-time
polymerase chain reaction in primary leukemic cells from 52 children with AML.
All genes were expressed in many patients, but the level of expression of the
last four genes was not associated with either PRAME expression or PRAME and EZH2
co-expression. In conclusion, the above mechanisms do not seem to play a major
role in the pathogenesis of AML; they could be neutralized by other pathways that
affect the same targets.

PMID: 17693191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proteomics. 2007 Sep;7(17):3097-104.

Proteomic analysis of EZH2 downstream target proteins in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Chen Y(1), Lin MC, Wang H, Chan CY, Jiang L, Ngai SM, Yu J, He ML, Shaw PC, Yew
DT, Sung JJ, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Shatin, Hong Kong.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is suggested to be a potential therapeutic
target and a diagnostic marker for cancer. Our previous study also showed the
critical role of EZH2 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumorigenesis. The
present study is aimed at revealing the comprehensive downstream pathways of EZH2
by functional proteomic profiling. Lentivirus mediated RNA interference (RNAi)
was employed to knockdown EZH2 in HCC cells. The 2-DE was employed to compare the
expression profile difference between parental and EZH2-knockdown HCC cells. In
total, 28 spots were differentially expressed during EZH2 inhibition. Among all, 
18 proteins were identified by PMF with MALDI-TOF MS. Western blotting further
validated upregulation of 60S acidic ribosomal protein P0 (L10E), and
downregulation of two proteins with EZH2 inhibition: stathmin1 and probable
protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) ER-60 precursor (ERp57). Moreover, L10E was
downregulated with overexpression of EZH2 in hepatocytes, and L10E reversed the
effect of EZH2 on cell proliferation, suggesting it a downstream target of EZH2. 
The comprehensive and comparative analyses of proteins associated with EZH2 could
further our understanding on the downstream signal cascade of EZH2 leading to
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17676662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Cutan Pathol. 2007 Aug;34(8):597-600.

Expression of polycomb group protein EZH2 in nevi and melanoma.

McHugh JB(1), Fullen DR, Ma L, Kleer CG, Su LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, 1301 Catherine Road, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), a polycomb group protein that
regulates the cell cycle, has recently been implicated in the progression of
several human cancers. We sought to determine the pattern of EZH2 expression in
benign and malignant melanocytic tumors to see if EZH2 might play a role in
melanoma pathogenesis and progression.
METHODS: We identified and reviewed 11 compound nevi, 13 dysplastic nevi, 13
Spitz nevi, 9 in situ melanomas, 10 non-metastatic invasive melanomas and 19
melanomas metastatic to lymph nodes from the University of Michigan pathology
archives. Sections immunostained with anti-EZH2 antibody were scored
independently and blindly for staining intensity on a scale of 1-4 by three
dermatopathologists. Results were analyzed and compared statistically.
RESULTS: We observed an incremental increase in EZH2 expression from benign nevi 
to melanoma: scores of 1.18 and 1.08 for ordinary and dysplastic nevi, 1.7 and
1.78 for Spitz nevi and in situ melanoma, and 1.9 and 3.0 for invasive and
metastatic melanoma, respectively. EZH2 expression for metastatic melanoma was
significantly higher compared with invasive and in situ melanoma and benign nevi 
(p < or = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 protein levels increase incrementally from benign nevi to
melanoma, which suggests that EZH2 may play a role in the pathogenesis and
progression of melanoma.

PMID: 17640228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Hepatology. 2007 Jul;46(1):200-8.

Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference targeting enhancer of zeste homolog 2
inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma growth through down-regulation of stathmin.

Chen Y(1), Lin MC, Yao H, Wang H, Zhang AQ, Yu J, Hui CK, Lau GK, He ML, Sung J, 
Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Stanley Ho Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Hong Kong, China.

Erratum in
    Hepatology. 2007 Oct;46(4):1314.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) has been shown to be overexpressed in
hepatocellular (HCC). We investigated the potential role of EZH2 in HCC
tumorigenesis and examined the usefulness of RNA interference (RNAi) targeting
EZH2 as a form of HCC treatment. Lentivirus-mediated RNAi was employed to
knock-down EZH2 expression in human hepatoma cells to study the function of EZH2 
in tumorigenesis and evaluate the treatment efficacy. Lentivirus-mediated RNAi
effectively reduced EZH2 expression. Suppression of EZH2 in HCC cells
significantly reduced their growth rate in vitro and markedly diminished their
tumorigenicity in vivo. Moreover, in a mice model of established large-sized HCC,
we showed that intratumor injection of lentiviral (Lenti)-shRNA (short hairpin
RNA) or siRNA (small interfering RNA) targeting EZH2 produced significant tumor
regression. To understand its molecular mechanism of action, we employed
proteomic profiling technique and found that stathmin 1 is the downstream target 
of EZH2, as Lenti-shEZH2 treatment decreased stathmin protein expression, and
ectopic overexpression of stathmin prevented Lenti-shEZH2 mediated tumor growth
inhibition.CONCLUSION: Results from our study suggested for the first time that
EZH2 plays a key role in HCC tumorigenesis, and is a novel therapeutic target for
HCC.

PMID: 17596871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;9(7):804-12. Epub 2007 Jun 24.

NUP98-NSD1 links H3K36 methylation to Hox-A gene activation and leukaemogenesis.

Wang GG(1), Cai L, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) prototype is a family of
mammalian histone methyltransferases (NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, NSD3/WHSC1L1) that 
are essential in development and are mutated in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), overgrowth syndromes, multiple myeloma and lung cancers. In AML, the
recurring t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) translocation fuses NSD1 to nucleoporin-98 (NUP98). 
Here, we present the first characterization of the transforming properties and
molecular mechanisms of NUP98-NSD1. We demonstrate that NUP98-NSD1 induces AML in
vivo, sustains self-renewal of myeloid stem cells in vitro, and enforces
expression of the HoxA7, HoxA9, HoxA10 and Meis1 proto-oncogenes.
Mechanistically, NUP98-NSD1 binds genomic elements adjacent to HoxA7 and HoxA9,
maintains histone H3 Lys 36 (H3K36) methylation and histone acetylation, and
prevents EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression of the Hox-A locus during
differentiation. Deletion of the NUP98 FG-repeat domain, or mutations in NSD1
that inactivate the H3K36 methyltransferase activity or that prevent binding of
NUP98-NSD1 to the Hox-A locus precluded both Hox-A gene activation and myeloid
progenitor immortalization. We propose that NUP98-NSD1 prevents EZH2-mediated
repression of Hox-A locus genes by colocalizing H3K36 methylation and histone
acetylation at regulatory DNA elements. This report is the first to link
deregulated H3K36 methylation to tumorigenesis and to link NSD1 to
transcriptional regulation of the Hox-A locus.

PMID: 17589499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Cells Tissues Organs. 2007;185(1-3):162-74.

Chromatin structure regulation in transforming growth factor-beta-directed
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Blumenberg M(1), Gao S, Dickman K, Grollman AP, Bottinger EP, Zavadil J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10016, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions (EMTs) occur in organogenesis throughout
embryonic development and are recapitulated during epithelial tissue injury and
in carcinoma progression. EMTs are regulated by complex, precisely orchestrated
cell signaling and gene expression networks, with the participation of key
developmental pathways. Here we review context-dependent modules of gene
regulation by hairy/enhancer-of-split-related (H/E(spl)) repressors downstream of
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)/Smad and Notch signals in EMT and in
other phenotype transitions such as differentiation and cancer. Based on multiple
models of disease-related EMT, we propose that Polycomb group epigenetic
silencers and histone-lysine methyl-transferases EZH1 and EZH2 are candidate
targets of H/E(spl)-mediated transcriptional repression, in a process accompanied
by replacement of modified core histone H3 with de novo synthesized histone
variant H3.3B. Finally, we discuss the potential significance of this scenario
for EMT in the light of recent findings on gene regulation by histone
modifications and chromatin structure changes.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 17587822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Hepatol Res. 2007 Nov;37(11):974-83. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Alterations of DNA methylation and histone modifications contribute to gene
silencing in hepatocellular carcinomas.

Kondo Y(1), Shen L, Suzuki S, Kurokawa T, Masuko K, Tanaka Y, Kato H, Mizuno Y,
Yokoe M, Sugauchi F, Hirashima N, Orito E, Osada H, Ueda R, Guo Y, Chen X, Issa
JP, Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Aichi,
Japan.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to examine DNA methylation and histone
modification changes in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC).
METHODS: DNA methylation in the P16, RASSF1a, progesterone receptor (PGR) and
estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) promoters was determined by quantitative
bisulfite-pyrosequencing technique in HCC patients. Histone H3-lysine (K) 4,
H3-K9 and H3-K27 modifications in all these four genes were examined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay in HCC cell lines. Expression of two DNA
methyltransferases (DNMT1 and DNMT3b) and three histone methyltransferases
(SUV39H1, G9a and EZH2) in HCC patients was measured by real-time polymerase
chain reaction.
RESULTS: Aberrant DNA methylation was detected in all the HCC. Patients with DNA 
methylation in the RASSF1a, PGR andERalpha promoters in cancers also had
substantial DNA methylation in their non-cancerous liver tissues, whereas DNA
methylation in the P16 promoter was cancer specific. Epigenetic states in HCC
cell lines showed that silencing of P16 and RASSF1a depended on DNA methylation
and histone H3-K9 methylation. However, silencing of the PGR and ERalpha genes
was more closely related to H3-K27 methylation rather than DNA methylation.
Consistent with the alteration of histone status, higher expression of G9a and
EZH2 was found in HCC than in non-cancerous liver tissues (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that multiple epigenetic silencing mechanisms are 
inappropriately active in HCC cells.

PMID: 17584191  [PubMed]


305. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Jul 1;25(19):2770-7. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Quantitative gene expression deregulation in mantle-cell lymphoma: correlation
with clinical and biologic factors.

Kienle D(1), Katzenberger T, Ott G, Saupe D, Benner A, Kohlhammer H, Barth TF,
Höller S, Kalla J, Rosenwald A, Müller-Hermelink HK, Möller P, Lichter P, Döhner 
H, Stilgenbauer S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

PURPOSE: There is evidence for a direct role of quantitative gene expression
deregulation in mantle-cell lymphoma (MCL) pathogenesis. Our aim was to
investigate gene expression associations with other pathogenic factors and the
significance of gene expression in a multivariate survival analysis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Quantitative expression of 20 genes of potential relevance 
for MCL prognosis and pathogenesis were analyzed using real-time reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and correlated with clinical and genetic 
factors, tumor morphology, and Ki-67 index in 65 MCL samples.
RESULTS: Genomic losses at the loci of TP53, RB1, and P16 were associated with
reduced transcript levels of the respective genes, indicating a gene-dosage
effect as the pathomechanism. Analysis of gene expression correlations between
the candidate genes revealed a separation into two clusters, one dominated by
proliferation activators, another by proliferation inhibitors and regulators of
apoptosis. Whereas only weak associations were identified between gene expression
and clinical parameters or blastoid morphology, several genes were correlated
closely with the Ki-67 index, including the short CCND1 variant (positive
correlation) and RB1, ATM, P27, and BMI (negative correlation). In multivariate
survival analysis, expression levels of MYC, MDM2, EZH2, and CCND1 were the
strongest prognostic factors independently of tumor proliferation and clinical
factors.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a pathogenic contribution of several gene
transcript levels to the biology and clinical course of MCL. Genes can be
differentiated into factors contributing to proliferation deregulation, either by
enhancement or loss of inhibition, and proliferation-independent factors
potentially contributing to MCL pathogenesis by apoptosis impairment.

PMID: 17563396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Res. 2007 Jun 1;67(11):5097-102.

DNA methylation and complete transcriptional silencing of cancer genes persist
after depletion of EZH2.

McGarvey KM(1), Greene E, Fahrner JA, Jenuwein T, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Recent work suggests a link between the polycomb group protein EZH2 and mediation
of gene silencing in association with maintenance of DNA methylation. However, we
show that whereas basally expressed target cancer genes with minimal DNA
methylation have increased transcription during EZH2 knockdown, densely DNA
hypermethylated and silenced genes retain their methylation and remain
transcriptionally silent. These results suggest that EZH2 can modulate
transcription of basally expressed genes but not silent genes that are densely
DNA methylated.

PMID: 17545586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Tumour Biol. 2007;28(3):151-7. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

EZH2 polycomb transcriptional repressor expression correlates with methylation of
the APAF-1 gene in superficial transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.

Hinz S(1), Kempkensteffen C, Weikert S, Schostak M, Schrader M, Miller K,
Christoph F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Charité - Universitatsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Berlin, Germany.

The EZH2 gene controls methylation of various EZH2 target promoters. The APAF-1, 
DAPK-1 und IGFBP-3 genes are frequently methylated in bladder cancer, and
methylation of these genes is found in more aggressive tumor types. The aim of
our study was to investigate a potential link between EZH2 mRNA expression and
the extent of APAF-1, DAPK-1 and IGFBP-3 methylation in urothelial transitional
cell carcinoma (TCC) and to correlate the data with histopathological parameters 
and follow-up data. EZH2 mRNA expression was measured by real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, and the methylation analysis was
performed using methylation-specific real-time polymerase chain reaction. Tissue 
specimens were obtained from 35 patients with TCC. EZH2 mRNA expression was
detected in all tumor specimens investigated. The EZH2 expression levels
correlated well with the differentiation grade of the tumor specimens (p = 0.03),
and the APAF-1 methylation correlated with tumor stage (p = 0.0001) and grade (p 
= 0.004). Matched pair analysis demonstrated a statistically significant
correlation between elevated EZH2 mRNA expression and higher methylation levels
of APAF-1 in superficial (p = 0.024) and well- differentiated (p = 0.04) TCC. In 
patients with recurrent TCC, APAF-1 and IGFBP-3 methylation levels were
significantly higher (p = 0.03 and p = 0.01, respectively), which was not
observed when EZH2 mRNA expression or DAPK-1 methylation levels were related to
the clinical outcome. In conclusion, our data show that EZH2 expression and
APAF-1 methylation are related to tumor progression and invasiveness. Moreover,
these data present first evidence that APAF-1 methylation is related to
transcriptional activity of EZH2 expression in early-stage tumor disease of the
bladder.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17541304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Stem Cells. 2007 Sep;25(9):2191-9. Epub 2007 May 24.

High histone acetylation and decreased polycomb repressive complex 2 member
levels regulate gene specific transcriptional changes during early embryonic stem
cell differentiation induced by retinoic acid.

Lee ER(1), Murdoch FE, Fritsch MK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

Histone modifications play a crucial role during embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation. During differentiation, binding of polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), which mediates trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (K27me3), is
lost on developmental genes that are transcriptionally induced. We observed a
global decrease in K27me3 in as little as 3 days after differentiation of mouse
ES cells induced by retinoic acid (RA) treatment. The global levels of the
histone K27 methyltransferase EZH2 also decreased with RA treatment. A loss of
EZH2 binding and K27me3 was observed locally on PRC2 target genes induced after 3
days of RA, including Nestin. In contrast, direct RA-responsive genes that are
rapidly induced, such as Hoxa1, showed a loss of EZH2 binding and K27me3 after
only a few hours of RA treatment. Following differentiation induced by leukemia
inhibitor factor (LIF) withdrawal without RA, Hoxa1 was not transcriptionally
activated. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 resulted in loss of
K27me3 during LIF withdrawal, but the Hoxa1 gene remained transcriptionally
silent after loss of this repressive mark. Induction of histone hyperacetylation 
overrode the repressive K27me3 modification and resulted in Hoxa1 gene
expression. Together, these data show that there are multiple temporal phases of 
derepression of PRC2 target genes during ES cell differentiation and that other
epigenetic marks (specifically, increased acetylation of histones H3 and H4), in 
addition to derepression, are important for gene-specific transcriptional
activation. This report demonstrates the temporal interplay of various epigenetic
changes in regulating gene expression during early ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17525233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(14):5105-19. Epub 2007 May 14.

Integration of estrogen and Wnt signaling circuits by the polycomb group protein 
EZH2 in breast cancer cells.

Shi B(1), Liang J, Yang X, Wang Y, Zhao Y, Wu H, Sun L, Zhang Y, Chen Y, Li R,
Zhang Y, Hong M, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100083, China.

Essential for embryonic development, the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in breast and prostate cancers and is
implicated in the growth and aggression of the tumors. The tumorigenic mechanism 
underlying EZH2 overexpression is largely unknown. It is believed that EZH2
exerts its biological activity as a transcription repressor. However, we report
here that EZH2 functions in gene transcriptional activation in breast cancer
cells. We show that EZH2 transactivates genes that are commonly targeted by
estrogen and Wnt signaling pathways. We demonstrated that EZH2 physically
interacts directly with estrogen receptor alpha and beta-catenin, thus connecting
the estrogen and Wnt signaling circuitries, functionally enhances gene
transactivation by estrogen and Wnt pathways, and phenotypically promotes cell
cycle progression. In addition, we identified the transactivation activity of
EZH2 in its two N-terminal domains and demonstrated that these structures serve
as platforms to connect transcription factors and the Mediator complex. Our
experiments indicated that EZH2 is a dual function transcription regulator with a
dynamic activity, and we provide a mechanism for EZH2 in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC1951944
PMID: 17502350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Front Biosci. 2007 May 1;12:3287-301.

Chromosomal aberrations in prostate cancer.

Saramaki O(1), Visakorpi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere, and
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Prostate cancer incidence is steadily increasing in Western industrialized
countries where it has become the most common male malignancy and second most
common cause of cancer death among men. Despite efforts to understand the
mechanisms of prostate cancer development and progression, the reasons for the
disease remain unclear. Although recurrent DNA copy number aberrations in
prostate cancer have been well documented in the past 15 years, most of the
target genes for these aberrations remain to be identified. The most common DNA
copy number aberrations are losses in chromosomes 5q, 6q, 8p, 10q, 13q, 16q, 17p,
and 18q, and gains in 7p/q, 8q, 9p, and Xq. In addition, a chromosomal
rearrangement in 21q has been observed in over 50% of prostate cancers. The
target genes for two common chromosomal aberrations have been identified: the
androgen receptor (AR) gene at Xq12, and TMPRSS2 and ERG at 21q. Putative target 
genes for other copy number aberrations include: NKX3-1 (8p loss), PTEN and MXI1 
(10q loss), FOXO1A (13q loss), CDH1 and ATBF1 (16q loss), MCM7 and EZH2 (7q
gain), TCEB1, EIF3S3 and MYC (8q gain). The identification of target genes for
the chromosomal aberrations will provide new prognostic markers and therapeutic
targets for future drug development.

PMID: 17485299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Jan;107(2):235-42. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

EZH2 regulates the transcription of estrogen-responsive genes through association
with REA, an estrogen receptor corepressor.

Hwang C(1), Giri VN, Wilkinson JC, Wright CW, Wilkinson AS, Cooney KA, Duckett
CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-0602, USA.

Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase polycomb group 
(PcG) protein, which has been implicated in the process of cellular
differentiation and cancer progression for both breast and prostate cancer.
Although transcriptional repression by histone modification appears to contribute
to the process of cellular differentiation, it is unclear what mediates the
specificity of PcG proteins. Since EZH2 requires a binding partner for its
histone methyltransferase activity, we surmised that evaluating interacting
proteins might shed light on how the activity of EZH2 is regulated. Here we
describe the identification of a novel binding partner of EZH2, the repressor of 
estrogen receptor activity (REA). REA functions as a transcriptional corepressor 
of the estrogen receptor and can potentiate the effect of anti-estrogens. REA
expression levels have also previously been associated with the degree of
differentiation of human breast cancers. We show here that EZH2 can also mediate 
the repression of estrogen-dependent transcription, and that moreover, the
ability of both REA and EZH2 to repress estrogen-dependent transcription are
mutually dependent. These data suggest that EZH2 may be recruited to specific
target genes by its interaction with the estrogen receptor corepressor REA. The
identification of a novel interaction between EZH2 and REA, two transcription
factors that have been linked to breast cancer carcinogenesis, may lead to
further insights into the process of deregulated gene expression in breast
cancer.

PMID: 17453341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Genes Dev. 2007 May 1;21(9):1050-63. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Pharmacologic disruption of Polycomb-repressive complex 2-mediated gene
repression selectively induces apoptosis in cancer cells.

Tan J(1), Yang X, Zhuang L, Jiang X, Chen W, Lee PL, Karuturi RK, Tan PB, Liu ET,
Yu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672, Singapore.

Polycomb-repressive complex 2 (PRC2)-mediated histone methylation plays an
important role in aberrant cancer gene silencing and is a potential target for
cancer therapy. Here we show that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-Deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) induces efficient apoptotic cell death in cancer
cells but not in normal cells. We found that DZNep effectively depleted cellular 
levels of PRC2 components EZH2, SUZ12, and EED and inhibited associated histone
H3 Lys 27 methylation (but not H3 Lys 9 methylation). By integrating RNA
interference (RNAi), genome-wide expression analysis, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies, we have identified a prominent set of genes
selectively repressed by PRC2 in breast cancer that can be reactivated by DZNep. 
We further demonstrate that the preferential reactivation of a set of these genes
by DZNep, including a novel apoptosis affector, FBXO32, contributes to
DZNep-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Our results demonstrate the
unique feature of DZNep as a novel chromatin remodeling compound and suggest that
pharmacologic reversal of PRC2-mediated gene repression by DZNep may constitute a
novel approach for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC1855231
PMID: 17437993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Chromosome Res. 2007;15(3):299-314. Epub 2007 May 10.

The polycomb group protein SUZ12 regulates histone H3 lysine 9 methylation and
HP1 alpha distribution.

de la Cruz CC(1), Kirmizis A, Simon MD, Isono K, Koseki H, Panning B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Regulation of histone methylation is critical for proper gene expression and
chromosome function. Suppressor of Zeste 12 (SUZ12) is a requisite member of the 
EED/EZH2 histone methyltransferase complexes, and is required for full activity
of these complexes in vitro. In mammals and flies, SUZ12/Su(z)12 is necessary for
trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) on facultative
heterochromatin. However, Su(z)12 is unique among Polycomb Group Proteins in that
Su(z)12 mutant flies exhibit gross defects in position effect variegation,
suggesting a role for Su(z)12 in constitutive heterochromatin formation. We
investigated the role of Suz12 in constitutive heterochromatin and discovered
that Suz12 is required for histone H3 lysine 9 tri-methylation (H3K9me3) in
differentiated but not undifferentiated mouse embryonic stem cells. Knockdown of 
SUZ12 in human cells caused a reduction in H3K27me3 and H3K9me3, and altered the 
distribution of HP1 alpha. In contrast, EZH2 knockdown caused loss of H3K27me3
but not H3K9me3, indicating that SUZ12 regulates H3-K9 methylation in an
EZH2-independent fashion. This work uncovers a role for SUZ12 in H3-K9
methylation.

PMID: 17406994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Genes Dev. 2007 Mar 1;21(5):525-30.

The Polycomb group proteins bind throughout the INK4A-ARF locus and are
disassociated in senescent cells.

Bracken AP(1), Kleine-Kohlbrecher D, Dietrich N, Pasini D, Gargiulo G, Beekman C,
Theilgaard-Mönch K, Minucci S, Porse BT, Marine JC, Hansen KH, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epigenetics, Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC),
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen 2200, Denmark. adrian.bracken@bric.dk

The p16INK4A and p14ARF proteins, encoded by the INK4A-ARF locus, are key
regulators of cellular senescence, yet the mechanisms triggering their
up-regulation are not well understood. Here, we show that the ability of the
oncogene BMI1 to repress the INK4A-ARF locus requires its direct association and 
is dependent on the continued presence of the EZH2-containing Polycomb-Repressive
Complex 2 (PRC2) complex. Significantly, EZH2 is down-regulated in stressed and
senescing populations of cells, coinciding with decreased levels of associated
H3K27me3, displacement of BMI1, and activation of transcription. These results
provide a model for how the INK4A-ARF locus is activated and how Polycombs
contribute to cancer.

PMCID: PMC1820894
PMID: 17344414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(10):3769-79. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

The polycomb group protein Suz12 is required for embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Pasini D(1), Bracken AP, Hansen JB, Capillo M, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Epigenetics and BRIC, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 
2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form multiprotein complexes, called Polycomb
repressive complexes (PRCs). PRC2 contains the PcG proteins EZH2, SUZ12, and EED 
and represses transcription through methylation of lysine (K) 27 of histone H3
(H3). Suz12 is essential for PRC2 activity and its inactivation results in early 
lethality of mouse embryos. Here, we demonstrate that Suz12(-/-) mouse embryonic 
stem (ES) cells can be established and expanded in tissue culture. The Suz12(-/-)
ES cells are characterized by global loss of H3K27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and 
higher expression levels of differentiation-specific genes. Moreover, Suz12(-/-) 
ES cells are impaired in proper differentiation, resulting in a lack of
repression of ES cell markers as well as activation of differentiation-specific
genes. Finally, we demonstrate that the PcGs are actively recruited to several
genes during ES cell differentiation, which despite an increase in H3K27me3
levels is not always sufficient to prevent transcriptional activation. In
summary, we demonstrate that Suz12 is required for the establishment of specific 
expression programs required for ES cell differentiation. Furthermore, we provide
evidence that PcGs have different mechanisms to regulate transcription during
cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1899991
PMID: 17339329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:233-9. Epub 2007 Mar 1.

Epigenetic control of hematopoietic stem cell aging the case of Ezh2.

De Haan G(1), Gerrits A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV
Groningen, the Netherlands. g.de.haan@med.umcg.nl

Hematopoietic stem cells have potent, but not unlimited, selfrenewal potential.
The mechanisms that restrict selfrenewal are likely to play a role during aging. 
Recent data suggest that the regulation of histone modifications by Polycomb
group genes may be of crucial relevance to balance selfrenewal and aging. We
provide evidence for the involvement of one of these Polycomb group genes, Ezh2, 
in aging of the hematopoietic stem cell system.

PMID: 17332078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;67(4):1757-68.

Gene alterations identified by expression profiling in tumor-associated
endothelial cells from invasive ovarian carcinoma.

Lu C(1), Bonome T, Li Y, Kamat AA, Han LY, Schmandt R, Coleman RL, Gershenson DM,
Jaffe RB, Birrer MJ, Sood AK.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gynecologic Oncology and Cancer Biology, University of Texas M.
D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Therapeutic strategies based on antiangiogenic approaches are beginning to show
great promise in clinical studies. However, full realization of these approaches 
requires identification of key differences in gene expression between endothelial
cells from tumors versus their normal counterparts. Here, we examined gene
expression differences in purified endothelial cells from 10 invasive epithelial 
ovarian cancers and 5 normal ovaries using Affymetrix U133 Plus 2.0 microarrays. 
More than 400 differentially expressed genes were identified in tumor-associated 
endothelial cells. We selected and validated 23 genes that were overexpressed by 
3.6- to 168-fold using real-time reverse transcription-PCR and/or
immunohistochemistry. Among these, the polycomb group protein enhancer of Zeste
homologue 2 (EZH2), the Notch ligand Jagged1, and PTK2 were elevated 3- to
4.3-fold in tumor-associated endothelial cells. Silencing these genes
individually with small interfering RNA blocked endothelial cell migration and
tube formation in vitro. The present study shows that tumor and normal
endothelium differ at the molecular level, which may have significant
implications for the development of antiangiogenic therapies.

PMID: 17308118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Urol. 2007 Mar;177(3):1157-62.

Identification of target antigens in specific immunotherapy for renal cell
carcinoma.

Komohara Y(1), Harada M, Arima Y, Suekane S, Noguchi M, Yamada A, Itoh K,
Matsuoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Vaccine Development Division, Kurume University Research Center for
Innovative Cancer Therapy, Kurume University, Fukuoka, Japan.

PURPOSE: Effective immunotherapy against renal cell carcinoma has not yet been
established despite recent advances in specific immunotherapy for various
malignancies. A plausible reason is limited information about target antigens of 
renal cell carcinoma. We searched for useful cancer antigens applicable to
immunotherapy for renal cell carcinoma by examining antigen expression in renal
cell carcinoma cell lines and testing the ability to induce renal cell carcinoma 
reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: mRNA expression of a panel of cancer associated antigens
was examined using 5 renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Thereafter antigen derived 
peptides reported to induce cancer reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes from human
leukocyte antigen-A24+ patients with cancer were examined for their potential to 
induce cytotoxic T lymphocytes from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of human
leukocyte antigen-A24+ patients with renal cell carcinoma.
RESULTS: Three candidate antigens, including multidrug resistance-associated
protein 3, polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 and Her2/neu,
were expressed in all 5 renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Six peptides derived
from these antigens, including multidrug resistance-associated protein
3(503-511), multidrug resistance-associated protein 3(1293-1302), polycomb group 
protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2(291-299), polycomb group protein enhancer
of zeste homologue 2(735-743), Her2/neu342-350 and Her2/neu485-493, efficiently
induced peptide specific and renal cell carcinoma reactive cytotoxic T
lymphocytes from human leukocyte antigen-A24+ patients with renal cell carcinoma.
Blocking and cold inhibition assays revealed that cytotoxicity against renal cell
carcinoma depended on human leukocyte antigen class I restricted and peptide
specific CD8+ T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This information could facilitate the development of effective
immunotherapy against renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 17296437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9962-72. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Developmental regulation of Eed complex composition governs a switch in global
histone modification in brain.

Kim SY(1), Levenson JM, Korsmeyer S, Sweatt JD, Schumacher A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Originally discovered as epigenetic regulators of developmental gene expression, 
the Polycomb (PcG) and trithorax (trxG) group of proteins form distinct nuclear
complexes governing post-translational modification of histone tails. This study 
identified a novel, developmentally regulated interface between Eed and Mll,
pivotal constituents of PcG and trxG pathways, respectively, in mouse brain.
Although the PcG proteins Eed and EzH2 (Enhancer of Zeste protein-2) engaged in a
common complex during neurodevelopment, Eed associated with the trxG protein Mll 
upon brain maturation. Comprehensive analysis of multiple histone modifications
revealed differential substrate specificity of the novel Eed-Mll complex in adult
brain compared with the developmental Eed-EzH2 complex. Newborn brain from eed
heterozygotes and eed;Mll double heterozygotes exhibited decreased trimethylation
at lysine 27 of histone H3, as well as hyperacetylation of histone H4. In
contrast, adult hippocampus from Mll heterozygotes was remarkable for decreased
acetylation of histone H4, which restored to wild-type levels in eed;Mll double
heterozygotes. A physiological role for the Eed-Mll complex in adult brain was
evident from complementary defects in synaptic plasticity in eed and Mll mutant
hippocampi. These results support the notion that developmental regulation of
complex composition bestows the predominant Eed complex with the chromatin
remodeling activity conducive for gene regulation during neurodevelopment and
adult brain function. Thus, this study suggests dynamic regulation of chromatin
complex composition as a molecular mechanism to co-opt constituents of
developmental pathways into the regulation of neuronal memory formation in adult 
brain.

PMID: 17259173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Prostate. 2007 Apr 1;67(5):547-56.

EZH2 promotes proliferation and invasiveness of prostate cancer cells.

Bryant RJ(1), Cross NA, Eaton CL, Hamdy FC, Cunliffe VT.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre Development for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University
of Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: The transcriptional repressor EZH2 is implicated in control of cell
proliferation in embryonic, immortalized and transformed cells. EZH2 expression
in prostate cancer correlates with progression to hormone-refractory and
metastatic disease, but it is unknown whether EZH2 plays a specific role in the
acquisition of an advanced prostate cancer phenotype.
METHODS: Using siRNA knockdown, we investigated the role of EZH2 in maintenance
of prostate cancer cell proliferation and invasiveness. Using LNCaP cells with
inducible EZH2 overexpression, we investigated whether EZH2 upregulation promotes
an aggressive phenotype.
RESULTS: Knockdown of endogenous EZH2 reduced proliferation of
androgen-responsive and androgen-independent prostate cancer cells. EZH2
knockdown also inhibited prostate cancer cell invasion. However, overexpression
of EZH2 in androgen-responsive cancer cells did not appreciably affect either
proliferation or invasiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 promotes proliferation and invasion of prostate cancer cells,
which can account for the correlation between EZH2 expression levels and an
adverse prostate cancer prognosis.

PMID: 17252556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Oncogene. 2007 Jul 5;26(31):4590-5. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

The gene encoding the prostatic tumor suppressor PSP94 is a target for repression
by the Polycomb group protein EZH2.

Beke L(1), Nuytten M, Van Eynde A, Beullens M, Bollen M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosignaling & Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium.

PSP94, for prostatic secretory protein of 94 amino acids, is secreted by the
prostate gland and functions as a suppressor of tumor growth and metastasis. The 
expression of PSP94 is lost in advanced, hormone-refractory prostate cancer and
this correlates with an increased expression of the Polycomb protein EZH2
(enhancer of zeste homolog 2), which represses transcription via trimethylation
of histone H3 on Lys27 (H3K27). We show here that these events are causally
related and that the MSMB gene, which encodes PSP94, is trimethylated on H3K27 in
androgen-refractory, but not in androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed an association of EZH2 with
the MSMB gene. The RNAi-mediated knockdown of EZH2 resulted in a loss of H3K27
trimethylation and an increased expression of the MSMB gene. Conversely, the
overexpression of EZH2 was associated with a decreased expression of the MSMB
gene. We also demonstrate that MSMB is additionally repressed in
androgen-refractory prostate cancer cells by the hypoacetylation of histone H3K9 
and the hypermethylation of a CpG island in the promoter region. Our data
disclose a hitherto unexplored link between the putative oncogene EZH2 and the
tumor suppressor PSP94, and show that MSMB is silenced by EZH2 in advanced
prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 17237810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Genes Dev. 2007 Jan 1;21(1):49-54.

pRB family proteins are required for H3K27 trimethylation and Polycomb repression
complexes binding to and silencing p16INK4alpha tumor suppressor gene.

Kotake Y(1), Cao R, Viatour P, Sage J, Zhang Y, Xiong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Program in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genetic studies have demonstrated that Bmi1 promotes cell proliferation and stem 
cell self-renewal with a correlative decrease of p16(INK4a) expression. Here, we 
demonstrate that Polycomb genes EZH2 and BMI1 repress p16 expression in human and
mouse primary cells, but not in cells deficient for pRB protein function. The p16
locus is H3K27-methylated and bound by BMI1, RING2, and SUZ12. Inactivation of
pRB family proteins abolishes H3K27 methylation and disrupts BMI1, RING2, and
SUZ12 binding to the p16 locus. These results suggest a model in which pRB
proteins recruit PRC2 to trimethylate p16, priming the BMI1-containing PRC1L
ubiquitin ligase complex to silence p16.

PMCID: PMC1759899
PMID: 17210787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nat Genet. 2007 Feb;39(2):232-6. Epub 2006 Dec 31.

Polycomb-mediated methylation on Lys27 of histone H3 pre-marks genes for de novo 
methylation in cancer.

Schlesinger Y(1), Straussman R, Keshet I, Farkash S, Hecht M, Zimmerman J, Eden
E, Yakhini Z, Ben-Shushan E, Reubinoff BE, Bergman Y, Simon I, Cedar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew
University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Many genes associated with CpG islands undergo de novo methylation in cancer.
Studies have suggested that the pattern of this modification may be partially
determined by an instructive mechanism that recognizes specifically marked
regions of the genome. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, here we show
that genes methylated in cancer cells are specifically packaged with nucleosomes 
containing histone H3 trimethylated on Lys27. This chromatin mark is established 
on these unmethylated CpG island genes early in development and then maintained
in differentiated cell types by the presence of an EZH2-containing Polycomb
complex. In cancer cells, as opposed to normal cells, the presence of this
complex brings about the recruitment of DNA methyl transferases, leading to de
novo methylation. These results suggest that tumor-specific targeting of de novo 
methylation is pre-programmed by an established epigenetic system that normally
has a role in marking embryonic genes for repression.

PMID: 17200670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):3096-104.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors deplete enhancer of zeste 2 and associated
polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins in human acute leukemia cells.

Fiskus W(1), Pranpat M, Balasis M, Herger B, Rao R, Chinnaiyan A, Atadja P,
Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, 1120 15th Street, CN2101A, Augusta, 
GA 30912, USA.

Human enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) protein belongs to the multiprotein polycomb
repressive complex 2, which also includes suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and
embryonic ectoderm development (EED). The polycomb repressive complex 2 complex
possesses histone methyltransferase activity mediated by the Su(var)3-9, enhancer
of zeste, and trithorax domain of EZH2, which methylates histone H3 on lysine
(K)-27 (H3K27). In the present studies, we determined that treatment with the
hydroxamate histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 or LAQ824 depleted the protein
levels of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED in the cultured (K562, U937, and HL-60) and
primary human acute leukemia cells. This was associated with decreased levels of 
trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27, with concomitant depletion of the homeobox 
domain containing HOXA9 and of MEIS1 transcription factors. Knockdown of EZH2 by 
EZH2 small interfering RNA also depleted SUZ12 and EED, inhibited histone
methyltransferase activity, and reduced trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27
levels, with a concomitant loss of clonogenic survival of the cultured acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells. EZH2 small interfering RNA sensitized the AML
cells to LBH589-mediated depletion of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED; loss of clonogenic
survival; and LBH589-induced differentiation of the AML cells. These findings
support the rationale to test anti-EZH2 treatment combined with hydroxamate
histone deacetylase inhibitors as an antileukemia epigenetic therapy, especially 
against AML with coexpression of EZH2, HOXA9, and MEIS1 genes.

PMID: 17172412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur Urol. 2007 Aug;52(2):455-63. Epub 2006 Nov 17.

Polycomb-group oncogenes EZH2, BMI1, and RING1 are overexpressed in prostate
cancer with adverse pathologic and clinical features.

van Leenders GJ(1), Dukers D, Hessels D, van den Kieboom SW, Hulsbergen CA,
Witjes JA, Otte AP, Meijer CJ, Raaphorst FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
g.vanleenders@erasmusmc.nl

OBJECTIVES: Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are involved in maintenance of cell
identity and proliferation. The protein EZH2 is overexpressed in disseminated
prostate cancer, implicating a role of PcG complexes in tumor progression. In
this study, we evaluated the expression of eight members of both PcG complexes in
clinicopathologically defined prostate cancer.
METHODS: Components of both PcG protein complexes PRC2 (EZH2, EED, YY1) and PRC1 
(BMI1, RING1, HPH1, HPC1, HPC2) were immunohistochemically identified in tissue
microarrays of 114 prostate cancer patients. Protein expression was
semi-quantitatively scored and correlated with pathologic parameters and
recurrence of prostate-specific antigen (PSA).
RESULTS: Whereas BMI1, RING1, HPC1 and HPH1 were all abundantly present in normal
and malignant prostate epithelium, expression of EZH2 occurred in only <10% of
cells. Expression of EZH2, BMI1 and RING1 were all significantly enhanced in
tumours with Gleason score (GS) > or = 8, extraprostatic extension, positive
surgical margins, and PSA recurrence. When only the subgroup of GS < or = 6 was
considered, representing the tumour grade in the majority of needle biopsies,
EZH2 and BMI1 were also predictive for PSA recurrence. In a multivariable
analysis, BMI1 was the only PcG protein with an independent prognostic value.
CONCLUSIONS: PcG proteins EZH2, BMI1, and RING1 are associated with adverse
pathologic features and clinical PSA recurrence of prostate cancer. Whereas BMI1 
and RING1 are abundantly present in prostate cancer, EZH2 is expressed at
relatively low levels, making it a less obvious target for therapy.

PMID: 17134822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Mar;210(3):711-9.

Multiple binding of methyl-CpG and polycomb proteins in long-term gene silencing 
events.

Matarazzo MR(1), De Bonis ML, Strazzullo M, Cerase A, Ferraro M, Vastarelli P,
Ballestar E, Esteller M, Kudo S, D'Esposito M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati Traverso Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche, via Castellino, Naples, Italy.

Epigenetic regulation is involved in the maintenance of long-term silencing
phenomena, such as X-inactivation and genomic imprinting in mammals. Gene
repression is mediated by several mechanisms, such as histone modifications, DNA 
methylation, and recruitment of Polycomb proteins. To understand the mechanistic 
relationships between these mechanisms for stable gene silencing, we analyzed the
mechanisms of X- and Y-inactivation of the PAR2 gene SYBL1, previously showed to 
be regulated by concerted epigenetic mechanisms. Maintenance of stable repression
occurs via the recruitment of both MBDPs and PRC2 complexes to SYBL1 promoter.
Their binding is equally sensitive to defective DNA methylation seen in cells
derived from ICF syndrome patients. Multiple occupancy is a feature shared within
long-term repressed genes, such as the X-inactivated PGK1 and the imprinted IGF2.
MBD2, MBD3, and MeCP2 occupy SYBL1 promoter simultaneously, as revealed by
sequential ChIP. We did not find this co-occurring binding when looked for
members of PRC2 complex together with any of the methyl-binding proteins.
Furthermore, in co-transfection assays, MECP2 can silence methylated SYBL1
promoter, whereas the mutated protein fails. However, RNA interference of
endogenous MECP2 does not induce the expression of the inactive SYBL1 alleles,
suggesting that its silencing activity can be replaced by the other
methyl-binding proteins. Our data suggest that maintenance of long-term silencing
involves multiple layers of epigenetic control functionally redundant. PRC2 and
MBD proteins could collaborate to different phases of this process, the former
possibly recruiting DNMTs to the silenced promoters, the latter dictating the
lock of the transcription.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17133344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4957-68. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Juxtaposed Polycomb complexes co-regulate vertebral identity.

Kim SY(1), Paylor SW, Magnuson T, Schumacher A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Best known as epigenetic repressors of developmental Hox gene transcription,
Polycomb complexes alter chromatin structure by means of post-translational
modification of histone tails. Depending on the cellular context, Polycomb
complexes of diverse composition and function exhibit cooperative interaction or 
hierarchical interdependency at target loci. The present study interrogated the
genetic, biochemical and molecular interaction of BMI1 and EED, pivotal
constituents of heterologous Polycomb complexes, in the regulation of vertebral
identity during mouse development. Despite a significant overlap in
dosage-sensitive homeotic phenotypes and co-repression of a similar set of Hox
genes, genetic analysis implicated eed and Bmi1 in parallel pathways, which
converge at the level of Hox gene regulation. Whereas EED and BMI1 formed
separate biochemical entities with EzH2 and Ring1B, respectively, in
mid-gestation embryos, YY1 engaged in both Polycomb complexes. Strikingly,
methylated lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3-K27), a mediator of Polycomb complex
recruitment to target genes, stably associated with the EED complex during the
maintenance phase of Hox gene repression. Juxtaposed EED and BMI1 complexes,
along with YY1 and methylated H3-K27, were detected in upstream regulatory
regions of Hoxc8 and Hoxa5. The combined data suggest a model wherein epigenetic 
and genetic elements cooperatively recruit and retain juxtaposed Polycomb
complexes in mammalian Hox gene clusters toward co-regulation of vertebral
identity.

PMID: 17107999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Oncol. 2006 Dec;29(6):1555-60.

Anti-cancer vaccine candidates in specific immunotherapy for bladder carcinoma.

Komohara Y(1), Harada M, Arima Y, Suekane S, Noguchi M, Yamada A, Itoh K,
Matsuoka K.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Vaccine Development Division, Kurume University Research Center for
Innovative Cancer Therapy, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka 
830-0011, Japan. ycomo@med.kurume-u.ac.jp

We have previously identified numerous tumor-rejection antigens and their epitope
peptides having the potential to induce cancer-reactive cytotoxic T lymphocytes
(CTLs) in patients with various types of cancer. In the present study, we
attempted to determine which antigens and their peptides are useful in specific
immunotherapy for bladder carcinoma (BC) patients, especially those with human
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A24+ alleles. The mRNA expression of a panel of
cancer-associated antigens was examined regarding four BC cell lines. As a
result, three candidate antigens, including SART3, multidrug
resistance-associated protein 3 (MRP3), and polycomb group protein enhancer of
zeste homolog 2 (EZH2), were expressed in three of four BC cell lines.
Thereafter, antigen-derived peptides which we reported to induce cancer-reactive 
CTLs from HLA-A24+ patients with various types of cancer were examined for their 
potential to induce CTLs from peripheral-blood mononuclear cells of HLA-A24+ BC
patients. Among these antigen-derived six peptides, SART3109-118, MRP31293-1301, 
and EZH2735-742 peptides efficiently induced peptide-specific and BC
cell-reactive CTLs from HLA-A24+ BC patients. The cytotoxicity against BC cells
was dependent on peptide-specific CD8+ T cells. IgG reactive to the SART3109-118 
peptide was frequently detected in the plasma of BC patients. This information
could facilitate the development of effective peptide-based immunotherapy for
HLA-A24+ BC patients.

PMID: 17088996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Br J Cancer. 2006 Nov 6;95(9):1202-11. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

The polycomb group proteins, BMI-1 and EZH2, are tumour-associated antigens.

Steele JC(1), Torr EE, Noakes KL, Kalk E, Moss PA, Reynolds GM, Hubscher SG, van 
Lohuizen M, Adams DH, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, University of Birmingham,
Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. j.c.steele@bham.ac.uk

We used SEREX technology to identify novel tumour-associated antigens in patients
with primary hepatocellular carcinoma and found serological responses to the
polycomb group (PcG) protein BMI-1, which is overexpressed in a range of
different tumour types. Further studies identified T-cell responses to both BMI-1
and another PcG protein, EZH2, in cancer patients and at relatively lower levels 
in some normal donors. We next identified several CD8+ T-cell epitopes derived
from BMI-1 and EZH2 and demonstrated that EZH2-derived peptides elicited more
significant interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) release than BMI-1-derived peptides.
That CD8(+) T cells were responsible for the observed responses was confirmed for
EZH2 by both IFN-gamma capture assays and tetramer staining using an
HLA-A0201-restricted, EZH2-derived YMSCSFLFNL (aa 666-674) epitope. The ability
of YMSCSFLFNL (aa 666-674) to stimulate the in vitro expansion of specific T
cells from peripheral blood lymphocytes was greatly enhanced when the CD25(+)
T-cell population was depleted. EZH2-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte clones
specific for two HLA-A0201 epitopes were generated and found to recognise
endogenously processed EZH2 in both HLA-matched fibroblasts and tumour cell
lines. Given the widespread overexpression of PcG proteins in cancer and their
critical role in oncogenesis, these data suggest that they may be useful targets 
for cancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2360579
PMID: 17024127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9352-5.

Enhancer of Zeste 2 as a marker of preneoplastic progression in the breast.

Ding L(1), Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Amplification of the Polycomb group transcriptional repressor Enhancer of Zeste 2
(EZH2) occurs in various malignancies including breast cancer, where its
overexpression is associated with poor outcome. We found that EZH2 is
up-regulated in ductal carcinoma in situ, atypical ductal hyperplasia, and even
morphologically normal breast epithelial cells from women who have an increased
risk of breast cancer. This review discusses how EZH2 may promote neoplastic
conversion and it surveys the evidence suggesting that EZH2 may offer a clinical 
tool to help identify patients at risk for developing breast cancer before
precursor lesions are histologically evident.

PMID: 17018586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;210(1):183-91.

Immunohistochemical analysis of pRb2/p130, VEGF, EZH2, p53, p16(INK4A),
p27(KIP1), p21(WAF1), Ki-67 expression patterns in gastric cancer.

Mattioli E(1), Vogiatzi P, Sun A, Abbadessa G, Angeloni G, D'Ugo D, Trani D,
Gaughan JP, Vecchio FM, Cevenini G, Persiani R, Giordano A, Claudio PP.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.

Although the considerable progress against gastric cancer, it remains a complex
lethal disease defined by peculiar histological and molecular features. The
purpose of the present study was to investigate pRb2/p130, VEGF, EZH2, p53,
p16(INK4A), p27(KIP1), p21(WAF1), Ki-67 expressions, and analyze their possible
correlations with clinicopathological factors. The expression patterns were
examined by immunohistochemistry in 47 patients, 27 evaluated of intestinal-type,
and 20 of diffuse-type, with a mean follow up of 56 months and by Western blot in
AGS, N87, KATO-III, and YCC-2, -3, -16 gastric cell lines. Overall, stomach
cancer showed EZH2 correlated with high levels of p53, Ki-67, and cytoplasmic
pRb2/p130 (P < 0.05, and P < 0.01, respectively). Increased expression of EZH2
was found in the intestinal-type and correlated with the risk of distant
metastasis (P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively), demonstrating that this protein
may have a prognostic value in this type of cancer. Interestingly, a strong
inverse correlation was observed between p27(KIP1) expression levels and the risk
of advanced disease and metastasis (P < 0.05), and a positive correlation between
the expression levels of p21(WAF1) and low-grade (G1) gastric tumors (P < 0.05), 
confirming the traditionally accepted role for these tumor-suppressor genes in
gastric cancer. Finally, a direct correlation was found between the expression
levels of nuclear pRb2/p130 and low-grade (G1) gastric tumors that was
statistically significant (P < 0.05). Altogether, these data may help shed some
additional light on the pathogenetic mechanisms related to the two main gastric
cancer histotypes and their invasive potentials.

PMID: 16998811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cell Cycle. 2006 Aug;5(16):1886-901. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Essential role for activation of the Polycomb group (PcG) protein chromatin
silencing pathway in metastatic prostate cancer.

Berezovska OP(1), Glinskii AB, Yang Z, Li XM, Hoffman RM, Glinsky GV.

Author information: 
(1)Translational and Functional Genomics Laboratory, Ordway Cancer Center, Ordway
Research Institute, Inc., Center for Medical Sciences, Albany, New York 12208,
USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) gene BMI1 is required for the proliferation and
self-renewal of normal and leukemic stem cells. Overexpression of Bmi1 oncogene
causes neoplastic transformation of lymphocytes and plays essential role in
pathogenesis of myeloid leukemia. Another PcG protein, Ezh2, was implicated in
metastatic prostate and breast cancers, suggesting that PcG pathway activation is
relevant for epithelial malignancies. Whether an oncogenic role of the BMI1 and
PcG pathway activation may be extended beyond the leukemia and may affect
progression of solid tumors as well remains unknown. Here we demonstrate that
activation of the BMI1 oncogene-associated PcG pathway plays an essential role in
metastatic prostate cancer, thus mechanistically linking the pathogenesis of
leukemia, self-renewal of stem cells, and prostate cancer metastasis. To
characterize the functional status of the PcG pathway in metastatic prostate
cancer, we utilized advanced cell- and whole animal-imaging technologies, gene
and protein expression profiling, stable siRNA-gene targeting, and tissue
microarray (TMA) analysis in relevant experimental and clinical settings. We
demonstrate that in multiple experimental models of metastatic prostate cancer
both BMI1 and Ezh2 genes are amplified and gene amplification is associated with 
increased expression of corresponding mRNAs and proteins. For the first time, we 
provide images of human prostate carcinoma metastasis precursor cells isolated
from blood and shown to overexpress both BMI1 and Ezh2 oncoproteins. Consistent
with the PcG pathway activation hypothesis, increased BMI1 and Ezh2 expression in
metastatic cancer cells is associated with elevated levels of H2AubiK119 and
H3metK27 histones. Quantitative immunofluorescence colocalization analysis and
expression profiling experiments documented increased BMI1 and Ezh2 expression in
clinical prostate carcinoma samples and demonstrated that high levels of BMI1 and
Ezh2 expression are associated with markedly increased likelihood of therapy
failure and disease relapse after radical prostatectomy. Gene-silencing analysis 
reveals that activation of the PcG pathway is mechanistically linked with highly 
malignant behavior of human prostate carcinoma cells and is essential for in vivo
growth and metastasis of human prostate cancer. We conclude that the results of
experimental and clinical analyses indicate the important biological role of the 
PcG pathway activation in metastatic prostate cancer. Our work suggests that the 
PcG pathway activation is a common oncogenic event in pathogenesis of metastatic 
solid tumors and provides justification for development of small molecule
inhibitors of the PcG chromatin silencing pathway as a novel therapeutic modality
for treatment of metastatic prostate cancer.

PMID: 16963837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2006 Sep;13(9):793-7. Epub 2006 Aug 27.

Argonaute-1 directs siRNA-mediated transcriptional gene silencing in human cells.

Kim DH(1), Villeneuve LM, Morris KV, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute of the City
of Hope, 1450 E. Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Argonaute proteins are the core components of effector complexes that facilitate 
RNA interference (RNAi). Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeted to promoter
regions mediate transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) in human cells through
heterochromatin formation. RNAi effector complexes have yet to be implicated in
the mechanism of mammalian TGS. Here we describe the role of the human
Argonaute-1 homolog (AGO1) in directing TGS at the promoters for human
immunodeficiency virus-1 coreceptor CCR5 and tumor suppressor RASSF1A. AGO1
associates with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) and is required for histone H3 Lys9
dimethylation and TGS. AGO1, TAR RNA-binding protein-2 (7TRBP2) and Polycomb
protein EZH2 colocalize to the siRNA-targeted RASSF1A promoter, implicating
Polycomb silencing in the mechanism of mammalian TGS. These results establish a
connection between RNAi components AGO1 and TRBP2, RNAPII transcription and
Polycomb-regulated control of gene expression.

PMID: 16936726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Prostate. 2006 Oct 1;66(14):1521-34.

Quantitative multi-gene expression profiling of primary prostate cancer.

Schmidt U(1), Fuessel S, Koch R, Baretton GB, Lohse A, Tomasetti S, Unversucht S,
Froehner M, Wirth MP, Meye A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Technical University of Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: This study describes the evaluation of the expression patterns of
prostate-related transcripts in 106 matched prostate tissues from prostatectomies
as predictors for prostate cancer (PCa).
METHODS: Quantitative PCR (QPCR) assays with site-specific hybridization probes
were established for four housekeeping genes (GAPDH, HPRT, PBGD, TBP) and nine
prostate-related genes (AibZIP, D-GPCR, EZH2, PCA3, PDEF, prostein, PSA, PSCA,
TRPM8).
RESULTS: The relative mRNA expression levels of AibZIP, D-GPCR, EZH2, PCA3, PDEF,
PSA, TRPM8 (all P < 0.001) and prostein (P = 0.019) normalized to the TBP
reference gene were significantly higher in malignant compared to non-malignant
prostate tissues. Employing receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) analyses,
PCA3 was the best single tumor marker with the highest area-under-the-curve (AUC 
= 0.85). A multivariate logit model for the predictability of the tumor was
developed, which employed the relative expression levels of EZH2, PCA3, prostein,
and TRPM8 and yielded an AUC of 0.90.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcript marker PCA3 is a powerful predictor of primary PCa
but the inclusion of EZH2, prostein, and TRPM8 adds even more to the diagnostic
power. The finding of a significantly higher mRNA expression of three different
genes (prostein, PSA, TRPM8) in organ-confined tumors compared to
non-organ-confined tumors as well as the multi-marker PCa prediction model
developed in the retrospective model system on prostatectomies could be of
clinical importance for diagnostic purposes, and should be verified in diagnostic
biopsies.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16921506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Aug;48(6):381-90.

Esg1, expressed exclusively in preimplantation embryos, germline, and embryonic
stem cells, is a putative RNA-binding protein with broad RNA targets.

Tanaka TS(1), Lopez de Silanes I, Sharova LV, Akutsu H, Yoshikawa T, Amano H,
Yamanaka S, Gorospe M, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

In our earlier attempt to identify genes involved in the maintenance of cellular 
pluripotency, we found that KH-domain protein Embryonal stem cell-specific gene 1
(Esg1) showed similar expression patterns to those of Oct3/4 (Pou5f1), whereas
the forced repression of Oct3/4 in mouse embryonic stem cells immediately
downregulated the expression of Esg1. Here we further confirm this overlap by in 
situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analyses. Both Esg1 transcript and
protein exist in the egg and preimplantation embryos. At embryonic day 3.5,
blastocyst stage, however, ESG1 protein was more abundant in the inner cell mass 
(ICM) than in trophectoderm (TE), whereas Esg1 transcript was detected in both
the ICM and the TE, particularly in the polar trophectoderm. The presence of an
RNA-binding KH-domain in ESG1 led us to search for and identify 902 target
transcripts by microarray analysis of immunoprecipitated ESG1 complex.
Interaction of 20 target mRNA with ESG1, including Cdc25a, Cdc42, Ezh2, Nfyc and 
Nr5a2, was further validated by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
of the immunoprecipitation material, supporting the notion that ESG1 is an
RNA-binding protein which associates with specific target transcripts.

PMID: 16872451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Mol Histol. 2006 Sep;37(5-7):219-23. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

The Polycomb group protein Enhancer of Zeste 2: its links to DNA repair and
breast cancer.

Zeidler M(1), Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Michigan, 3510C MSRB1, 1150 W. Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 is a transcriptional repressor involved in
controlling cellular memory and has been linked to tumorigenesis in multiple
organs. In this review we summarize the current knowledge on the function of EZH2
in cancer, with special focus on breast cancer, and propose a link between EZH2, 
the homologous recombination pathway of DNA repair, and breast tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16855786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24790-802. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Tumor suppressor p16INK4A regulates polycomb-mediated DNA hypermethylation in
human mammary epithelial cells.

Reynolds PA(1), Sigaroudinia M, Zardo G, Wilson MB, Benton GM, Miller CJ, Hong C,
Fridlyand J, Costello JF, Tlsty TD.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0511, USA.

Alterations in DNA methylation are important in cancer, but the acquisition of
these alterations is poorly understood. Using an unbiased global screen for CpG
island methylation events, we have identified a non-random pattern of DNA
hypermethylation acquired in p16-repressed cells. Interestingly, this pattern
included loci located upstream of a number of homeobox genes. Upon removal of
p16(INK4A) activity in primary human mammary epithelial cells, polycomb
repressors, EZH2 and SUZ12, are up-regulated and recruited to HOXA9, a locus
expressed during normal breast development and epigenetically silenced in breast 
cancer. We demonstrate that at this targeted locus, the up-regulation of polycomb
repressors is accompanied by the recruitment of DNA methyltransferases and the
hypermethylation of DNA, an endpoint, which we show to be dependent on SUZ12
expression. These results demonstrate a causal role of p16(INK4A) disruption in
modulating DNA hypermethylation, and identify a dynamic and active process
whereby epigenetic modulation of gene expression is activated as an early event
in breast tumor progression.

PMID: 16766534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. EMBO J. 2006 Jul 12;25(13):3110-22. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Recruitment of PRC1 function at the initiation of X inactivation independent of
PRC2 and silencing.

Schoeftner S(1), Sengupta AK, Kubicek S, Mechtler K, Spahn L, Koseki H, Jenuwein 
T, Wutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

In mammals X inactivation is initiated by expression of Xist RNA and involves the
recruitment of Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) and 2 (PRC2), which mediate
chromosome-wide ubiquitination of histone H2A and methylation of histone H3,
respectively. Here, we show that PRC1 recruitment by Xist RNA is independent of
gene silencing. We find that Eed is required for the recruitment of the canonical
PRC1 proteins Mph1 and Mph2 by Xist. However, functional Ring1b is recruited by
Xist and mediates ubiquitination of histone H2A in Eed deficient embryonic stem
(ES) cells, which lack histone H3 lysine 27 tri-methylation. Xist expression
early in ES cell differentiation establishes a chromosomal memory, which allows
efficient H2A ubiquitination in differentiated cells and is independent of
silencing and PRC2. Our data show that Xist recruits PRC1 components by both PRC2
dependent and independent modes and in the absence of PRC2 function is sufficient
for the establishment of Polycomb-based memory systems in X inactivation.

PMCID: PMC1500994
PMID: 16763550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jun 6;103(23):8703-8. Epub 2006 May 31.

Mutant nuclear lamin A leads to progressive alterations of epigenetic control in 
premature aging.

Shumaker DK(1), Dechat T, Kohlmaier A, Adam SA, Bozovsky MR, Erdos MR, Eriksson
M, Goldman AE, Khuon S, Collins FS, Jenuwein T, Goldman RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, 303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is caused
by a mutant lamin A (LADelta50). Nuclei in cells expressing LADelta50 are
abnormally shaped and display a loss of heterochromatin. To determine the
mechanisms responsible for the loss of heterochromatin, epigenetic marks
regulating either facultative or constitutive heterochromatin were examined. In
cells from a female HGPS patient, histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 27
(H3K27me3), a mark for facultative heterochromatin, is lost on the inactive X
chromosome (Xi). The methyltransferase responsible for this mark, EZH2, is also
down-regulated. These alterations are detectable before the changes in nuclear
shape that are considered to be the pathological hallmarks of HGPS cells. The
results also show a down-regulation of the pericentric constitutive
heterochromatin mark, histone H3 trimethylated on lysine 9, and an altered
association of this mark with heterochromatin protein 1alpha (Hp1alpha) and the
CREST antigen. This loss of constitutive heterochromatin is accompanied by an
up-regulation of pericentric satellite III repeat transcripts. In contrast to
these decreases in histone H3 methylation states, there is an increase in the
trimethylation of histone H4K20, an epigenetic mark for constitutive
heterochromatin. Expression of LADelta50 in normal cells induces changes in
histone methylation patterns similar to those seen in HGPS cells. The epigenetic 
changes described most likely represent molecular mechanisms responsible for the 
rapid progression of premature aging in HGPS patients.

PMCID: PMC1472659
PMID: 16738054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cancer Sci. 2006 Jun;97(6):484-91.

Expression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 is correlated with poor prognosis
in human gastric cancer.

Matsukawa Y(1), Semba S, Kato H, Ito A, Yanagihara K, Yokozaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Pathology, Department of Biomedical Informatics, Kobe
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Overexpression of the enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) protein, a known
repressor of gene transcription, has been reported to be associated with
biological malignancy of prostate cancer and several other cancers. The purpose
of this study was to examine the expression of EZH2 and analyze its relationship 
with the clinicopathological features of human gastric cancers. Expression levels
of EZH2 mRNA and protein were examined in 13 gastric cancer cell lines and in 83 
surgically removed human gastric cancer tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis of 
the 83 tissue samples and corresponding non-cancerous gastric mucosa showed that 
EZH2 was more highly expressed in the cancerous than in the non-cancerous
tissues, and the expression levels of EZH2 were highly correlated with tumor
size, depth of invasion, vessel invasion, lymph node metastasis and clinical
stages. Univariate analysis of survival rate calculated by the Kaplan-Meier
method revealed that gastric cancer patients with high-level EZH2 expression had 
poorer prognosis than those expressing no or low levels of EZH2 (P = 0.0271).
These findings suggest that overexpression of EZH2 may contribute to the
progression and oncogenesis of human gastric cancers, and thus
immunohistochemical study of EZH2 expression may serve as a new biomarker for
predicting the prognosis of gastric cancers.

PMID: 16734726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 28;281(30):21209-15. Epub 2006 May 22.

The polycomb group protein EZH2 is required for mammalian circadian clock
function.

Etchegaray JP(1), Yang X, DeBruyne JP, Peters AH, Weaver DR, Jenuwein T, Reppert 
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, 01605, USA.

We examined the importance of histone methylation by the polycomb group proteins 
in the mouse circadian clock mechanism. Endogenous EZH2, a polycomb group enzyme 
that methylates lysine 27 on histone H3, co-immunoprecipitates with CLOCK and
BMAL1 throughout the circadian cycle in liver nuclear extracts. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed EZH2 binding and di- and trimethylation of H3K27 on 
both the Period 1 and Period 2 promoters. A role of EZH2 in cryptochrome-mediated
transcriptional repression of the clockwork was supported by overexpression and
RNA interference studies. Serum-induced circadian rhythms in NIH 3T3 cells in
culture were disrupted by transfection of an RNA interfering sequence targeting
EZH2. These results indicate that EZH2 is important for the maintenance of
circadian rhythms and extend the activity of the polycomb group proteins to the
core clockwork mechanism of mammals.

PMID: 16717091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 7;345(3):1051-8. Epub 2006 May 11.

Association of Polycomb group SUZ12 with WD-repeat protein MEP50 that binds to
histone H2A selectively in vitro.

Furuno K(1), Masatsugu T, Sonoda M, Sasazuki T, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Population Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

SUZ12 is a Polycomb group protein that forms Polycomb repressive complexes
(PRC2/3) together with EED and histone methyltransferase EZH2. Although the
essential role of SUZ12 in regulating the activity of the PRC2/3 complexes has
been demonstrated, additional function of this protein was suggested. Here, we
show that SUZ12 interacts with WD-repeat protein MEP50 in vitro and in vivo. We
show that the MEP50 binds histone H2A selectively among core histones, and
mediates transcriptional repression of protein arginine methyltransferase PRMT5, 
which is known to methylate H2A and H4. These results suggest that SUZ12 might
have a role in transcriptional regulation through physical interaction with MEP50
that can be an adaptor between PRMT5 and its substrate H2A.

PMID: 16712789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Genes Dev. 2006 May 1;20(9):1123-36. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Genome-wide mapping of Polycomb target genes unravels their roles in cell fate
transitions.

Bracken AP(1), Dietrich N, Pasini D, Hansen KH, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

The Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form chromatin-modifying complexes that are
essential for embryonic development and stem cell renewal and are commonly
deregulated in cancer. Here, we identify their target genes using genome-wide
location analysis in human embryonic fibroblasts. We find that
Polycomb-Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), PRC2, and tri-methylated histone H3K27
co-occupy >1000 silenced genes with a strong functional bias for embryonic
development and cell fate decisions. We functionally identify 40 genes
derepressed in human embryonic fibroblasts depleted of the PRC2 components (EZH2,
EED, SUZ12) and the PRC1 component, BMI-1. Interestingly, several markers of
osteogenesis, adipogenesis, and chrondrogenesis are among these genes, consistent
with the mesenchymal origin of fibroblasts. Using a neuronal model of
differentiation, we delineate two different mechanisms for regulating PcG target 
genes. For genes activated during differentiation, PcGs are displaced. However,
for genes repressed during differentiation, we paradoxically find that they are
already bound by the PcGs in nondifferentiated cells despite being actively
transcribed. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that PcGs are part of
a preprogrammed memory system established during embryogenesis marking certain
key genes for repressive signals during subsequent developmental and
differentiation processes.

PMCID: PMC1472472
PMID: 16618801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 15;66(8):4095-9.

Identification of EZH2 as a molecular marker for a precancerous state in
morphologically normal breast tissues.

Ding L(1), Erdmann C, Chinnaiyan AM, Merajver SD, Kleer CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109, USA.

The discovery of molecular markers to detect the precancerous state would have
profound implications in the prevention of breast cancer. We report that the
expression of the Polycomb group protein EZH2 increases in histologically normal 
breast epithelium with higher risk of developing cancer. We identify EZH2 as a
potential marker for detecting preneoplastic lesions of the breast in vivo and as
a possible target for preventative intervention.

PMID: 16618729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Jul;45(7):639-45.

The gene for polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is
amplified in late-stage prostate cancer.

Saramäki OR(1), Tammela TL, Martikainen PM, Vessella RL, Visakorpi T.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics, Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere and
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Overexpression of the polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2)
has been found in several malignancies, including prostate cancer, with an
aggressive phenotype. Amplification of the gene has previously been demonstrated 
in several malignancies, but not in prostate cancer. Our goal was to evaluate the
gene copy number and expression alterations of EZH2 in prostate cancer. The copy 
number of EZH2 in cell lines (LNCaP, DU145, PC-3, 22Rv1), xenografts (n = 10),
and clinical tumors (n = 191) was studied with fluorescence in situ
hybridization. All cell lines had a gain of EZH2. Eight of the ten xenografts
showed an increased copy number of the gene, including one case of high-level
amplification (>or=5 copies of the gene and EZH2/centromere ratio >or=2). 34/125 
(27%) of untreated prostate carcinomas showed increased copy number, but only one
case of low-level amplification (>or=5 copies of the gene and EZH2/centromere
ratio <2), whereas half (25/46) of the hormone-refractory carcinomas showed
increased copy number, including seven cases of low-level amplification and three
cases of high-level amplification (P < 0.0001). Expression of EZH2 was
significantly (P = 0.0009) higher in hormone-refractory prostate cancer compared 
with that in benign prostatic hyperplasia or untreated cancer, according to
quantitative real-time RT-PCR assay. Also, the expression of EZH2 protein was
found to be higher in hormone-refractory tumors than in hormone-naïve tumors by
immunohistochemistry. The EZH2 gene amplification was significantly (P < 0.05)
associated with increased EZH2 protein expression. The data show that
amplification of the EZH2 gene is rare in early prostate cancer, whereas a
fraction of late-stage tumors contains the gene amplification leading to the
overexpression of the gene, thus indicating the importance of EZH2 in the
progression of prostate cancer.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16575874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Cell Mol Med. 2006 Jan-Mar;10(1):100-25.

Epigenetics of prostate cancer: beyond DNA methylation.

Schulz WA(1), Hatina J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
wolfgang.schulz@uni-duesseldorf.de

Epigenetic mechanisms permit the stable inheritance of cellular properties
without changes in DNA sequence or amount. In prostate carcinoma, epigenetic
mechanisms are essential for development and progression, complementing,
amplifying and diversifying genetic alterations. DNA hypermethylation affects at 
least 30 individual genes, while repetitive sequences including retrotransposons 
and selected genes become hypomethylated. Hypermethylation of several genes
occurs in a coordinate manner early in carcinogenesis and can be exploited for
cancer detection, whereas hypomethylation and further hypermethylation events are
associated with progression. DNA methylation alterations interact with changes in
chromatin proteins. Prominent alterations at this level include altered patterns 
of histone modification, increased expression of the EZH2 polycomb histone
methyltransferase, and changes in transcriptional corepressors and coactivators. 
These changes may make prostate carcinoma particularly susceptible to drugs
targeting chromatin and DNA modifications. They relate to crucial alterations in 
a network of transcription factors comprising ETS family proteins, the androgen
receptor, NKX3.1, KLF, and HOXB13 homeobox proteins. This network controls
differentiation and proliferation of prostate epithelial cells integrating
signals from hormones, growth factors and cell adhesion proteins that are
likewise distorted in prostate cancer. As a consequence, prostate carcinoma cells
appear to be locked into an aberrant state, characterized by continued
proliferation of largely differentiated cells. Accordingly, stem cell
characteristics of prostate cancer cells appear to be secondarily acquired. The
aberrant differentiation state of prostate carcinoma cells also results in
distorted mutual interactions between epithelial and stromal cells in the tumor
that promote tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3933104
PMID: 16563224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Res. 2006 Mar 1;66(5):2815-25.

Increased expression of genes converting adrenal androgens to testosterone in
androgen-independent prostate cancer.

Stanbrough M(1), Bubley GJ, Ross K, Golub TR, Rubin MA, Penning TM, Febbo PG,
Balk SP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Androgen receptor (AR) plays a central role in prostate cancer, and most patients
respond to androgen deprivation therapies, but they invariably relapse with a
more aggressive prostate cancer that has been termed hormone refractory or
androgen independent. To identify proteins that mediate this tumor progression,
gene expression in 33 androgen-independent prostate cancer bone marrow metastases
versus 22 laser capture-microdissected primary prostate cancers was compared
using Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarrays. Multiple genes associated with
aggressive behavior were increased in the androgen-independent metastatic tumors 
(MMP9, CKS2, LRRC15, WNT5A, EZH2, E2F3, SDC1, SKP2, and BIRC5), whereas a
candidate tumor suppressor gene (KLF6) was decreased. Consistent with castrate
androgen levels, androgen-regulated genes were reduced 2- to 3-fold in the
androgen-independent tumors. Nonetheless, they were still major transcripts in
these tumors, indicating that there was partial reactivation of AR
transcriptional activity. This was associated with increased expression of AR
(5.8-fold) and multiple genes mediating androgen metabolism (HSD3B2, AKR1C3,
SRD5A1, AKR1C2, AKR1C1, and UGT2B15). The increase in aldo-keto reductase family 
1, member C3 (AKR1C3), the prostatic enzyme that reduces adrenal androstenedione 
to testosterone, was confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. These results indicate that enhanced intracellular
conversion of adrenal androgens to testosterone and dihydrotestosterone is a
mechanism by which prostate cancer cells adapt to androgen deprivation and
suggest new therapeutic targets.

PMID: 16510604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;12(4):1168-74.

Expression of enhancer of zeste homologue 2 is significantly associated with
increased tumor cell proliferation and is a marker of aggressive breast cancer.

Collett K(1), Eide GE, Arnes J, Stefansson IM, Eide J, Braaten A, Aas T, Otte AP,
Akslen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Pathology, The Gade Institute, Haukeland University Hospital,
Norway.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) has been linked
to invasive properties of aggressive breast cancer. In this report, tissue
microarray analysis of 190 breast carcinomas from a nested case-control study
shows that EZH2 is significantly associated with interval breast cancers.
Further, a strong relationship was found with tumor cell proliferation (by Ki-67 
expression), locally advanced disease, metastasis at presentation, markers of the
basal epithelial phenotype (positivity for cytokeratin 5/6 or P-cadherin), and
p53 status. EZH2 expression was also significantly associated with glomeruloid
microvascular proliferation, an aggressive angiogenic phenotype. For prediction
of aggressive disease (any event of locally advanced disease, lymph node spread, 
or distant spread), EZH2 was the only variable of significance in multivariate
analysis, whereas no additional information was given by Ki-67. Although EZH2
expression was significant in univariate survival analysis, only tumor cell
proliferation and lymph node status were significant in the final multivariate
model. In conclusion, our findings indicate an important relationship not only
between EZH2 and markers of tumor cell proliferation but also with aggressive
disease. These findings might be practically important and relevant because the
polycomb group proteins have recently been suggested as candidates for targeted
therapy.

PMID: 16489070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):794-5.

Developmental biology: two paths to silence merge.

Taghavi P, van Lohuizen M.

Comment on
    Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):871-4.

PMID: 16482140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Cell Physiol. 2006 May;207(2):512-9.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of pRb2/p130, VEGF, EZH2, p53, p16, p21waf-1, p27,
and PCNA in Barrett's esophagus.

Merola E(1), Mattioli E, Minimo C, Zuo W, Rabitti C, Cicala M, Caviglia R,
Pollice L, Gabbrielli A, Giordano A, Claudio PP.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, College of
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122-6099,
USA.

Control of the G1/S-phase transition as well as angiogenic switch are two of the 
most studied mechanisms in cancer. The current study examined the correlation
between the immunohistochemical expression of pRb2/p130, VEGF, EZH2, p53, p16,
p21waf-1, p27, and PCNA in Barrett's esophagus (BE). Overall, p53 showed a much
higher expression in BE patients (up to 50%) than in controls (1-10%) (P <
0.005). Also p21 showed a downregulation in BE when compared to normal esophagus 
(70% of cells vs. 65%), but the difference did not show any statistical
significance (P = 0.45). pRb2/p130 was detected in 80% of cells in normal
controls, but showed positive in only 20% of cells in BE biopsies. Additionally, 
Rb2/p130 expression was inversely correlated to that of VEGF, EZH2, and PCNA (P <
0.0001, P = 0.0032, P < 0.001, respectively). p27 stained more intensely and in a
widespread manner (70%) cells in normal esophageal tissues but about only 30% in 
BE samples (P < 0.001). Lastly, in accordance with other reports, we also found
p16 expressed by immunohistochemistry at high levels in normal controls and at
low levels in BE (P < 0.001). In conclusion, p16, p21, p27, and p53 staining
confirmed previously published data. Interestingly, pRb2/p130 expression was
found significantly decreased in metaplastic epithelium compared to normal
controls and showed significant inverse correlation with the expression of other 
markers, such as VEGF, EZH2, and PCNA. These data, taken together, indicate that 
these molecular events occurring in Barrett's metaplasia (BM) may represent one
of the many steps taking place during esophageal malignant progression such as
impairment of cell-cycle control, altered differentiation, and unbalanced
angiogenesis.

PMID: 16447267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 31;281(13):8365-70. Epub 2006 Jan 23.

Substrate preferences of the EZH2 histone methyltransferase complex.

Martin C(1), Cao R, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Histone methylation plays an important role in chromatin dynamics and gene
expression. Methylation of histone H3-lysine 27 by the EZH2 complex has been
linked to the silencing of homeotic genes and the inactivation of the X
chromosome. Here we report a characterization of the substrate preferences of the
enzyme complex using a reconstituted chromatin and enzyme system. We found that
the linker histone H1, when incorporated into nucleosomes, stimulates the
enzymatic activity toward histone H3. This stimulatory activity may be explained 
by protein-protein interactions between H1 and components of the EZH2 complex. In
addition, we found that the EZH2 complex exhibits a dramatic preference for
dinucleosomes when compared with mononucleosomes and that the stimulation of H3
methylation by H1 requires dinucleosomes or oligonucleosome substrates.
Furthermore, in contrast with a recent study suggesting that Embryonic Ectoderm
Development EED isoforms may affect substrate specificity, we found that EZH2
complexes reconstituted with different EED isoforms exhibit similar substrate
preference and specificity. Our work supports the hypothesis that linker histone 
H1 and chromatin structure are important factors in determining the substrate
preference of the EZH2 histone methyltransferase complex.

PMID: 16431907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Feb;8(2):195-202. Epub 2006 Jan 15.

The Polycomb group protein Eed protects the inactive X-chromosome from
differentiation-induced reactivation.

Kalantry S(1), Mills KC, Yee D, Otte AP, Panning B, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, University
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) encodes an evolutionarily conserved set of
chromatin-modifying proteins that are thought to maintain cellular
transcriptional memory by stably silencing gene expression. In mouse embryos that
are mutated for the PcG protein Eed, X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is not
stably maintained in extra-embryonic tissues. Eed is a component of a
histone-methyltransferase complex that is thought to contribute to stable
silencing in undifferentiated cells due to its enrichment on the inactive
X-chromosome in cells of the early mouse embryo and in stem cells of the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineage. Here, we demonstrate that the inactive
X-chromosome in Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells and in cells of the
trophectoderm-derived extra-embryonic ectoderm in Eed(-/-) embryos remain
transcriptionally silent, despite lacking the PcG-mediated histone modifications 
that normally characterize the facultative heterochromatin of the inactive
X-chromosome. Whereas undifferentiated Eed(-/-) trophoblast stem cells maintained
XCI, reactivation of the inactive X-chromosome occurred when these cells were
differentiated. These results indicate that PcG complexes are not necessary to
maintain transcriptional silencing of the inactive X-chromosome in
undifferentiated stem cells. Instead, PcG proteins seem to propagate cellular
memory by preventing transcriptional activation of facultative heterochromatin
during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1400591
PMID: 16415857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Cell Sci. 2006 Jan 1;119(Pt 1):132-40.

Neural induction promotes large-scale chromatin reorganisation of the Mash1
locus.

Williams RR(1), Azuara V, Perry P, Sauer S, Dvorkina M, Jørgensen H, Roix J,
McQueen P, Misteli T, Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK.
ruth.williams@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Determining how genes are epigenetically regulated to ensure their correct
spatial and temporal expression during development is key to our understanding of
cell lineage commitment. Here we examined epigenetic changes at an important
proneural regulator gene Mash1 (Ascl1), as embryonic stem (ES) cells commit to
the neural lineage. In ES cells where the Mash1 gene is transcriptionally
repressed, the locus replicated late in S phase and was preferentially positioned
at the nuclear periphery with other late-replicating genes (Neurod, Sprr2a). This
peripheral location was coupled with low levels of histone H3K9 acetylation at
the Mash1 promoter and enhanced H3K27 methylation but surprisingly location was
not affected by removal of the Ezh2/Eed HMTase complex or several other
chromatin-silencing candidates (G9a, SuV39h-1, Dnmt-1, Dnmt-3a and Dnmt-3b). Upon
neural induction however, Mash1 transcription was upregulated (>100-fold),
switched its time of replication from late to early in S phase and relocated
towards the interior of the nucleus. This spatial repositioning was selective for
neural commitment because Mash1 was peripheral in ES-derived mesoderm and other
non-neural cell types. A bidirectional analysis of replication timing across a 2 
Mb region flanking the Mash1 locus showed that chromatin changes were focused at 
Mash1. These results suggest that Mash1 is regulated by changes in chromatin
structure and location and implicate the nuclear periphery as an important
environment for maintaining the undifferentiated state of ES cells.

PMID: 16371653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;11(24 Pt 1):8570-6.

Increased expression of the polycomb group gene, EZH2, in transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder.

Raman JD(1), Mongan NP, Tickoo SK, Boorjian SA, Scherr DS, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The New York Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

PURPOSE: The Polycomb group gene, EZH2, functions as a transcriptional repressor 
involved in gene silencing. Amplification of EZH2 has been reported in several
malignancies, including prostate, breast, and lymphoma. We evaluated EZH2 mRNA
and protein expression in bladder specimens from patients and the EZH2 mRNA
expression in five bladder cancer cell lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EZH2 mRNA expression was assessed by reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) in 38 bladder tissue specimens. We also evaluated 39
bladder cancer specimens for EZH2 protein expression using immunohistochemistry
with affinity-purified antibodies to human EZH2. In addition, five human bladder 
cancer cell lines were analyzed by RT-PCR for EZH2 mRNA expression.
RESULTS: Five of 14 (36%) nontumor bladder specimens versus 21 of 24 (88%)
bladder tumors showed EZH2 mRNA expression (P=0.003). All of the invasive tumors 
(10 of 10) had detectable EZH2 mRNA expression, compared with 11 of 14 (79%)
superficial tumors. In addition, EZH2 mRNA expression was noted in 100% (16 of
16) of high-grade bladder tumors versus 50% (4 of 8) of low-grade tumors
(P=0.01). EZH2 protein expression, meanwhile, was increased in neoplastic tissue 
compared with nontumor urothelium (78% versus 69% of nuclei, P<0.005). There were
no differences in EZH2 protein levels between superficial and invasive tumors.
High-grade tumors had increased EZH2 staining compared with normal urothelium
(78% versus 68%, P<0.005), whereas low-grade lesions did not. Four of five human 
bladder cancer cell lines expressed high levels of EZH2, whereas only low levels 
were detected in one cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a significant increase in EZH2 expression in transitional 
cell carcinoma of the bladder compared with normal urothelium. These data suggest
that similar to other human malignancies, increased EZH2 expression correlates
with oncogenesis of the bladder.

PMID: 16361539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Cell. 2005 Dec 22;20(6):845-54.

Role of Bmi-1 and Ring1A in H2A ubiquitylation and Hox gene silencing.

Cao R(1), Tsukada Y, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins exist in at least two biochemically distinct
protein complexes, the EED-EZH2 complex and the PRC1 complex, that respectively
possess H3-K27 methyltransferase and H2A-K119 ubiquitin E3 ligase activities. How
the enzymatic activities are regulated and what their role is in Hox gene
silencing are not clear. Here, we demonstrate that Bmi-1 and Ring1A, two
components of the PRC1 complex, play important roles in H2A ubiquitylation and
Hox gene silencing. We show that both proteins positively regulate H2A
ubiquitylation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrate that
Bmi-1 and other components of the two PcG complexes bind to the promoter of
HoxC13. Knockout Bmi-1 results in significant loss of H2A ubiquitylation and
upregulation of Hoxc13 expression, whereas EZH2-mediated H3-K27 methylation is
not affected. Our results suggest that EZH2-mediated H3-K27 methylation functions
upstream of PRC1 and establishes a critical role for Bmi-1 and Ring1A in H2A
ubiquitylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMID: 16359901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):871-4. Epub 2005 Dec 14.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 directly controls DNA methylation.

Viré E(1), Brenner C, Deplus R, Blanchon L, Fraga M, Didelot C, Morey L, Van
Eynde A, Bernard D, Vanderwinden JM, Bollen M, Esteller M, Di Croce L, de Launoit
Y, Fuks F.

Author information: 
(1)Free University of Brussels, Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Molecular
Virology, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2007 Apr 12;446(7137):824.

Comment in
    Nature. 2006 Feb 16;439(7078):794-5.

The establishment and maintenance of epigenetic gene silencing is fundamental to 
cell determination and function. The essential epigenetic systems involved in
heritable repression of gene activity are the Polycomb group (PcG) proteins and
the DNA methylation systems. Here we show that the corresponding silencing
pathways are mechanistically linked. We find that the PcG protein EZH2 (Enhancer 
of Zeste homolog 2) interacts-within the context of the Polycomb repressive
complexes 2 and 3 (PRC2/3)-with DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and associates
with DNMT activity in vivo. Chromatin immunoprecipitations indicate that binding 
of DNMTs to several EZH2-repressed genes depends on the presence of EZH2.
Furthermore, we show by bisulphite genomic sequencing that EZH2 is required for
DNA methylation of EZH2-target promoters. Our results suggest that EZH2 serves as
a recruitment platform for DNA methyltransferases, thus highlighting a previously
unrecognized direct connection between two key epigenetic repression systems.

PMID: 16357870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Neoplasia. 2005 Nov;7(11):1011-9.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 impairs DNA repair in breast epithelial cells.

Zeidler M(1), Varambally S, Cao Q, Chinnaiyan AM, Ferguson DO, Merajver SD, Kleer
CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Arbor, MI, USA.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 is a transcriptional repressor involved in
controlling cellular memory and has been linked to aggressive and metastatic
breast cancer. Here we report that EZH2 decreased the expression of five RAD51
paralog proteins involved in homologous recombination (HR) repair of DNA
double-strand breaks (RAD51B/RAD51L1, RAD51C/RAD51L2, RAD51D/RAD51L3, XRCC2, and 
XRCC3), but did not affect the levels of DMC1, a gene that only functions in
meiosis. EZH2 overexpression impaired the formation of RAD51 repair foci at sites
of DNA breaks. Overexpression of EZH2 resulted in decreased cell survival and
clonogenic capacity following DNA damage induced independently by etoposide and
ionizing radiation. We suggest that EZH2 may contribute to breast tumorigenesis
by specific downregulation of RAD51-like proteins and by impairment of HR repair.
We provide mechanistic insights into the function of EZH2 in mammalian cells and 
uncover a link between EZH2, a regulator of homeotic gene expression, and HR DNA 
repair. Our study paves the way for exploring the blockade of EZH2 overexpression
as a novel approach for the prevention and treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1502020
PMID: 16331887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jan 10;24(2):268-73. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

EZH2 expression is associated with high proliferation rate and aggressive tumor
subgroups in cutaneous melanoma and cancers of the endometrium, prostate, and
breast.

Bachmann IM(1), Halvorsen OJ, Collett K, Stefansson IM, Straume O, Haukaas SA,
Salvesen HB, Otte AP, Akslen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Gade Institute, Section of Pathology, Bergen, Norway.

PURPOSE: EZH2 is a member of the polycomb group of genes and important in cell
cycle regulation. Increased expression of EZH2 has been associated previously
with invasive growth and aggressive clinical behavior in prostate and breast
cancer, but the relationship with tumor cell proliferation has not been examined 
in human tumors. The purpose of this study was to validate previous findings in a
population-based setting, also including tumors that have not been studied
previously.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In our study of nearly 700 patients, we examined EZH2
expression and its association with tumor cell proliferation and other tumor
markers, clinical features, and prognosis in cutaneous melanoma and cancers of
the endometrium, prostate, and breast.
RESULTS: Strong EZH2 expression was associated with increased tumor cell
proliferation in all four cancer types. Associations were also found between EZH2
and important clinicopathologic variables. EZH2 expression showed significant
prognostic impact in melanoma, prostate, and endometrial carcinoma in univariate 
survival analyses, and revealed independent prognostic importance in carcinoma of
the endometrium and prostate. CONCLUSION Our findings point at EZH2 as a novel
and independent prognostic marker in endometrial cancer, and validate previous
findings on prostate and breast cancer. Further, EZH2 expression was associated
with features of aggressive cutaneous melanoma. The fact that EZH2 might identify
increased tumor cell proliferation and aggressive subgroups in several cancers
may be of practical interest because the polycomb group proteins have been
suggested as candidates for targeted therapy. EZH2 expression should, therefore, 
be further examined as a possible predictive factor.

PMID: 16330673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2005 Dec 1;125(23):3279-82.

[Markers for diagnosis, prediction and prognosis of prostate cancer].

[Article in Norwegian]

Taskén KA(1), Angelsen A, Svindland A, Eide T, Berge V, Wahlquist R, Karlsen S.

Author information: 
(1)Fakultetsdivisjonen Aker, Universitetet i Oslo, og Seksjon for urologisk
molekylaerbiologi, Oslo Urologiske Universitetsklinikk (OUU), Aker
universitetssykehus, Trondheimsveien 235, 0514 Oslo. k.a.tasken@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is the most frequent new cancer diagnosis in the
western world today. There is an urgent need to obtain validated molecular
markers that can identify clinically significant prostate cancer.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The article represents our view of the current status of
molecular markers in diagnosis of prostate cancer based on literature searches
(PubMed).
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Prostate specific antigen (PSA) is a sensitive serum 
marker for pathology in the prostate (cancer, infection, benign hyperplasia). The
level of PSA, however, is poorly correlated with grade and stage of prostate
cancer. Genomic and proteomic methodology has recently been used to discover more
then 200 putative new markers for prostate cancer like alpha-methylacyl CoA
racemase (AMACR), hepsin, glutathione S-transferase pi, EZH2 and DD3(PCA3). To
date, none of these markers have been adequately validated for clinical use.
Knowledge about the role of these candidates in prostate cancer biology and
evaluation of their correlation to clinical parameters will be of importance in
the validation process.

PMID: 16327854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Reproduction. 2005 Dec;130(6):883-8.

Expression of Polycomb-group genes in human ovarian follicles, oocytes and
preimplantation embryos.

Hinkins M(1), Huntriss J, Miller D, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Faculty of Medicine and
Health, University of Leeds, D Floor Clarendon Wing, Leeds General Infirmary,
Leeds LS2 9NS, West Yorkshire, UK.

Mammalian oocytes possess unique properties with respect to their ability to
regulate and reprogram chromatin structure and epigenetic information. Proteins
containing the conserved chromodomain motif that is common to the Polycomb-group 
(Pc-G) proteins and the heterochromatin-associated protein HP1, play essential
roles in these processes and more specifically, in X-chromosome inactivation in
female zygotes and extra-embryonic tissues and in the regulation of genomic
imprinting. To characterize the potential role of these proteins in the
regulation of epigenetic events during early human development, we utilized a
degenerate PCR priming assay to assess the expression of mRNAs of chromodomain
proteins in cDNA samples derived from the human female germline and
preimplantation embryos. Expression of mRNAs of HP1 genes was observed in ovarian
follicles, (HP1 (HSalpha), HP1 (HSbeta), HP1 (HSgamma)), mature oocytes (HP1
(HSalpha), HP1 (HSbeta)), cleavage stage preimplantation embryos (HP1 (HSalpha), 
HP1 (HSbeta), HP1 (HSgamma)) and blastocysts (HP1 (HSalpha), HP1 (HSgamma)).
Transcripts for three Pc-G genes, which are essential for early mammalian
development (Yin Yang 1 (YY1), Enhancer of Zeste-2 (EZH2) and Embryonic Ectoderm 
Development (EED)) and that are essential for the regulation of X-inactivation
and certain imprinted genes (EED) were revealed by gene-specific-PCR expression
analysis of human ovarian follicles, oocytes and preimplantation embryos. YY1 and
EZH2 transcripts were additionally detected in metaphase II oocytes.

PMID: 16322547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):11047-58.

Association of BMI1 with polycomb bodies is dynamic and requires PRC2/EZH2 and
the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1.

Hernández-Muñoz I(1), Taghavi P, Kuijl C, Neefjes J, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are epigenetic chromatin modifiers involved in
heritable gene repression. Two main PcG complexes have been characterized.
Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is thought to be involved in the initiation 
of gene silencing, whereas Polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) is implicated in 
the stable maintenance of gene repression. Here, we investigate the kinetic
properties of the binding of one of the PRC1 core components, BMI1, with PcG
bodies. PcG bodies are unique nuclear structures located on regions of
pericentric heterochromatin, found to be the site of accumulation of PcG
complexes in different cell lines. We report the presence of at least two
kinetically different pools of BMI1, a highly dynamic and a less dynamic
fraction, which may reflect BMI1 pools with different binding capacities to these
stable heterochromatin domains. Interestingly, PRC2 members EED and EZH2 appear
to be essential for BMI1 recruitment to the PcG bodies. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 is necessary for
proper PcG body assembly independent of DNMT-associated histone deacetylase
activity. Together, these results provide new insights in the mechanism for
regulation of chromatin silencing by PcG proteins and suggest a highly regulated 
recruitment of PRC1 to chromatin.

PMCID: PMC1316945
PMID: 16314526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Biomarkers. 2005 Nov;10 Suppl 1:S83-6.

Biomarker discovery in urogenital cancer.

Said J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Urology, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. jsaid@mednet.ucla.edu

Novel approaches for the early detection of urogenital cancers are urgently
needed. Metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has a poor prognosis and
unpredictable course and to date there are no molecular markers that reliably
protect RCC outcome. A novel kidney cancer marker, carbonic anhydrase IX (CA IX),
was investigated as an independent prognostic factor for survival for patients
with metastatic RCC. In patients with non-metastatic RCC low CAIX predicted a
worse outcome similar to patients with metastatic disease and overall CAIX
expression decreased with development of metastasis. CAIX reflects significant
changes in tumour biology, which may be used to predict clinical outcome and
identify high-risk patients for adjuvant-targeted therapies. With regard to
prostate cancer there are a number of putative biomarkers, although there are
limited studies providing clinical correlations in humans. Potential biomarkers
include caveolin-1, p-Akt, p27, the met oncogene, Ki67 (MIB-1), 8q24
over-expression, polycomb protein EZH2, plasma TGF-B1 and IL-6 among others. The 
laboratory has concentrated on the Prostate Stem Cell Antigen (PSCA) which is
increased in patients with more aggressive features, that is higher Gleason grade
and higher stage. Highest expression is seen in metastatic lesions to bone and
staining for PSCA may predict for disease progression or recurrence. Also
promising is the finding reported by the group that expression of p27 in radical 
prostatectomy specimens correlates with biochemical recurrence. Loss of p27
(defined as absent expression in more than 70% of the specimen) is an independent
predictor of recurrence among all patients and among the sub-set with organ
confined and extra-capsular disease. The data also shows that p27 can predict
outcome among patients with positive surgical resection margins. As with other
biomarkers, major questions still to be addressed is the requirement for
universal application with uniform scoring and the need for prospective studies
in randomized clinical trials.

PMID: 16298916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Blood. 2006 Mar 1;107(5):2170-9. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

The Polycomb group gene Ezh2 prevents hematopoietic stem cell exhaustion.

Kamminga LM(1), Bystrykh LV, de Boer A, Houwer S, Douma J, Weersing E, Dontje B, 
de Haan G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Section Stem Cell Biology, University Medical
Center Groningen, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

The molecular mechanism responsible for a decline of stem cell functioning after 
replicative stress remains unknown. We used mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
and hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) to identify genes involved in the process of 
cellular aging. In proliferating and senescent MEFs one of the most
differentially expressed transcripts was Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (Ezh2), a
Polycomb group protein (PcG) involved in histone methylation and deacetylation.
Retroviral overexpression of Ezh2 in MEFs resulted in bypassing of the senescence
program. More importantly, whereas normal HSCs were rapidly exhausted after
serial transplantations, overexpression of Ezh2 completely conserved long-term
repopulating potential. Animals that were reconstituted with 3 times serially
transplanted control bone marrow cells all died due to hematopoietic failure. In 
contrast, similarly transplanted Ezh2-overexpressing stem cells restored stem
cell quality to normal levels. In a "genetic genomics" screen, we identified
novel putative Ezh2 target or partner stem cell genes that are associated with
chromatin modification. Our data suggest that stabilization of the chromatin
structure preserves HSC potential after replicative stress.

PMCID: PMC1895717
PMID: 16293602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Int J Cancer. 2006 Apr 15;118(8):1954-62.

Expression profiling of Wilms tumors reveals new candidate genes for different
clinical parameters.

Zirn B(1), Hartmann O, Samans B, Krause M, Wittmann S, Mertens F, Graf N, Eilers 
M, Gessler M.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Chemistry I, Biozentrum, University of Wuerzburg, Germany.

Wilms tumor is the most frequent renal neoplasm in children, but our
understanding of its genetic basis is still limited. We performed cDNA microarray
experiments using 63 primary Wilms tumors with the aim of detecting new candidate
genes associated with malignancy grade and tumor progression. All tumors had
received preoperative chemotherapy as mandated by the SIOP protocol, which sets
this study apart from related approaches in the Unites States that are based on
untreated samples. The stratification of expression data according to clinical
criteria allowed a rather clear distinction between different subsets of Wilms
tumors. Clear-cut differences in expression patterns were discovered between
relapse-free as opposed to relapsed tumors and tumors with intermediate risk as
opposed to high risk histology. Several differentially expressed genes,
e.g.TRIM22, CENPF, MYCN, CTGF, RARRES3 and EZH2, were associated with Wilms tumor
progression. For a subset of differentially expressed genes, microarray data were
confirmed by real-time RT-PCR on the original set of tumors. Interestingly, we
found the retinoic acid pathway to be deregulated at different levels in advanced
tumors suggesting that treatment of these tumors with retinoic acid may represent
a promising novel therapeutic approach.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16287080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Science. 2005 Oct 14;310(5746):306-10.

Akt-mediated phosphorylation of EZH2 suppresses methylation of lysine 27 in
histone H3.

Cha TL(1), Zhou BP, Xia W, Wu Y, Yang CC, Chen CT, Ping B, Otte AP, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a methyltransferase that plays an important
role in many biological processes through its ability to trimethylate lysine 27
in histone H3. Here, we show that Akt phosphorylates EZH2 at serine 21 and
suppresses its methyltransferase activity by impeding EZH2 binding to histone H3,
which results in a decrease of lysine 27 trimethylation and derepression of
silenced genes. Our results imply that Akt regulates the methylation activity,
through phosphorylation of EZH2, which may contribute to oncogenesis.

PMID: 16224021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Urol Int. 2005;75(3):252-7.

Increased expression of EZH2, a polycomb group protein, in bladder carcinoma.

Arisan S(1), Buyuktuncer ED, Palavan-Unsal N, Caskurlu T, Cakir OO, Ergenekon E.

Author information: 
(1)Sisli Etfal Research and Training Hospital, 1st Urology Clinic Sisli,
Istanbul, Turkey. serdar@arisan.org

INTRODUCTION: Recent experiments have demonstrated that polycomb group gene
enhancer zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is highly expressed in many cancer types.
Therefore, we aim to demonstrate EZH2 gene expression in transitional cell
bladder cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used for detection of EZH2 mRNA levels in healthy and cancerous
human bladder specimens. Also, expression of the particular protein was
determined by Western blotting and immunohistochemistry to confirm RT-PCR
results.
RESULTS: Gradually increased expression of EZH2 was detected by mRNA and protein 
levels in highly advanced bladder cancer specimens. In contrast, 100% of control 
subjects were negative for EZH2 expression. The expression of EZH2 was more
frequent in G3 (92%) than G1-G2 (62-63%) and more frequent in T1-2 (72-85%) than 
Ta (56%). Western blot analysis results confirm the RT-PCR results.
CONCLUSIONS: EZH2 overexpression precedes high frequencies of proliferation and
the gradual advance of bladder cancer. These observations suggest that
deregulated expression of EZH2 is associated with bladder carcinoma.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16215315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell. 2005 Sep 23;122(6):835-47.

The human tumor antigen PRAME is a dominant repressor of retinoic acid receptor
signaling.

Epping MT(1), Wang L, Edel MJ, Carlée L, Hernandez M, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis and Center for Biomedical Genetics, The
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Retinoic acid (RA) induces proliferation arrest, differentiation, and apoptosis, 
and defects in retinoic acid receptor (RAR) signaling have been implicated in
cancer. The human tumor antigen PRAME is overexpressed in a variety of cancers,
but its function has remained unclear. We identify here PRAME as a dominant
repressor of RAR signaling. PRAME binds to RAR in the presence of RA, preventing 
ligand-induced receptor activation and target gene transcription through
recruitment of Polycomb proteins. PRAME is present at RAR target promoters and
inhibits RA-induced differentiation, growth arrest, and apoptosis. Conversely,
knockdown of PRAME expression by RNA interference in RA-resistant human melanoma 
restores RAR signaling and reinstates sensitivity to the antiproliferative
effects of RA in vitro and in vivo. Our data suggest that overexpression of PRAME
frequently observed in human cancers confers growth or survival advantages by
antagonizing RAR signaling.

PMID: 16179254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Trends Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;15(10):514-7. Epub 2005 Aug 26.

The Ezh2 methyltransferase complex: actin up in the cytosol.

Nolz JC(1), Gomez TS, Billadeau DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Ezh2, a polycomb group protein, is known to function in histone methylation,
thereby regulating gene expression. However, in a recent study by Su et al., the 
Ezh2-containing complex has been given an additional role in cellular regulation.
Cytosolic Ezh2 methyltransferase complexes were shown to associate with Vav1 and 
control receptor-induced actin polymerization and proliferation in a
methylation-dependent manner. Overall, these findings implicate lysine
methylation as a posttranslational modification crucial for receptor-mediated
signal transduction events.

PMID: 16126384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 23;102(34):12177-82. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Efficient delivery of small interfering RNA to bone-metastatic tumors by using
atelocollagen in vivo.

Takeshita F(1), Minakuchi Y, Nagahara S, Honma K, Sasaki H, Hirai K, Teratani T, 
Namatame N, Yamamoto Y, Hanai K, Kato T, Sano A, Ochiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Studies on Metastasis, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
1-1 Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Silencing of gene expression by small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) is rapidly
becoming a powerful tool for genetic analysis and represents a potential strategy
for therapeutic product development. However, there are no reports of systemic
delivery for siRNAs toward treatment of bone-metastatic cancer. Accordingly, we
report here that i.v. injection of GL3 luciferase siRNA complexed with
atelocollagen showed effective reduction of luciferase expression from
bone-metastatic prostate tumor cells developed in mouse thorax, jaws, and/or
legs. We also show that the siRNA/atelocollagen complex can be efficiently
delivered to tumors 24 h after injection and can exist intact at least for 3
days. Furthermore, atelocollagen-mediated systemic administration of siRNAs such 
as enhancer of zeste homolog 2 and phosphoinositide 3'-hydroxykinase
p110-alpha-subunit, which were selected as candidate targets for inhibition of
bone metastasis, resulted in an efficient inhibition of metastatic tumor growth
in bone tissues. In addition, upregulation of serum IL-12 and IFN-alpha levels
was not associated with the in vivo administration of the siRNA/atelocollagen
complex. Thus, for treatment of bone metastasis of prostate cancer, an
atelocollagen-mediated systemic delivery method could be a reliable and safe
approach to the achievement of maximal function of siRNA.

PMCID: PMC1183487
PMID: 16091473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nat Immunol. 2005 Aug;6(8):836-43. Epub 2005 Jul 17.

Regulation of interleukin 7-dependent immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable gene
rearrangements by transcription factor STAT5.

Bertolino E(1), Reddy K, Medina KL, Parganas E, Ihle J, Singh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Rearrangement of immunoglobulin heavy-chain variable (V(H)) gene segments has
been suggested to be regulated by interleukin 7 signaling in pro-B cells.
However, the genetic evidence for this recombination pathway has been challenged.
Furthermore, no molecular components that directly control V(H) gene
rearrangement have been elucidated. Using mice deficient in the interleukin
7-activated transcription factor STAT5, we demonstrate here that STAT5 regulated 
germline transcription, histone acetylation and DNA recombination of distal V(H) 
gene segments. STAT5 associated with V(H) gene segments in vivo and was recruited
as a coactivator with the transcription factor Oct-1. STAT5 did not affect the
nuclear repositioning or compaction of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus.
Therefore, STAT5 functions at a distinct step in regulating distal V(H)
recombination in relation to the transcription factor Pax5 and histone
methyltransferase Ezh2.

PMID: 16025120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Scand J Urol Nephrol Suppl. 2005 May;(216):82-93.

Molecular prostate cancer pathology: current issues and achievements.

Schalken JA(1), Bergh A, Bono A, Foster C, Gospadarowicz M, Isaacs WB, Rubin M,
Schröder F, Tribukait B, Tsukamotot T, Wiklund P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Urology, University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. j.schalken@uro.umcn.nl

Recent developments in the field of molecular techniques have provided new tools 
that have led to the discovery of many new promising biomarkers for prostate
cancer. These biomarkers may be instrumental in the development of new tests that
will have a high specificity for the diagnosis and prognosis of prostate cancer. 
A biomarker is defined as a molecular test that provides additional information
to currently available clinical and pathological tests. Biomarkers should be
reproducible (both within and between institutes) and have an impact on clinical 
management. For diagnostic purposes it is important that potential biomarkers are
tested in terms of tissue specificity and their discrimination potential between 
prostate cancer, normal prostate and benign prostatic hyperplasia. The results of
(multiple) biomarker-based assays may enhance the specificity of cancer
detection. There is an urgent need for molecular prognostic biomarkers for
predicting the biological behavior and outcome of cancer.

PMID: 16019760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Prostate. 2005 Nov 1;65(3):252-9.

Mutation screen and association study of EZH2 as a susceptibility gene for
aggressive prostate cancer.

Bachmann N(1), Hoegel J, Haeusler J, Kuefer R, Herkommer K, Paiss T, Vogel W,
Maier C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Several linkage studies have provided evidence for a prostate cancer 
aggressiveness gene on chromosome 7q. This report details the results of the
first mutation screen and association study of EZH2 (located at 7q35) as a
potential candidate gene for the development of aggressive prostate cancer.
METHODS: In 10 families with linkage of chromosome 7q31-33 to aggressive prostate
cancer, we sequenced the promoter region and all 20 exons of EZH2. We genotyped
11 variants in 287 prostate cancer probands and 96 controls. Association between 
the disease and the variants/haplotypes was evaluated taking into account
clinical data and disease recurrence.
RESULTS: The individual variation sites did not show significant differences in
the allele frequencies between cases and controls. In contrast, one haplotype had
a higher frequency in controls, and another haplotype was significantly more
frequent in cases with low grade tumors (GI/II) and progression free survival
(NED).
CONCLUSION: We have possibly identified haplotypes which mark alleles that have a
beneficial effect on the development of prostate cancer. Moreover, our results
suggest that genetic variations of the EZH2 gene are not responsible for the
linkage of 7q to aggressive prostate cancer.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 16015586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Aug;16(2):349-53.

Expression levels of the EZH2 polycomb transcriptional repressor correlate with
aggressiveness and invasive potential of bladder carcinomas.

Weikert S(1), Christoph F, Köllermann J, Müller M, Schrader M, Miller K, Krause
H.

Author information: 
(1)Charitè - University Medicine in Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Department 
of Urology, Hindenburgdamm 30, D-12200 Berlin, Germany.
steffen.weikert@charite.de

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) is a transcriptional
repressor involved in the control of cellular proliferation and oncogenesis. The 
aim of the present study was to quantify EZH2 expression in bladder carcinomas
and to correlate the data with clinicopathological findings. EZH2 mRNA expression
was measured by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in
tumor tissue specimens obtained from 37 patients with urothelial carcinomas of
the bladder and in four bladder cancer cell lines. EZH2 levels were normalized to
expression of the housekeeping porphobilinogen deaminase gene. EZH2 transcripts
were commonly detected in tumor tissue. Transcript levels correlated
significantly with the invasiveness of bladder tumors (p = 0.029) with elevated
EZH2 mRNA expression measured in invasive bladder carcinomas (median value,
38.92) compared with non-invasive tumors (15.51). In addition, levels of
expression were significantly higher in high-grade (G3) than in low-grade (G1/2) 
lesions (p < 0.001). EZH2 mRNA levels in bladder carcinoma cell lines were within
the range of high-grade invasive bladder cancers. In conclusion, expression
levels of EZH2 are elevated in aggressive and invasive urothelial carcinomas,
suggesting that deregulated EZH2 expression may be involved in the progression of
bladder tumors.

PMID: 16012774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31470-7. Epub 2005 Jul 11.

EZH2 and histone 3 trimethyl lysine 27 associated with Il4 and Il13 gene
silencing in Th1 cells.

Koyanagi M(1), Baguet A, Martens J, Margueron R, Jenuwein T, Bix M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195-7650, USA.

Differentiation of naïve CD4 T cells toward the T helper 1 (T(H)1) and T helper 2
(T(H)2) fates involves the transcriptional repression and enhancement,
respectively, of Il4 and Il13, adjacent chromosome 11 genes encoding the
canonical T(H)2 cytokines interleukin-4 and interleukin-13. Proper execution of
this developmental fate choice during immune responses is critical to host
defense and, when misregulated, leads to susceptibility to infectious microbes
and to allergic and autoimmune diseases. Here, using chromatin
immunoprecipitation and real time reverse transcription PCR we identify the
Polycomb family histone methyltransferase EZH2 as the enzyme responsible for
methylating lysine 27 of histone H3 at the Il4-Il13 locus of T(H)1 but not T(H)2 
cells, implicating EZH2 in the mechanism of Il4 and Il13 transcriptional
silencing.

PMID: 16009709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 15;24(41):6269-80.

The polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH 2) is an oncogene
that influences myeloma cell growth and the mutant ras phenotype.

Croonquist PA(1), Van Ness B.

Author information: 
(1)The Graduate Program in Molecular, Cellular, Developmental Biology, and
Genetics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Three distinct proliferative signals for multiple myeloma (MM) cell lines induce 
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (ezh 2) transcript expression. EZH 2 is a polycomb
group protein that mediates repression of gene transcription at the chromatin
level through its methyltransferase activity. Normal bone marrow plasma cells do 
not express ezh2; however, gene expression is induced and correlates with tumor
burden during progression of this disease. We therefore investigated how EZH 2
expression is deregulated in MM cell lines and determined the consequence of this
activity on proliferation and transformation. We found that EZH 2 protein
expression is induced by interleukin 6 (IL-6) in growth factor-dependent cell
lines and is constitutive in IL-6-independent cell lines. Furthermore, EZH 2
expression correlates with proliferation and B-cell terminal differentiation.
Significantly, EZH 2 protein inhibition by short interference RNA treatment
results in MM cell growth arrest. Conversely, EZH 2 ectopic overexpression
induces growth factor independence. We found that the growth factor-independent
proliferative phenotype in MM cell lines harboring a mutant N- or K-ras gene
requires EZH 2 activity. Finally, this is the first report to demonstrate that
EZH 2 has oncogenic activity in vivo, and that cell transformation and tumor
formation require histone methyltransferase activity.

Oncogene (2005) 24, 6269-6280.

PMID: 16007202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. EMBO Rep. 2005 Aug;6(8):748-54.

Initiation of epigenetic reprogramming of the X chromosome in somatic nuclei
transplanted to a mouse oocyte.

Bao S(1), Miyoshi N, Okamoto I, Jenuwein T, Heard E, Azim Surani M.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of
Cambridge.

The active and inactive X chromosomes have distinct epigenetic marks in somatic
nuclei, which undergo reprogramming after transplantation into oocytes. We show
that, despite the disappearance of Xist RNA coating in 30 min, the epigenetic
memory of the inactive X persists with the precocious appearance of histone H3
trimethylation of lysine 27 (H3-3meK27), without the expected colocalization with
Eed/Ezh2. Subsequently, Xist re-appears on the original inactive X, and the
silent Xist on the active X undergoes re-activation, resulting in unusual
biallelic Xist RNA domains. Despite this abnormal Xist expression pattern,
colocalization of H3-3meK27 and Eed is thereafter confined to a single Xist
domain, which is presumably on the original inactive X. These epigenetic events
differ markedly from the kinetics of preferential paternal X inactivation in
normal embryos. All the epigenetic marks on the X are apparently erased in the
epiblast, suggesting that the oocyte and epiblast may have distinct properties
for stepwise programming of the genome.

PMCID: PMC1369137
PMID: 16007070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jul;25(14):6021-30.

Sites that direct nuclear compartmentalization are near the 5' end of the mouse
immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus.

Yang Q(1), Riblet R, Schildkraut CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology (CH 416), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Ave., Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

VDJ rearrangement in the mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain (Igh) locus involves a 
combination of events, including a large change in its nuclear
compartmentalization. Prior to rearrangement, Igh moves from its default
peripheral location near the nuclear envelope to an interior compartment, and
after rearrangement it returns to the periphery. To identify any sites in Igh
responsible for its association with the periphery, we systematically analyzed
the nuclear positions of the Igh locus in mouse non-B- and B-cell lines and,
importantly, in primary splenic lipopolysaccharide-stimulated B cells and
plasmablasts. We found that a broad approximately 1-Mb region in the 5' half of
the variable-gene region heavy-chain (Vh) locus regularly colocalizes with the
nuclear lamina. The 3' half of the Vh gene region is less frequently colocalized 
with the periphery, while sequences flanking the Vh gene region are infrequently 
so. Importantly, in plasmacytomas, VDJ rearrangements that delete most of the Vh 
locus, including part of the 5' half of the Vh gene region, result in loss of
peripheral compartmentalization, while deletion of only the proximal half of the 
Vh gene region does not. In addition, when Igh-Myc translocations move the Vh
genes to a new chromosome, the distal Vh gene region is still associated with the
nuclear periphery. Thus, the Igh region that interacts with the nuclear periphery
is localized but is likely comprised of multiple sites that are distributed over 
approximately 1 Mb in the 5' half of the Vh gene region. This 5' Vh gene region
that produces peripheral compartmentalization is the same region that is
distinguished by requirements for interleukin-7, Pax5, and Ezh2 for rearrangement
of the Vh genes.

PMCID: PMC1168801
PMID: 15988016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Chromosoma. 2005 Aug;114(3):183-92. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Developmental regulation of Suz 12 localization.

de la Cruz CC(1), Fang J, Plath K, Worringer KA, Nusinow DA, Zhang Y, Panning B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Chromatin modifications are among the epigenetic alterations essential for
genetic reprogramming during development. The Polycomb group (PcG) gene family
mediates chromatin modifications that contribute to developmentally regulated
transcriptional silencing. Trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27, mediated by
a PcG protein complex consisting of Eed, Ezh2, and Suz12, is integral in
differentiation, stem cell self-renewal, and tumorigenesis. Eed and Ezh2 are also
implicated in the developmentally regulated silencing of the inactive X
chromosome, as they are transiently enriched on the inactive X chromosome when X 
chromosome silencing is initiated. Here we analyze the dynamic localization of
Suz12 during cellular differentiation and X-inactivation. Though Suz12 is a
requisite member of the Eed/Ezh2 complexes, we found that Suz12 exhibits a
notable difference from Ezh2 and Eed: while Ezh2 and Eed levels decrease during
stem cell differentiation, Suz12 levels remain constant. Despite the differential
regulation in abundance of Suz12 and Eed/Ezh2, Suz12 is also transiently enriched
on the Xi during early stages of X-inactivation, and this accumulation is Xist
RNA dependent. These results suggest that Suz12 may have a function that is not
mediated by its association with Eed and Ezh2, and that this additional function 
is not involved in the regulation of X-inactivation.

PMID: 15986205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Blood. 2005 Sep 15;106(6):1965-74. Epub 2005 Jun 9.

Novel pathway for megakaryocyte production after in vivo conditional eradication 
of integrin alphaIIb-expressing cells.

Jacquelin B(1), Kortulewski T, Vaigot P, Pawlik A, Gruel G, Alibert O, Soularue
P, Joubert C, Gidrol X, Tronik-Le Roux D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génomique et Radiobiologie de l'Hématopoïèse, Service de
Génomique Fonctionnelle, Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique, Evry, France.

Our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms that regulate hematopoiesis in
physiologic and pathologic conditions is limited. Using a molecular approach
based on cDNA microarrays, we demonstrated the emergence of an alternative
pathway for mature bone marrow cell recovery after the programmed and reversible 
eradication of CD41+ cells in transgenic mice expressing a conditional toxigene
targeted by the platelet alphaIIb promoter. The expression profile of the newly
produced CD41+ cells showed high levels of transcripts encoding Ezh2, TdT, Rag2, 
and various immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chains. In this context, we identified and 
characterized a novel population of Lin-Sca-1hi c-Kit- cells, with a
lymphoid-like expression pattern, potentially involved in the reconstitution
process. Our study revealed novel transcriptional cross talk between myeloid and 
lymphoid lineages and identified gene expression modifications that occur in vivo
under these particular stress conditions, opening important prospects for
therapeutic applications.

PMID: 15947096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Curr Biol. 2005 May 24;15(10):942-7.

The murine polycomb group protein Eed is required for global histone H3 lysine-27
methylation.

Montgomery ND(1), Yee D, Chen A, Kalantry S, Chamberlain SJ, Otte AP, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Call Box 
#7264, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

PcG proteins mediate heritable transcriptional silencing by generating and
recognizing covalent histone modifications. One conserved PcG complex, PRC2, is
composed of several proteins including the histone methyltransferase (HMTase)
Ezh2, the WD-repeat protein Eed, and the Zn-finger protein Suz12. Ezh2 methylates
histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27), which serves as an epigenetic mark mediating
silencing. H3K27 can be mono-, di-, or trimethylated (1mH3K27, 2mH3K27, and
3mH3K27, respectively). Hence, either PRC2 must be regulated so as to add one
methyl group to certain nucleosomes but two or three to others, or distinct
complexes must be responsible for 1m-, 2m-, and 3mH3K27. Consistent with the
latter possibility, 2mH3K27 and 3mH3K27, but not 1mH3K27, are absent in Suz12-/- 
embryos, which lack both Suz12 and Ezh2 protein. Mammalian proteins required for 
1mH3K27 have not been identified. Here, we demonstrate that unlike Suz12 and
Ezh2, Eed is required not only for 2m- and 3mH3K27 but also global 1mH3K27. These
results provide a functionally important distinction between PRC2 complex
components and implicate Eed in PRC2-independent histone methylation.

PMID: 15916951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;25(11):4552-64.

In vivo HP1 targeting causes large-scale chromatin condensation and enhanced
histone lysine methylation.

Verschure PJ(1), van der Kraan I, de Leeuw W, van der Vlag J, Carpenter AE,
Belmont AS, van Driel R.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of
Amsterdam, P.O. Box 94062, 1090 GB Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
pj.verschure@science.uva.nl

Changes in chromatin structure are a key aspect in the epigenetic regulation of
gene expression. We have used a lac operator array system to visualize by light
microscopy the effect of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) alpha (HP1alpha) and
HP1beta on large-scale chromatin structure in living mammalian cells. The
structure of HP1, containing a chromodomain, a chromoshadow domain, and a hinge
domain, allows it to bind to a variety of proteins. In vivo targeting of an
enhanced green fluorescent protein-tagged HP1-lac repressor fusion to a lac
operator-containing, gene-amplified chromosome region causes local condensation
of the higher-order chromatin structure, recruitment of the histone
methyltransferase SETDB1, and enhanced trimethylation of histone H3 lysine 9.
Polycomb group proteins of both the HPC/HPH and the EED/EZH2 complexes, which are
involved in the heritable repression of gene activity, are not recruited to the
amplified chromosome region by HP1alpha and HP1beta in vivo targeting. HP1alpha
targeting causes the recruitment of endogenous HP1beta to the chromatin region
and vice versa, indicating a direct interaction between the two HP1 homologous
proteins. Our findings indicate that HP1alpha and HP1beta targeting is sufficient
to induce heterochromatin formation.

PMCID: PMC1140641
PMID: 15899859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Cell. 2005 May 6;121(3):425-36.

Polycomb group protein ezh2 controls actin polymerization and cell signaling.

Su IH(1), Dobenecker MW, Dickinson E, Oser M, Basavaraj A, Marqueron R, Viale A, 
Reinberg D, Wülfing C, Tarakhovsky A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA. sui@rockefeller.edu

Polycomb group protein Ezh2, one of the key regulators of development in
organisms from flies to mice, exerts its epigenetic function through regulation
of histone methylation. Here, we report the existence of the cytosolic
Ezh2-containing methyltransferase complex and tie the function of this complex to
regulation of actin polymerization in various cell types. Genetic evidence
supports the essential role of cytosolic Ezh2 in actin polymerization-dependent
processes such as antigen receptor signaling in T cells and PDGF-induced dorsal
circular ruffle formation in fibroblasts. Revealed function of Ezh2 points to a
broader usage of lysine methylation in regulation of both nuclear and
extra-nuclear signaling processes.

PMID: 15882624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Br J Cancer. 2005 May 9;92(9):1754-8.

Clinicopathological significance of EZH2 mRNA expression in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Sudo T(1), Utsunomiya T, Mimori K, Nagahara H, Ogawa K, Inoue H, Wakiyama S,
Fujita H, Shirouzu K, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 
4546, Tsurumihara, Beppu 874-0838, Japan.

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), a member of the polycomb group protein
family, plays a crucial role in the regulation of embryonic development and has
been associated with the regulation of the cell cycle. Recently, several studies 
have shown that EZH2 is highly expressed in aggressive tumours, including human
breast cancer, prostate cancer, and lymphomas. We thus analysed EZH2 expression
using real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and correlated
its expression status with various clinicopathological parameters in 66 patients 
with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We found high expression of EZH2 in human
liver cancer cell lines. Furthermore, EZH2 gene-expression levels in tumour
tissue specimens (0.34+/-0.52) were significantly higher (P<0.0001) than those in
the corresponding nontumour tissue specimens (0.07+/-0.09). The incidence of
cancer cell invasion into the portal vein was significantly higher (P<0.001) in
the high EZH2 expression group (26 of the 33, 79%) than in the low expression
group (13 of the 33, 39%). However, there was no significant difference in the
disease-free survival rate between the two groups. The findings of this study
indicate that EZH2 mRNA expression was upregulated in human HCC and may play an
important role in tumour progression, especially by facilitating portal vein
invasion.

PMCID: PMC2362028
PMID: 15856046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):22437-44. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

Down-regulation of human DAB2IP gene expression mediated by polycomb Ezh2 complex
and histone deacetylase in prostate cancer.

Chen H(1), Tu SW, Hsieh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323
Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390-9110, USA.

Human DAB2IP (hDAB2IP), a novel GTPase-activating protein modulating the
Ras-mediated signaling and tumor necrosis factor-mediated apoptosis, is a potent 
growth inhibitor in human prostate cancer (PCa). Loss of hDAB2IP expression in
PCa is due to altered epigenetic regulation (i.e. DNA methylation and histone
modification) of its promoter region. The elevated polycomb Ezh2, a histone
methyltransferase, has been associated with PCa progression. In this study, we
have demonstrated that an increased Ezh2 expression in normal prostatic
epithelial cells can suppress hDAB2IP gene expression. In contrast, knocking down
the endogenous Ezh2 levels in PCa by a specific small interfering RNA can
increase hDAB2IP expression. The association of Ezh2 complex (including Eed and
Suz12) with hDAB2IP gene promoter is also detected in PCa cells but not in normal
prostatic epithelial cells. Increased Ezh2 expression in normal prostatic
epithelial cells by cDNA transfection facilitates the recruitment of other
components of Ezh2 complex to the hDAB2IP promoter region accompanied with the
increased levels of methyl histone H3 (H3) and histone deacetylase (HDAC1).
Consistently, data from PCa cells transfected with Ezh2 small interfering RNA
demonstrated that reduced Ezh2 levels resulted in the dissociation of Ezh2
complex accompanied with decreased levels of both methyl H3 and HDAC1 from
hDAB2IP gene promoter. We further unveiled that the methylation status of Lys-27 
but not Lys-9 of H3 in hDAB2IP promoter region is consistent with the hDAB2IP
levels in both normal prostatic epithelial cells and PCa cells. Together, we
conclude that hDAB2IP gene is a target gene of Ezh2 in prostatic epithelium,
which provides an underlying mechanism of the down-regulation of hDAB2IP gene in 
PCa.

PMID: 15817459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Neoplasia. 2004 Nov-Dec;6(6):736-43.

Increased expression of the EZH2 polycomb group gene in BMI-1-positive neoplastic
cells during bronchial carcinogenesis.

Breuer RH(1), Snijders PJ, Smit EF, Sutedja TG, Sewalt RG, Otte AP, van Kemenade 
FJ, Postmus PE, Meijer CJ, Raaphorst FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) genes are responsible for maintenance of cellular identity
and contribute to regulation of the cell cycle. Recent studies have identified
several PcG genes as oncogenes, and a role for PcG proteins in human oncogenesis 
is suspected. We investigated the expression of BMI-1 and EZH2 PcG oncogenes in
human bronchial squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) and bronchial premalignant
precursor lesions (PLs). Whereas normal bronchial epithelium was associated with 
widespread expression of BMI-1 in resting EZH2-negative cells, neoplastic cells
in lung carcinomas displayed altered expression of both BMI-1 and EZH2. Two
patterns of abnormal PcG expression were observed: increased expression of BMI-1 
in dividing neoplastic cells of PLs and SCCs, and enhanced expression of EZH2 and
Ki-67 in BMI-1-positive cells according to severity of the histopathologic stage.
We propose that altered expression of BMI-1 and EZH2 is an early event that
precedes high rates of proliferation in lung cancer. Because PcG complexes are
normally involved in the maintenance of cell characteristics, abnormal PcG
expression may contribute to loss of cell identity.

PMCID: PMC1531677
PMID: 15720799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;24(2):117-25.

Role of polycomb group proteins in stem cell self-renewal and cancer.

Gil J(1), Bernard D, Peters G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research Institute, 
London, United Kingdom. jesus.gil@cancer.org.uk

Polycomb group proteins (PcG) form part of a gene regulatory mechanism that
determines cell fate during normal and pathogenic development. The mechanism
relies on epigenetic modifications on specific histone tails that are inherited
through cell divisions, thus behaving de facto as a cellular memory. This
cellular memory governs key events in organismal development as well as
contributing to the control of normal cell growth and differentiation.
Consequently, the dysregulation of PcG genes, such as Bmi1, Pc2, Cbx7, and EZH2
has been linked with the aberrant proliferation of cancer cells. Furthermore, at 
least three PcG genes, Bmi1, Rae28, and Mel18, appear to regulate self-renewal of
specific stem cell types suggesting a link between the maintenance of cellular
homeostasis and tumorigenesis. In this review, we will briefly summarize current 
views on PcG function and the evidence linking specific PcG proteins with the
behavior of stem cells and cancer cells.

PMID: 15699631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 8;102(6):1859-64. Epub 2005 Jan 31.

Composition and histone substrates of polycomb repressive group complexes change 
during cellular differentiation.

Kuzmichev A(1), Margueron R, Vaquero A, Preissner TS, Scher M, Kirmizis A, Ouyang
X, Brockdorff N, Abate-Shen C, Farnham P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Nucleic Acids Enzymology,
Department of Biochemistry, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ
08854, USA.

Changes in the substrate specificities of factors that irreversibly modify the
histone components of chromatin are expected to have a profound effect on gene
expression through epigenetics. Ezh2 is a histone-lysine methyltransferase with
activity dependent on its association with other components of the Polycomb
Repressive Complexes 2 and 3 (PRC2/3). Ezh2 levels are increasingly elevated
during prostate cancer progression. Other PRC2/3 components also are elevated in 
cancer cells. Overexpression of Ezh2 in tissue culture promotes formation of a
previously undescribed PRC complex, PRC4, that contains the NAD+-dependent
histone deacetylase SirT1 and isoform 2 of the PRC component Eed. Eed2 is
expressed in cancer and undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells but is
undetectable in normal and differentiated ES cells. The distinct PRCs exhibit
differential histone substrate specificities. These findings suggest that
formation of a transformation-specific PRC complex may have a major role in
resetting patterns of gene expression by regulating chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC548563
PMID: 15684044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1199-208. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

A novel repressive E2F6 complex containing the polycomb group protein, EPC1, that
interacts with EZH2 in a proliferation-specific manner.

Attwooll C(1), Oddi S, Cartwright P, Prosperini E, Agger K, Steensgaard P,
Wagener C, Sardet C, Moroni MC, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, Milan, 20141, Italy.

The transcriptional repressor E2F6 has been identified as a component of two
distinct polycomb group protein (PcG)-containing complexes, suggesting a
mechanism for the recruitment of repressive complexes to target sequences in DNA.
Whereas one complex is involved in the repression of classic E2F target genes in 
G0, a role for E2F6 within the cell cycle has yet to be defined. We searched for 
novel E2F6-binding proteins using a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified the
PcG protein, EPC1. We showed that, both in vitro and in vivo, E2F6, DP1, and EPC1
form a stable core complex with repressive activity. Furthermore, we identified
the proliferation-specific PcG, EZH2, as an EPC1-interacting protein. Using
affinity purification, we showed that E2F6, DP1, EPC1, EZH2, and Sin3B co-elute, 
suggesting the identification of a novel E2F6 complex that exists in vivo in both
normal and transformed human cell lines. EZH2 is required for cellular
proliferation and consistent with this, EZH2 elutes with the E2F6-EPC1 complex
only in proliferating cells. Thus we have identified a novel E2F6-PcG complex
(E2F6-EPC1) that interacts with EZH2 and may regulate genes required for cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 15536069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004 Nov;70(11):870-9.

Polycomb homologs are involved in teratogenicity of valproic acid in mice.

Okada A(1), Aoki Y, Kushima K, Kurihara H, Bialer M, Fujiwara M.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Research Laboratories, Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid (VPA) is widely used to treat epilepsy and bipolar
disorder and is also a potent teratogen, but its teratogenic mechanisms are
unknown. We have attempted to describe a fundamental role of the Polycomb group
(Pc-G) in VPA-induced transformations of the axial skeleton.
METHODS: Pregnant NMRI mice were given a single subcutaneous injection of vehicle
or VPA (800 mg/kg) on gestation day (GD) 8. The expression of genes encoding
Polycomb and trithorax groups was measured by quantitative real-time RT-PCR using
total RNA isolated from the embryos exposed to vehicle or VPA for 1, 3, and 6 hr.
In addition, the use of two less teratogenic antiepileptic chemicals valpromide
(VPD) and valnoctamide (VCD) provide reliable evidence to support the
relationship between VPA teratogenicity and the Polycomb group.
RESULTS: At a teratogenic level, VPA inhibits the expression of the Polycomb
group genes, including Eed, Ezh2, Zfp144, Bmi1, Cbx2, Rnf2, and YY1 in the mouse 
embryos. In contrast, neither VPD nor VCD have significant effects on the
expression of those genes affected by VPA. The trithorax group (trx-G) gene MLL, 
which is known to be required to maintain homeobox gene expression such as the
Polycomb gene, is not affected by a teratogenic dose of VPA.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that, during embryonic development, VPA may affect the
gene silencing pathway mediated by the Polycomb group complex. The epigenetic
mechanism of VPA teratogenicity on anteroposterior patterning is suspected.

PMID: 15523661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genes Dev. 2004 Nov 1;18(21):2627-38.

The Polycomb Ezh2 methyltransferase regulates muscle gene expression and skeletal
muscle differentiation.

Caretti G(1), Di Padova M, Micales B, Lyons GE, Sartorelli V.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Gene Expression Group, Laboratory of Muscle Biology, NIAMS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev. 2005 Mar 15;19(6):768.

The Ezh2 protein endows the Polycomb PRC2 and PRC3 complexes with histone lysine 
methyltransferase (HKMT) activity that is associated with transcriptional
repression. We report that Ezh2 expression was developmentally regulated in the
myotome compartment of mouse somites and that its down-regulation coincided with 
activation of muscle gene expression and differentiation of
satellite-cell-derived myoblasts. Increased Ezh2 expression inhibited muscle
differentiation, and this property was conferred by its SET domain, required for 
the HKMT activity. In undifferentiated myoblasts, endogenous Ezh2 was associated 
with the transcriptional regulator YY1. Both Ezh2 and YY1 were detected, with the
deacetylase HDAC1, at genomic regions of silent muscle-specific genes. Their
presence correlated with methylation of K27 of histone H3. YY1 was required for
Ezh2 binding because RNA interference of YY1 abrogated chromatin recruitment of
Ezh2 and prevented H3-K27 methylation. Upon gene activation, Ezh2, HDAC1, and YY1
dissociated from muscle loci, H3-K27 became hypomethylated and MyoD and SRF were 
recruited to the chromatin. These findings suggest the existence of a two-step
activation mechanism whereby removal of H3-K27 methylation, conferred by an
active Ezh2-containing protein complex, followed by recruitment of positive
transcriptional regulators at discrete genomic loci are required to promote
muscle gene expression and cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC525543
PMID: 15520282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Nat Genet. 2004 Dec;36(12):1296-300. Epub 2004 Oct 31.

Imprinting along the Kcnq1 domain on mouse chromosome 7 involves repressive
histone methylation and recruitment of Polycomb group complexes.

Umlauf D(1), Goto Y, Cao R, Cerqueira F, Wagschal A, Zhang Y, Feil R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, CNRS UMR-5535 and University of
Montpellier-II, 1919, route de Mende, 34090 Montpellier, France.

Imprinted genes are clustered in domains, and their allelic repression is
mediated by imprinting control regions. These imprinting control regions are
marked by DNA methylation, which is essential to maintain imprinting in the
embryo. To explore how imprinting is regulated in placenta, we studied the Kcnq1 
domain on mouse distal chromosome 7. This large domain is controlled by an
intronic imprinting control region and comprises multiple genes that are
imprinted in placenta, without the involvement of promoter DNA methylation. We
found that the paternal repression along the domain involves acquisition of
trimethylation at Lys27 and dimethylation at Lys9 of histone H3. Eed-Ezh2
Polycomb complexes are recruited to the paternal chromosome and potentially
regulate its repressive histone methylation. Studies on embryonic stem cells and 
early embryos support our proposal that chromatin repression is established early
in development and is maintained in the placenta. In the embryo, however,
imprinting is stably maintained only at genes that have promoter DNA methylation.
These data underscore the importance of histone methylation in placental
imprinting and identify mechanistic similarities with X-chromosome inactivation
in extraembryonic tissues, suggesting that the two epigenetic mechanisms are
evolutionarily linked.

PMID: 15516932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. EMBO J. 2004 Nov 10;23(22):4462-72. Epub 2004 Oct 28.

Histone hypomethylation is an indicator of epigenetic plasticity in quiescent
lymphocytes.

Baxter J(1), Sauer S, Peters A, John R, Williams R, Caparros ML, Arney K, Otte A,
Jenuwein T, Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
School of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Post-translational modifications of histone amino termini are thought to convey
epigenetic information that extends the coding potential of DNA. In particular,
histone lysine methylation has been implicated in conveying transcriptional
memory and maintaining lineage fidelity. Here an analysis of histone lysine
methylation in quiescent (G(0)) and cycling lymphocytes showed that methylation
of histone H3 at lysines 4 (H3K4), 9 (H3K9), 27 (H3K27) and histone H4 at lysine 
20 is markedly reduced in resting B lymphocytes as compared with cycling cells.
Quiescent B cells also lacked heterochromatin-associated HP1beta and Ikaros at
pericentric chromatin and expressed low levels of Ezh2 and ESET histone methyl
transferases (HMTases). Nuclei from resting B or T cells were approximately three
times more efficiently reprogrammed in nuclear transfer assays than cells in
which HMTase expression, histone methylation and HP1beta binding had been
restored following mitotic stimulation. These results showing local and global
changes in histone lysine methylation levels in vivo demonstrate that
constitutive heterochromatin organization is modified in resting lymphocytes and 
suggest that histone hypomethylation is a useful indicator of epigenetic
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC526455
PMID: 15510223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genesis. 2004 Nov;40(3):151-6.

X-inactivation is stably maintained in mouse embryos deficient for histone methyl
transferase G9a.

Ohhata T(1), Tachibana M, Tada M, Tada T, Sasaki H, Shinkai Y, Sado T.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Japan.

One of the two X chromosomes becomes inactivated during early development of
female mammals. Recent studies demonstrate that the inactive X chromosome is rich
in histone H3 methylated at Lys-9 and Lys-27, suggesting an important role for
these modifications in X-inactivation. It has been shown that in the mouse Eed is
required for maintenance of X-inactivation in the extraembryonic lineages.
Interestingly, Eed associates with Ezh2 to form a complex possessing histone
methyltransferase activity predominantly for H3 Lys-27. We previously showed that
G9a is one of the histone methyltransferases specific for H3 Lys-9 and is
essential for embryonic development. Here we examined X-inactivation in mouse
embryos deficient for G9a. Expression of Xist, which is crucial for the
initiation of X-inactivation, was properly regulated and the inactivated X
chromosome was stably maintained even in the absence of G9a. These results
demonstrate that G9a is not essential for X-inactivation.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15493016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 13;23(20):4061-71. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

Suz12 is essential for mouse development and for EZH2 histone methyltransferase
activity.

Pasini D(1), Bracken AP, Jensen MR, Lazzerini Denchi E, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

SUZ12 is a recently identified Polycomb group (PcG) protein, which together with 
EZH2 and EED forms different Polycomb repressive complexes (PRC2/3). These
complexes contain histone H3 lysine (K) 27/9 and histone H1 K26 methyltransferase
activity specified by the EZH2 SET domain. Here we show that mice lacking Suz12, 
like Ezh2 and Eed mutant mice, are not viable and die during early
postimplantation stages displaying severe developmental and proliferative
defects. Consistent with this, we demonstrate that SUZ12 is required for
proliferation of cells in tissue culture. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SUZ12 
is essential for the activity and stability of the PRC2/3 complexes in mouse
embryos, in tissue culture cells and in vitro. Strikingly, Suz12-deficient
embryos show a specific loss of di- and trimethylated H3K27, demonstrating that
Suz12 is indeed essential for EZH2 activity in vivo. In conclusion, our data
demonstrate an essential role of SUZ12 in regulating the activity of the PRC2/3
complexes, which are required for regulating proliferation and embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC524339
PMID: 15385962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Biol. 2004 Sep 21;14(18):1639-43.

The MES-2/MES-3/MES-6 complex and regulation of histone H3 methylation in C.
elegans.

Bender LB(1), Cao R, Zhang Y, Strome S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

The C. elegans proteins MES-2 and MES-6, orthologs of the Polycomb group (PcG)
chromatin repressors E(Z) and ESC, exist in a complex with their novel partner
MES-3. The MES system participates in silencing the X chromosomes in the
hermaphrodite germline. Loss of maternal MES function leads to germline
degeneration and sterility. We report here that the MES complex is responsible
for di- and trimethylation of histone H3 Lys27 (H3-K27) in the adult germline and
in early embryos and that MES-dependent H3-K27 marks are concentrated on the X's.
Another H3-K27 HMT functions in adult somatic cells, oocytes, and the PGCs of
embryos. In PGCs, the MES complex may specifically convert dimethyl to trimethyl 
H3-K27. The HMT activity of the MES complex appears to be dependent on the SET
domain of MES-2. MES-2 thus joins its orthologs Drosophila E(Z) and human EZH2
among SET domain proteins known to function as HMTs (reviewed in ). Methylation
of histones is important for long-term epigenetic regulation of chromatin and
plays a key role in diverse processes such as X inactivation and oncogenesis. Our
results contribute to understanding the composition and roles of E(Z)/MES-2
complexes across species.

PMID: 15380065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Development. 2004 Sep;131(17):4381-91. Epub 2004 Aug 4.

Chick Pcl2 regulates the left-right asymmetry by repressing Shh expression in
Hensen's node.

Wang S(1), Yu X, Zhang T, Zhang X, Zhang Z, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology
and Center for Bioenvironmental Research, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA
70118, USA.

Asymmetric expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) in the left side of Hensen's node, 
a crucial step for specifying the left-right (LR) axis in the chick embryo, is
established by the repression of Shh expression in the right side of the node.
The transcriptional regulator that mediates this repression has not been
identified. We report the isolation and characterization of a novel chick
Polycomblike 2 gene, chick Pcl2, which encodes a transcription repressor and
displays an asymmetric expression, downstream from Activin-betaB and Bmp4, in the
right side of Hensen's node in the developing embryo. In vitro mapping studies
define the transcription repression activity to the PHD finger domain of the
chick Pcl2 protein. Repression of chick Pcl2 expression in the early embryo
results in randomized heart looping direction, which is accompanied by the
ectopic expression of Shh in the right side of the node and Shh downstream genes 
in the right lateral plate mesoderm (LPM), while overexpression of chick Pcl2
represses Shh expression in the node. The repression of Shh by chick Pcl2 was
also supported by studies in which chick Pcl2 was overexpressed in the developing
chick limb bud and feather bud. Similarly, transgenic overexpression of chick
Pcl2 in the developing mouse limb inhibits Shh expression in the ZPA. In vitro
pull-down assays demonstrated a direct interaction of the chick Pcl2 PHD finger
with EZH2, a component of the ESC/E(Z) repressive complex. Taken together with
the fact that chick Pcl2 was found to directly repress Shh promoter activity in
vitro, our results demonstrate a crucial role for chick Pcl2 in regulating LR
axis patterning in the chick by silencing Shh in the right side of the node.

PMID: 15294861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Prostate. 2004 Sep 1;60(4):273-81.

Identification of polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2)-derived peptides immunogenic in HLA-A24+ prostate cancer patients.

Ogata R(1), Matsueda S, Yao A, Noguchi M, Itoh K, Harada M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kurume University School of Medicine, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Antigens overexpressed in metastatic prostate cancer are appropriate 
targets in anti-cancer immunotherapy, and one candidate is the polycomb group
protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2).
METHODS: Eleven EZH2-derived peptides were prepared based on the HLA-A24 binding 
motif. These peptide candidates were screened first by their ability to be
recognized by immunoglobulin G (IgG), and then by their ability to induce
peptide-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
RESULTS: IgGs reactive to three EZH2 peptides (EZH2-243 to -252, EZH2-291 to
-299, and EZH2-735 to -;742) were detected in the plasma of almost half of
prostate cancer patients. Among them, the EZH2-291 to -299 and EZH2-735 to -742
peptides effectively induced HLA-A24-restricted and prostate cancer-reactive CTLs
from prostate cancer patients. The cytotoxicity was mainly dependent on EZH2
peptide-specific and CD8+ T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These EZH2-291 to -299 and EZH2-735 to -742 peptides could be
promising candidates for peptide-based immunotherapy for HLA-A24+ prostate cancer
patients with metastases.

PMID: 15264237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 1;18(13):1592-605.

Silencing of human polycomb target genes is associated with methylation of
histone H3 Lys 27.

Kirmizis A(1), Bartley SM, Kuzmichev A, Margueron R, Reinberg D, Green R, Farnham
PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) complexes 2 and 3 are involved in transcriptional silencing.
These complexes contain a histone lysine methyltransferase (HKMT) activity that
targets different lysine residues on histones H1 or H3 in vitro. However, it is
not known if these histones are methylation targets in vivo because the human
PRC2/3 complexes have not been studied in the context of a natural promoter
because of the lack of known target genes. Here we report the use of RNA
expression arrays and CpG-island DNA arrays to identify and characterize human
PRC2/3 target genes. Using oligonucleotide arrays, we first identified a cohort
of genes whose expression changes upon siRNA-mediated removal of Suz12, a core
component of PRC2/3, from colon cancer cells. To determine which of the putative 
target genes are directly bound by Suz12 and to precisely map the binding of
Suz12 to those promoters, we combined a high-resolution chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis with custom oligonucleotide promoter arrays. 
We next identified additional putative Suz12 target genes by using ChIP coupled
to CpG-island microarrays. We showed that HKMT-Ezh2 and Eed, two other components
of the PRC2/3 complexes, colocalize to the target promoters with Suz12.
Importantly, recruitment of Suz12, Ezh2 and Eed to target promoters coincides
with methylation of histone H3 on Lys 27.

PMCID: PMC443521
PMID: 15231737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Cell. 2004 Jul 2;15(1):57-67.

SUZ12 is required for both the histone methyltransferase activity and the
silencing function of the EED-EZH2 complex.

Cao R(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Recent studies have revealed the intrinsic histone methyltransferase (HMTase)
activity of the EED-EZH2 complex and its role in Hox gene silencing, X
inactivation, and cancer metastasis. In this study, we focus on the function of
individual components. We found that the HMTase activity requires a minimum of
three components-EZH2, EED, and SUZ12-while AEBP2 is required for optimal
enzymatic activity. Using a stable SUZ12 knockdown cell line, we show SUZ12
knockdown results in cell growth defects, which correlate with genome-wide
alteration on H3-K27 methylation as well as upregulation of a number of Hox
genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay identified a 500 bp region
located 4 kb upstream of the HoxA9 transcription initiation site as a SUZ12
binding site, which responds to SUZ12 knockdown and might play an important role 
in regulating HoxA9 expression. Thus, our study establishes a critical role of
SUZ12 in H3-lysine 27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMID: 15225548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 29;23(34):5759-69.

Activated p53 suppresses the histone methyltransferase EZH2 gene.

Tang X(1), Milyavsky M, Shats I, Erez N, Goldfinger N, Rotter V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, The Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Replicative senescence is an irreversible cell cycle arrest that limits the
proliferation of damaged cells and may be an important tumor suppression
mechanism in vivo. This process is regulated at critical steps by the tumor
suppressor p53. To identify genes that may regulate the senescence process, we
performed cDNA microarray analysis of gene expression in senescent, young
proliferating, and hTERT-immortalized primary human fibroblasts. The histone
methyltransferase (HMTase), EZH2, was specifically downregulated in senescent
cells. Activated p53 suppressed EZH2 gene expression through repression of the
EZH2 gene promoter. This activity of p53 requires intact p53 transactivation and 
DNA binding domains. Furthermore, the repression of EZH2 promoter by p53 is
dependent on p53 transcriptional target p21(Waf1) inactivating RB/E2F pathways.
In addition, the knockdown of EZH2 expression retards cell proliferation and
induces G2/M arrest. We suggest that the p53-dependent suppression of EZH2
expression is a novel pathway that contributes to p53-mediated G2/M arrest. EZH2 
associated complex possesses HMTase activity and is involved in epigenetic
regulation. Activated p53 suppresses EZH2 expression, suggesting a further role
for p53 in epigenetic regulation and in the maintenance of genetic stability.
Suppression of EZH2 expression in tumors by p53 may lead to novel approaches to
control cancer progression.

PMID: 15208672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2004 Apr;14(2):155-64.

The functions of E(Z)/EZH2-mediated methylation of lysine 27 in histone H3.

Cao R(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Curriculum in Genetics & Molecular
Biology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are important for maintaining the silenced state of
homeotic genes. Biochemical and genetic studies in Drosophila and mammalian cells
indicate that PcG proteins function in at least two distinct protein complexes:
the ESC-E(Z) or EED-EZH2 complex, and the PRC1 complex. Recent work has shown
that at least part of the silencing function of the ESC-E(Z) complex is mediated 
by its intrinsic activity for methylating histone H3 on lysine 27. In addition to
being involved in Hox gene silencing, the complex and its associated histone
methyltransferase activity are important in other biological processes including 
X-inactivation, germline development, stem cell pluripotency and cancer
metastasis.

PMID: 15196462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Oncogene. 2004 Aug 5;23(35):5871-9.

Transcription factor E2F3 overexpressed in prostate cancer independently predicts
clinical outcome.

Foster CS(1), Falconer A, Dodson AR, Norman AR, Dennis N, Fletcher A, Southgate
C, Dowe A, Dearnaley D, Jhavar S, Eeles R, Feber A, Cooper CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Genetics, University of Liverpool,
Duncan Building, Liverpool, UK.

E2F transcription factors, including E2F3, directly modulate expression of EZH2. 
Recently, overexpression of the EZH2 gene has been implicated in the development 
of human prostate cancer. In tissue microrarray studies we now show that
expression of high levels of nuclear E2F3 occurs in a high proportion (98/147,
67%) of human prostate cancers, but is a rare event in non-neoplastic prostatic
epithelium suggesting a role for E2F3 overexpression in prostate carcinogenesis. 
Patients with prostate cancer exhibiting immunohistochemically detectable nuclear
E2F3 expression have poorer overall survival (P=0.0022) and cause-specific
survival (P=0.0047) than patients without detectable E2F3 expression. When
patients are stratified according to the maximum percentage of E2F3-positive
nuclei identified within their prostate cancers (up to 20, 21-40%, etc.), there
is an increasingly significant association between E2F3 staining and risk of
death both for overall survival (P=0.0014) and for cause-specific survival
(P=0.0004). Multivariate analyses select E2F3 expression as an independent factor
predicting overall survival (unstratified P=0.0103, stratified P=0.0086) and
cause-specific survival (unstratified P=0.0288, stratified P=0.0072). When these 
results are considered together with published data on EZH2 and on the E2F3
control protein pRB, we conclude that the pRB-E2F3-EZH2 control axis may have a
critical role in modulating aggressiveness of individual human prostate cancer.

PMID: 15184867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell. 2004 Apr 23;14(2):183-93.

Different EZH2-containing complexes target methylation of histone H1 or
nucleosomal histone H3.

Kuzmichev A(1), Jenuwein T, Tempst P, Reinberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
Department of Biochemistry, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Human Enhancer of Zeste homolog (Ezh2) is a histone lysine methyltransferase
(HKMT) associated with transcriptional repression. Ezh2 is present in several
distinct complexes, one of which, PRC2, we characterized previously. Here we
report an additional Ezh2 complex, PRC3. We show that the Ezh2 complexes exhibit 
differential targeting of specific histones for lysine methylation dependent upon
the context of the histone substrates. This differential targeting is a function 
of the associated Eed protein within each complex. We found that Eed protein is
present in four isoforms, which represent alternate translation start site usage 
from the same mRNA. These Eed isoforms selectively associate with distinct
Ezh2-containing complexes with resultant differential targeting of their
associated HKMT activity toward histone H3-K27 or histone H1-K26. Our data
provide evidence for a novel mechanism regulating the substrate specificity of a 
chromatin-modifying enzyme through disparate translational products of a
regulatory subunit.

PMID: 15099518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Oncogene. 2004 Jun 17;23(28):4930-7.

Ezh2 reduces the ability of HDAC1-dependent pRb2/p130 transcriptional repression 
of cyclin A.

Tonini T(1), Bagella L, D'Andrilli G, Claudio PP, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for
Biotechnology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA 19122, USA.

The polycomb group (PcG) proteins are known to be involved in maintaining the
silenced state of several developmentally regulated genes. Enhancer of zeste
homolog 2 (Ezh2), a member of this large protein family, has also been shown to
be deregulated in different tumor types and its role, both as a potential primary
effector and as a mediator of tumorigenesis, has become a subject of increased
interest. We observed that Ezh2 binds to pRb2/p130, a member of the
retinoblastoma family; as such, we were led to consider the possible ability of
Ezh2 to modulate cell cycle progression. Both Ezh2 and pRb2/p130 repress gene
expression by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC1), which decreases DNA
accessibility for activating transcription factors. Additionally, we observed
that Ezh2 interacts with the C-terminal region of pRb2/p130, essential for
interaction with HDAC1. We show that Ezh2 is able to reverse
pRb2/p130-HDAC1-mediated repression of the cyclin A promoter. This indicates a
functional role of this complex in regulating cyclin A expression, known to be
crucial in mediating cell cycle advancement. We also detected a significant
decrease in the retention of HDAC1 activity associated with pRb2/p130 when Ezh2
was overexpressed. Finally, electromobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrated that
overexpression of Ezh2 caused the abrogation of the pRb2/p130-HDAC1 complex on
the cyclin A promoter. These data, taken together, suggest that Ezh2 competes
with HDAC1 in binding to pRb2/p130, disrupting their occupancy on the cyclin A
promoter. In this study, we propose a new mechanism for the functional
inactivation of pRb2/p130 that ultimately contributes to cell cycle progression
and malignant transformation.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15077161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Am J Pathol. 2004 Mar;164(3):873-81.

Unique polycomb gene expression pattern in Hodgkin's lymphoma and Hodgkin's
lymphoma-derived cell lines.

Dukers DF(1), van Galen JC, Giroth C, Jansen P, Sewalt RG, Otte AP,
Kluin-Nelemans HC, Meijer CJ, Raaphorst FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrije Universiteit University Medical Center (VUMC), 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Human Polycomb-group (PcG) genes play a crucial role in the regulation of
embryonic development and regulation of the cell cycle and hematopoiesis. PcG
genes encode proteins that form two distinct PcG complexes, involved in
maintenance of cell identity and gene silencing patterns. We recently showed that
expression of the BMI-1 and EZH2 PcG genes is separated during normal B-cell
development in germinal centers, whereas Hodgkin/Reed-Sternberg (H/RS) cells
co-express BMI-1 and EZH2. In the current study, we used immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence to determine whether the binding partners of these PcG
proteins are also present in H/RS cells and H/RS-derived cell lines. PcG
expression profiles were analyzed in combination with expression of the cell
cycle inhibitor p16INK4a, because experimental model systems indicate that p16 is
a downstream target of Bmi-1. We found that H/RS cells and HL-derived cell lines 
co-express all core proteins of the two known PcG complexes, including BMI-1,
MEL-18, RING1, HPH1, HPC1, and -2, EED, EZH2, YY1, and the HPC2 binding partner, 
CtBP. Expression of HPC1 has not been found in normal mature B cells and other
malignant lymphomas of B-cell origin, suggesting that the PcG expression profile 
of H/RS is unique. In contrast to Bmi-1 transgenic mice where p16INK4a is
down-regulated, 27 of 52 BMI-1POS cases of HL revealed strong nuclear expression 
of p16INK4a. We propose that abnormal expression of BMI-1 and its binding
partners in H/RS cells contributes to development of HL. However, abnormal
expression of BMI-1 in HL is not necessarily associated with down-regulation of
p16INK4a.

PMCID: PMC1613333
PMID: 14982841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Neoplasia. 2003 Nov-Dec;5(6):481-8.

Poorly differentiated breast carcinoma is associated with increased expression of
the human polycomb group EZH2 gene.

Raaphorst FM(1), Meijer CJ, Fieret E, Blokzijl T, Mommers E, Buerger H, Packeisen
J, Sewalt RA, Otte AP, van Diest PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, BioCentrum Amsterdam,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. fm.raaphorst@vumc.nl

Polycomb group (PcG) genes contribute to the maintenance of cell identity, cell
cycle regulation, and oncogenesis. We describe the expression of five PcG genes
(BMI-1, RING1, HPC1, HPC2, and EZH2) innormal breast tissues, invasive breast
carcinomas, and their precursors. Members of the HPC-HPH/PRC1 PcG complex,
including BMI-1, RING1, HPC1, and HPC2, were detected in normal resting and
cycling breast cells. The EED-EZH/PRC2 PcG complex protein EZH2 was only found in
rare cycling cells, whereas normal resting breast cells were negative for EZH2.
PcG gene expression patterns in ductal hyperplasia (DH), well-differentiated
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and well-differentiated invasive carcinomas
closely resembled the pattern in healthy cells. However, poorly differentiated
DCIS and invasive carcinomas frequently expressed EZH2 in combination with
HPC-HPH/PRC1 proteins. Most BMI-1/EZH2 double-positive cells in poorly
differentiated DCIS were resting. Poorly differentiated invasive carcinoma
displayed an enhanced rate of cell division within BMI-1/EZH2 double-positive
cells. We propose that the enhanced expression of EZH2 in BMI-1(+) cells
contributes to the loss of cell identity in poorly differentiated breast
carcinomas, and that increased EZH2 expression precedes high frequencies of
proliferation. These observations suggest that deregulated expression of EZH2 is 
associated with loss of differentiation and development of poorly differentiated 
breast cancer in humans.

PMCID: PMC1502571
PMID: 14965441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):401-6. Epub 2003 Oct 21.

Polycomb group suppressor of zeste 12 links heterochromatin protein 1alpha and
enhancer of zeste 2.

Yamamoto K(1), Sonoda M, Inokuchi J, Shirasawa S, Sasazuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Population Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. kyama@bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Drosophila suppressor of zeste 12 (Su(z)12) is a Polycomb group (PcG)
transcriptional repressor and is present in E(z)-ESC, a multiprotein complex with
methylation activity specific for lysine 9 and 27 of histone H3. Although PcG-
and heterochromatin-mediated gene silencing have been considered distinct, mutant
flies of Su(z)12 showed not only homeotic transformation but also position effect
variegation. We now report that the mammalian SU(Z)12 directly interacts with
heterochromatin protein 1alpha (HP1alpha) and PcG enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2), the
mammalian counterpart of E(z), in vitro and in vivo. Two distinct domains in
SU(Z)12 are involved in these interactions, the region between the zinc finger
motif and the VEFS (VRN2-EMF2-FIS2-Su(z)12) box for HP1alpha (amino acid residues
479-536) and the VEFS box for EZH2 (amino acid residues 600-639), which are not
mutually exclusive. Interestingly this region of the VEFS box has been shown to
be critical for the phenotype of the Su(z)12 mutant fly. In addition SU(Z)12
represses transcription activity in the presence of HP1alpha in a reporter assay.
These results provide a molecular explanation for the functional link of these
epigenetic silencing processes mediated by Su(z)12.

PMID: 14570930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. EMBO J. 2003 Oct 15;22(20):5323-35.

EZH2 is downstream of the pRB-E2F pathway, essential for proliferation and
amplified in cancer.

Bracken AP(1), Pasini D, Capra M, Prosperini E, Colli E, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Recent experiments have demonstrated that the Polycomb group (PcG) gene EZH2 is
highly expressed in metastatic prostate cancer and in lymphomas. EZH2 is a
component of the PRC2 histone methyltransferase complex, which also contains EED 
and SUZ12 and is required for the silencing of HOX gene expression during
embryonic development. Here we demonstrate that both EZH2 and EED are essential
for the proliferation of both transformed and non-transformed human cells. In
addition, the pRB-E2F pathway tightly regulates their expression and, consistent 
with this, we find that EZH2 is highly expressed in a large set of human tumors. 
These results raise the question whether EZH2 is a marker of proliferation or if 
it is actually contributing to tumor formation. Significantly, we propose that
EZH2 is a bona fide oncogene, since we find that ectopic expression of EZH2 is
capable of providing a proliferative advantage to primary cells and, in addition,
its gene locus is specifically amplified in several primary tumors.

PMCID: PMC213796
PMID: 14532106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11606-11. Epub 2003 Sep 19.

EZH2 is a marker of aggressive breast cancer and promotes neoplastic
transformation of breast epithelial cells.

Kleer CG(1), Cao Q, Varambally S, Shen R, Ota I, Tomlins SA, Ghosh D, Sewalt RG, 
Otte AP, Hayes DF, Sabel MS, Livant D, Weiss SJ, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA. kleer@umich.edu

The Polycomb Group Protein EZH2 is a transcriptional repressor involved in
controlling cellular memory and has been linked to aggressive prostate cancer.
Here we investigate the functional role of EZH2 in cancer cell invasion and
breast cancer progression. EZH2 transcript and protein were consistently elevated
in invasive breast carcinoma compared with normal breast epithelia. Tissue
microarray analysis, which included 917 samples from 280 patients, demonstrated
that EZH2 protein levels were strongly associated with breast cancer
aggressiveness. Overexpression of EZH2 in immortalized human mammary epithelial
cell lines promotes anchorage-independent growth and cell invasion. EZH2-mediated
cell invasion required an intact SET domain and histone deacetylase activity.
This study provides compelling evidence for a functional link between
dysregulated cellular memory, transcriptional repression, and neoplastic
transformation.

PMCID: PMC208805
PMID: 14500907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Development. 2003 Sep;130(18):4235-48.

Consequences of the depletion of zygotic and embryonic enhancer of zeste 2 during
preimplantation mouse development.

Erhardt S(1), Su IH, Schneider R, Barton S, Bannister AJ, Perez-Burgos L,
Jenuwein T, Kouzarides T, Tarakhovsky A, Surani MA.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Institute, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Enhancer of zeste 2 (Ezh2), a SET domain-containing protein, is crucial for
development in many model organisms, including early mouse development. In mice, 
Ezh2 is detected as a maternally inherited protein in the oocyte but its function
at the onset of development is unknown. We have used a conditional allele of Ezh2
to deplete the oocyte of this maternal inheritance. We show that the loss of
maternal Ezh2 has a long-term effect causing severe growth retardation of
neonates despite 'rescue' through embryonic transcription from the paternal
allele. This phenotypic effect on growth could be attributed to the asymmetric
localisation of the Ezh2/Eed complex and the associated histone methylation
pattern to the maternal genome, which is disrupted in Ezh2 mutant zygotes. During
subsequent development, we detect distinct histone methylation patterns in the
trophectoderm and the pluripotent epiblast. In the latter where Oct4 expression
continues from the zygote onwards, the Ezh2/Eed complex apparently establishes a 
unique epigenetic state and plasticity, which probably explains why loss of Ezh2 
is early embryonic lethal and obligatory for the derivation of pluripotent
embryonic stem cells. By contrast, in the differentiating trophectoderm cells
where Oct4 expression is progressively downregulated Ezh2/Eed complex is
recruited transiently to one X chromosome in female embryos at the onset of
X-inactivation. This accumulation and the associated histone methylation are also
lost in Ezh2 mutants, suggesting a role in X inactivation. Thus, Ezh2 has
significant and diverse roles during early development, as well as during the
establishment of the first differentiated cells, the trophectoderm, and of the
pluripotent epiblast cells.

PMID: 12900441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 May 7;95(9):661-8.

Multiplex biomarker approach for determining risk of prostate-specific
antigen-defined recurrence of prostate cancer.

Rhodes DR(1), Sanda MG, Otte AP, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA.

Comment in
    J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 May 7;95(9):634-5.

BACKGROUND: Molecular signatures in cancer tissue may be useful for diagnosis and
are associated with survival. We used results from high-density tissue
microarrays (TMAs) to define combinations of candidate biomarkers associated with
the rate of prostate cancer progression after radical prostatectomy that could
identify patients at high risk for recurrence.
METHODS: Fourteen candidate biomarkers for prostate cancer for which antibodies
are available included hepsin, pim-1 kinase, E-cadherin (ECAD; cell adhesion
molecule), alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase, and EZH2 (enhancer of zeste
homolog 2, a transcriptional repressor). TMAs containing more than 2000 tumor
samples from 259 patients who underwent radical prostatectomy for localized
prostate cancer were studied with these antibodies. Immunohistochemistry results 
were evaluated in conjunction with clinical parameters associated with prostate
cancer progression, including tumor stage, Gleason score, and prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) level. Recurrence was defined as a postsurgery PSA level of more
than 0.2 ng/mL. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Moderate or strong expression of EZH2 coupled with at most moderate
expression of ECAD (i.e., a positive EZH2:ECAD status) was the biomarker
combination that was most strongly associated with the recurrence of prostate
cancer. EZH2:ECAD status was statistically significantly associated with prostate
cancer recurrence in a training set of 103 patients (relative risk [RR] = 2.52,
95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.09 to 5.81; P =.021), in a validation set of 80 
patients (RR = 3.72, 95% CI = 1.27 to 10.91; P =.009), and in the combined set of
183 patients (RR = 2.96, 95% CI = 1.56 to 5.61; P<.001). EZH2:ECAD status was
statistically significantly associated with disease recurrence even after
adjusting for clinical parameters, such as tumor stage, Gleason score, and PSA
level (hazard ratio = 3.19, 95% CI = 1.50 to 6.77; P =.003).
CONCLUSION: EZH2:ECAD status was statistically significantly associated with
prostate cancer recurrence after radical prostatectomy and may be useful in
defining a cohort of high-risk patients.

PMID: 12734317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Science. 2003 Apr 4;300(5616):131-5. Epub 2003 Mar 20.

Role of histone H3 lysine 27 methylation in X inactivation.

Plath K(1), Fang J, Mlynarczyk-Evans SK, Cao R, Worringer KA, Wang H, de la Cruz 
CC, Otte AP, Panning B, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) protein Eed is implicated in regulation of imprinted
X-chromosome inactivation in extraembryonic cells but not of random X
inactivation in embryonic cells. The Drosophila homolog of the Eed-Ezh2 PcG
protein complex achieves gene silencing through methylation of histone H3 on
lysine 27 (H3-K27), which suggests a role for H3-K27 methylation in imprinted X
inactivation. Here we demonstrate that transient recruitment of the Eed-Ezh2
complex to the inactive X chromosome (Xi) occurs during initiation of X
inactivation in both extraembryonic and embryonic cells and is accompanied by
H3-K27 methylation. Recruitment of the complex and methylation on the Xi depend
on Xist RNA but are independent of its silencing function. Together, our results 
suggest a role for Eed-Ezh2-mediated H3-K27 methylation during initiation of both
imprinted and random X inactivation and demonstrate that H3-K27 methylation is
not sufficient for silencing of the Xi.

PMID: 12649488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Mar 4;100(5):2468-73. Epub 2003 Feb 14.

Rnf2 (Ring1b) deficiency causes gastrulation arrest and cell cycle inhibition.

Voncken JW(1), Roelen BA, Roefs M, de Vries S, Verhoeven E, Marino S, Deschamps
J, van Lohuizen M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The highly homologous Rnf2 (Ring1b) and Ring1 (Ring1a) proteins were identified
as in vivo interactors of the Polycomb Group (PcG) protein Bmi1. Functional
ablation of Rnf2 results in gastrulation arrest, in contrast to relatively mild
phenotypes in most other PcG gene null mutants belonging to the same functional
group, among which is Ring1. Developmental defects occur in both embryonic and
extraembryonic tissues during gastrulation. The early lethal phenotype is
reminiscent of that of the PcG-gene knockouts Eed and Ezh2, which belong to a
separate functional PcG group and PcG protein complex. This finding indicates
that these biochemically distinct PcG complexes are both required during early
mouse development. In contrast to the strong skeletal transformation in Ring1
hemizygous mice, hemizygocity for Rnf2 does not affect vertebral identity.
However, it does aggravate the cerebellar phenotype in a Bmi1 null-mutant
background. Together, these results suggest that Rnf2 or Ring1-containing PcG
complexes have minimal functional redundancy in specific tissues, despite overlap
in expression patterns. We show that the early developmental arrest in Rnf2-null 
embryos is partially bypassed by genetic inactivation of the Cdkn2a (Ink4aARF)
locus. Importantly, this finding implicates Polycomb-mediated repression of the
Cdkn2a locus in early murine development.

PMCID: PMC151364
PMID: 12589020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 Jan;2(1):113-21.

Identification of the polycomb group protein SU(Z)12 as a potential molecular
target for human cancer therapy.

Kirmizis A(1), Bartley SM, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

We have previously identified SU(Z)12 as an E2F target gene. Because many E2F
target genes encode proteins that are critical for the control of cell
proliferation, we have further characterized the regulation and expression of
SU(Z)12. To understand the molecular mechanisms responsible for expression of
SU(Z)12 mRNA, we have analyzed the promoter region. We found that the SU(Z)12
gene is controlled by dual promoters, one of which functions bidirectionally. In 
addition to the E2F binding site, we have identified two binding sites for T cell
factor (TCF)/beta-catenin complexes. Using gel mobility shift assays, we
demonstrated that both TCF sites can be bound by TCF4. TCF/beta-catenin complexes
have been shown to be a critical regulator of gene expression in tumors of the
colon, breast, and liver. Accordingly, we have used chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays to confirm that TCF4/beta-catenin complexes are bound to the SU(Z)12
promoter in colon cancer cells but not in HeLa cells. We next adapted the
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay for use with primary colon tumor samples,
and, using matched pairs of normal and tumor tissue obtained from several
different colon cancer patients, we demonstrate that levels of beta-catenin bound
to the SU(Z)12 promoter are increased in colon tumors. Finally, we show that the 
SU(Z)12 mRNA is up-regulated in a number of different human tumors, including
tumors of the colon, breast, and liver. Recent studies have found that SU(Z)12 is
a component of the Drosophila ESC-E(Z) and the human EED-EZH2 Polycomb chromatin 
remodeling complexes. Therefore, we suggest that SU(Z)12, which may modulate the 
tumor phenotype by changing gene expression profiles, may be a logical target for
the design of a new antitumor agent

PMID: 12533679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nat Immunol. 2003 Feb;4(2):124-31. Epub 2002 Dec 23.

Ezh2 controls B cell development through histone H3 methylation and Igh
rearrangement.

Su IH(1), Basavaraj A, Krutchinsky AN, Hobert O, Ullrich A, Chait BT, Tarakhovsky
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Feb;4(2):101-3.

Polycomb group protein Ezh2 is an essential epigenetic regulator of embryonic
development in mice, but its role in the adult organism is unknown. High
expression of Ezh2 in developing murine lymphocytes suggests Ezh2 involvement in 
lymphopoiesis. Using Cre-mediated conditional mutagenesis, we demonstrated a
critical role for Ezh2 in early B cell development and rearrangement of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene (Igh). We also revealed Ezh2 as a key regulator
of histone H3 methylation in early B cell progenitors. Our data suggest
Ezh2-dependent histone H3 methylation as a novel regulatory mechanism controlling
Igh rearrangement during early murine B cell development.

PMID: 12496962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Cancer Cell. 2002 Nov;2(5):349-50.

The EZH2 polycomb transcriptional repressor--a marker or mover of metastatic
prostate cancer?

Sellers WR(1), Loda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. william_sellers@dfci.harvard.edu

The recent finding of overexpression of the polycomb group transcriptional
repressor EZH2 in prostate cancer raises the possibility that transcriptional
regulation at the chromatin level may play a role in the development of the
metastatic phenotype and suggests new avenues of exploration with respect to
patient stratification and therapeutics.

PMID: 12450788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nature. 2002 Oct 10;419(6907):624-9.

The polycomb group protein EZH2 is involved in progression of prostate cancer.

Varambally S(1), Dhanasekaran SM, Zhou M, Barrette TR, Kumar-Sinha C, Sanda MG,
Ghosh D, Pienta KJ, Sewalt RG, Otte AP, Rubin MA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2002 Oct 10;419(6907):572-3.

Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death in males and is second
only to lung cancer. Although effective surgical and radiation treatments exist
for clinically localized prostate cancer, metastatic prostate cancer remains
essentially incurable. Here we show, through gene expression profiling, that the 
polycomb group protein enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is overexpressed in
hormone-refractory, metastatic prostate cancer. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
duplexes targeted against EZH2 reduce the amounts of EZH2 protein present in
prostate cells and also inhibit cell proliferation in vitro. Ectopic expression
of EZH2 in prostate cells induces transcriptional repression of a specific cohort
of genes. Gene silencing mediated by EZH2 requires the SET domain and is
attenuated by inhibiting histone deacetylase activity. Amounts of both EZH2
messenger RNA and EZH2 protein are increased in metastatic prostate cancer; in
addition, clinically localized prostate cancers that express higher
concentrations of EZH2 show a poorer prognosis. Thus, dysregulated expression of 
EZH2 may be involved in the progression of prostate cancer, as well as being a
marker that distinguishes indolent prostate cancer from those at risk of lethal
progression.

PMID: 12374981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mamm Genome. 2002 Sep;13(9):493-503.

The mouse PcG gene eed is required for Hox gene repression and extraembryonic
development.

Wang J(1), Mager J, Schnedier E, Magnuson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, CB 7264, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
27599-7264, USA.

The Polycomb group (PcG) of genes was first identified in Drosophila as
maintenance factors for long-term transcriptional repression of homeotic genes.
In mice, the PcG protein Eed (Embryonic ectoderm development) is present in a
distinct complex that interacts with histone deacetylase (HDAC) and the PcG
member Ezh2 (Enhancer of zeste homolog 2), but not in the larger Polycomb
repressive complex 1 (PRC1) formed by several other PcG proteins. eednull mutants
manifest a distinct early gastrulation defect that occurs prior to homeotic gene 
expression. To determine whether Eed is also required for regulating homeotic
genes, a later acting eedhypomorph mutation was analyzed. The anterior expression
boundaries of several Hox genes were shifted rostrally by one segment, indicating
that Eed is required for stable repression of homeotic genes. Furthermore,
although the eednull/hypomorph compound heterozygotes die during mid-gestation
stage, they did not show a more severe derepression of Hox genes than the
eedhypomorph/hypomorph homozygotes. A detailed analysis of the mid-gestation
lethality associated with the eednull/hypomorph compound heterozygotes revealed a
novel function for eed in the development of secondary trophoblast giant cells
during murine placenta formation. Tetraploid rescue experiments demonstrated that
the defect is cell autonomous in the extraembryonic lineage. Mash2, a paternally 
imprinted gene important for trophoblast development, was ectopically expressed
in the eed mutants. However, genetic crosses with a Mash2 null allele suggested
that Eed was not required to maintain Mash2 imprinting, but could be required in 
a lineage specific fashion to suppress Mash2 expression.

PMID: 12370779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Science. 2002 Nov 1;298(5595):1039-43. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

Role of histone H3 lysine 27 methylation in Polycomb-group silencing.

Cao R(1), Wang L, Wang H, Xia L, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Jones RS, Zhang
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins play important roles in maintaining the silent
state of HOX genes. Recent studies have implicated histone methylation in
long-term gene silencing. However, a connection between PcG-mediated gene
silencing and histone methylation has not been established. Here we report the
purification and characterization of an EED-EZH2 complex, the human counterpart
of the Drosophila ESC-E(Z) complex. We demonstrate that the complex specifically 
methylates nucleosomal histone H3 at lysine 27 (H3-K27). Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we show that H3-K27 methylation colocalizes with, and
is dependent on, E(Z) binding at an Ultrabithorax (Ubx) Polycomb response element
(PRE), and that this methylation correlates with Ubx repression. Methylation on
H3-K27 facilitates binding of Polycomb (PC), a component of the PRC1 complex, to 
histone H3 amino-terminal tail. Thus, these studies establish a link between
histone methylation and PcG-mediated gene silencing.

PMID: 12351676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Hybrid Hybridomics. 2002 Aug;21(4):245-52.

A panel of monoclonal antibodies against human polycomb group proteins.

Hamer KM(1), Sewalt RG, den Blaauwen JL, Hendrix T, Satijn DP, Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of
Amsterdam, 1018 TV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins are chromatin-associated proteins that heritably
repress gene activity in many organisms, including man. Two distinct human PcG
complexes have been identified. The HPC/HPH PcG complex I contains the HPC, HPH, 
RING1, and BMI1 proteins, the EED/EZH2 PcG complex II contains the EED, EZH2, and
YY1 proteins. Previously we found that the relative expression levels of proteins
of the human PcG complexes I and II are severely deregulated in human tumors.
These findings signify an important role for antibodies against human PcG
proteins as diagnostic tools. To be able to produce standardized anti-human PcG
antibodies, we developed a panel of five mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs)
against the human PcG proteins HPC2, BMI1, RING1A, EED, and EZH2. All MAbs can be
used for Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence labeling of tissue culture 
cells. With the exception of the MAb against HPC2, all MAbs can also be used in
immunoprecipitation experiments and immunohistochemistry of human tissues. The
novel MAbs are therefore valuable tools for the cell biological, biochemical, and
pathological analysis of human PcG proteins.

PMID: 12193277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(15):5539-53.

Selective interactions between vertebrate polycomb homologs and the SUV39H1
histone lysine methyltransferase suggest that histone H3-K9 methylation
contributes to chromosomal targeting of Polycomb group proteins.

Sewalt RG(1), Lachner M, Vargas M, Hamer KM, den Blaauwen JL, Hendrix T, Melcher 
M, Schweizer D, Jenuwein T, Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of
Amsterdam, Plantage Muidergracht 12, 1018 TV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form multimeric chromatin-associated protein
complexes that are involved in heritable repression of gene activity. Two
distinct human PcG complexes have been characterized. The EED/EZH2 PcG complex
utilizes histone deacetylation to repress gene activity. The HPC/HPH PcG complex 
contains the HPH, RING1, BMI1, and HPC proteins. Here we show that vertebrate
Polycomb homologs HPC2 and XPc2, but not M33/MPc1, interact with the histone
lysine methyltransferase (HMTase) SUV39H1 both in vitro and in vivo. We further
find that overexpression of SUV39H1 induces selective nuclear relocalization of
HPC/HPH PcG proteins but not of the EED/EZH2 PcG proteins. This SUV39H1-dependent
relocalization concentrates the HPC/HPH PcG proteins to the large pericentromeric
heterochromatin domains (1q12) on human chromosome 1. Within these PcG domains we
observe increased H3-K9 methylation. Finally, we show that H3-K9 HMTase activity 
is associated with endogenous HPC2. Our findings suggest a role for the SUV39H1
HMTase and histone H3-K9 methylation in the targeting of human HPC/HPH PcG
proteins to modified chromatin structures.

PMCID: PMC133945
PMID: 12101246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43065-73. Epub 2001 Sep 24.

Polycomblike PHD fingers mediate conserved interaction with enhancer of zeste
protein.

O'Connell S(1), Wang L, Robert S, Jones CA, Saint R, Jones RS.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Molecular Genetics of Development and Department of Genetics,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

The products of Polycomb group (PcG) genes are required for the epigenetic
repression of a number of important developmental regulatory genes, including
homeotic genes. Enhancer of zeste (E(Z)) is a Drosophila PcG protein that
previously has been shown to bind directly to another PcG protein, Extra Sex
Combs (ESC), and is present along with ESC in a 600-kDa complex in Drosophila
embryos. Using yeast two-hybrid and in vitro binding assays, we show that E(Z)
binds directly to another PcG protein, Polycomblike (PCL). PCL.E(Z) interaction
is shown to be mediated by the plant homeodomain (PHD) fingers domain of PCL,
providing evidence that this motif can act as an independent protein interaction 
domain. An association was also observed between PHF1 and EZH2, human homologs of
PCL and E(Z), respectively, demonstrating the evolutionary conservation of this
interaction. E(Z) was found to not interact with the PHD domains of three
Drosophila trithorax group (trxG) proteins, which function to maintain the
transcriptional activity of homeotic genes, providing evidence for the
specificity of the interaction of E(Z) with the PCL PHD domain.
Coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration experiments demonstrate in vivo
association of PCL with E(Z) and ESC in Drosophila embryos. We discuss the
implications of PCL association with ESC.E(Z) complexes and the possibility that 
PCL may either be a subunit of a subset of ESC.E(Z) complexes or a subunit of a
separate complex that interacts with ESC.E(Z) complexes.

PMID: 11571280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(13):4330-6.

The polycomb-group gene Ezh2 is required for early mouse development.

O'Carroll D(1), Erhardt S, Pagani M, Barton SC, Surani MA, Jenuwein T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Polycomb-group (Pc-G) genes are required for the stable repression of the
homeotic selector genes and other developmentally regulated genes, presumably
through the modulation of chromatin domains. Among the Drosophila Pc-G genes,
Enhancer of zeste [E(z)] merits special consideration since it represents one of 
the Pc-G genes most conserved through evolution. In addition, the E(Z) protein
family contains the SET domain, which has recently been linked with histone
methyltransferase (HMTase) activity. Although E(Z)-related proteins have not
(yet) been directly associated with HMTase activity, mammalian Ezh2 is a member
of a histone deacetylase complex. To investigate its in vivo function, we
generated mice deficient for Ezh2. The Ezh2 null mutation results in lethality at
early stages of mouse development. Ezh2 mutant mice either cease developing after
implantation or initiate but fail to complete gastrulation. Moreover,
Ezh2-deficient blastocysts display an impaired potential for outgrowth,
preventing the establishment of Ezh2-null embryonic stem cells. Interestingly,
Ezh2 is up-regulated upon fertilization and remains highly expressed at the
preimplantation stages of mouse development. Together, these data suggest an
essential role for Ezh2 during early mouse development and genetically link Ezh2 
with eed and YY1, the only other early-acting Pc-G genes.

PMCID: PMC87093
PMID: 11390661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Blood. 2001 Jun 15;97(12):3896-901.

Coexpression of BMI-1 and EZH2 polycomb-group proteins is associated with cycling
cells and degree of malignancy in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

van Kemenade FJ(1), Raaphorst FM, Blokzijl T, Fieret E, Hamer KM, Satijn DP, Otte
AP, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Hospital, Rm PA-001, De Boelelaan 1117,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands. f.vkemenade@azvu.nl

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins, such as BMI-1 and EZH2, form multimeric
gene-repressing complexes involved in axial patterning, hematopoiesis, and cell
cycle regulation. In addition, BMI-1 is involved in experimental lymphomagenesis.
Little is known about its role in human lymphomagenesis. Here, BMI-1 and EZH2
expression patterns are analyzed in a variety of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(B-NHLs), including small lymphocytic lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, large B-cell
lymphoma, mantle-cell lymphoma, and Burkitt lymphoma. In contrast to the mutually
exclusive pattern of BMI-1 and EZH2 in reactive follicles, the neoplastic cells
in B-NHLs of intermediate- and high-grade malignancy showed strong coexpression
of BMI-1 and EZH2. This pattern overlapped with the expression of Mib-1/Ki-67, a 
marker for proliferation. Neoplastic cells in B-NHL of low-grade malignancy were 
either BMI-1(low)/EZH2(+) (neoplastic centroblasts) or BMI-1(low)EZH2(-)
(neoplastic centrocytes). These observations show that low-, intermediate-, and
high grade B-NHLs are associated with increased coexpression of the BMI-1 and
EZH2 PcG proteins, whose normal expression pattern is mutually exclusive. This
expression pattern is probably caused by a failure to down-regulate BMI-1 in
dividing neoplastic cells, because BMI-1 expression is absent from normal
dividing B cells. These observations are in agreement with findings in studies of
Bmi-1 transgenic mice. The extent of BMI-1/EZH2 coexpression correlated with
clinical grade and the presence of Mib-1/Ki-67 expression, suggesting that the
irregular expression of BMI-1 and EZH2 is an early event in the formation of
B-NHL. This points to a role for abnormal PcG expression in human
lymphomagenesis. (Blood. 2001;97:3896-3901)

PMID: 11389032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Immunol. 2001 May 15;166(10):5925-34.

Distinct BMI-1 and EZH2 expression patterns in thymocytes and mature T cells
suggest a role for Polycomb genes in human T cell differentiation.

Raaphorst FM(1), Otte AP, van Kemenade FJ, Blokzijl T, Fieret E, Hamer KM, Satijn
DP, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vrÿe Universiteit University Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. fm.raaphorst@azvu.nl

BMI-1 and EZH2 Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins belong to two distinct protein
complexes involved in the regulation of hematopoiesis. Using unique PcG-specific 
antisera and triple immunofluorescence, we found that mature resting peripheral T
cells expressed BMI-1, whereas dividing blasts were EZH2(+). By contrast,
subcapsular immature double-negative (DN) (CD4(-)/CD8(-)) T cells in the thymus
coexpressed BMI-1 and EZH2 or were BMI-1 single positive. Their descendants,
double-positive (DP; CD4(+)/CD8(+)) cortical thymocytes, expressed EZH2 without
BMI-1. Most EZH2(+) DN and DP thymocytes were dividing, while DN BMI-1(+)/EZH2(-)
thymocytes were resting and proliferation was occasionally noted in DN
BMI-1(+)/EZH2(+) cells. Maturation of DP cortical thymocytes to single-positive
(CD4(+)/CD8(-) or CD8(+)/CD4(-)) medullar thymocytes correlated with decreased
detectability of EZH2 and continued relative absence of BMI-1. Our data show that
BMI-1 and EZH2 expression in mature peripheral T cells is mutually exclusive and 
linked to proliferation status, and that this pattern is not yet established in
thymocytes of the cortex and medulla. T cell stage-specific PcG expression
profiles suggest that PcG genes contribute to regulation of T cell
differentiation. They probably reflect stabilization of cell type-specific gene
expression and irreversibility of lineage choice. The difference in PcG
expression between medullar thymocytes and mature interfollicular T cells
indicates that additional maturation processes occur after thymocyte
transportation from the thymus.

PMID: 11342607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Br J Haematol. 2001 Mar;112(4):950-8.

The Polycomb group protein EZH2 is upregulated in proliferating, cultured human
mantle cell lymphoma.

Visser HP(1), Gunster MJ, Kluin-Nelemans HC, Manders EM, Raaphorst FM, Meijer CJ,
Willemze R, Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are involved in the stable transmittance of the
repressive state of their gene targets throughout the cell cycle. Mis-expression 
of PcG proteins can lead to proliferative defects and tumorigenesis. There are
two separate multimeric PcG protein complexes: an EED-EZH2-containing complex and
a BMI1-RING1-containing complex. In the normal human follicle mantle, both PcG
complexes have mutually exclusive expression patterns. BMI1-RING1 is expressed,
but EZH2-EED is not. Here, we studied the expression of both complexes in six
cases of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), which is derived from the follicle mantle.
MCL cells can be cultured in vitro and stimulated to proliferation. We found that
resting MCL cells expressed BMI1-RING1, but not EZH2-EED, like normal mantle
cells. Proliferating MCL cells, however, showed strongly enhanced expression of
EZH2. Also, BMI1 and RING1 continued to be expressed in proliferating MCL. This
is the first demonstration that EZH2 expression can be upregulated in fresh
lymphoma cells. To test whether the enhanced EZH2 expression was causal for the
increased proliferation in MCL, we overexpressed EZH2 in two different cell
lines. In the B cell-derived Ramos cell line, EZH2 overexpression caused an
increase in the proliferation rate. This suggests a possible causal effect
between EZH2 upregulation and increased proliferation in haematopoietic cells.

PMID: 11298590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(4):1360-9.

The polycomb group protein EED interacts with YY1, and both proteins induce
neural tissue in Xenopus embryos.

Satijn DP(1), Hamer KM, den Blaauwen J, Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of
Amsterdam, 1018 TV Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins form multimeric protein complexes which are
involved in the heritable stable repression of genes. Previously, we identified
two distinct human PcG protein complexes. The EED-EZH protein complex contains
the EED and EZH2 PcG proteins, and the HPC-HPH PcG complex contains the HPC, HPH,
BMI1, and RING1 PcG proteins. Here we show that YY1, a homolog of the Drosophila 
PcG protein pleiohomeotic (Pho), interacts specificially with the human PcG
protein EED but not with proteins of the HPC-HPH PcG complex. Since YY1 and Pho
are DNA-binding proteins, the interaction between YY1 and EED provides a direct
link between the chromatin-associated EED-EZH PcG complex and the DNA of target
genes. To study the functional significance of the interaction, we expressed the 
Xenopus homologs of EED and YY1 in Xenopus embryos. Both Xeed and XYY1 induce an 
ectopic neural axis but do not induce mesodermal tissues. In contrast, members of
the HPC-HPH PcG complex do not induce neural tissue. The exclusive, direct
neuralizing activity of both the Xeed and XYY1 proteins underlines the
significance of the interaction between the two proteins. Our data also indicate 
a role for chromatin-associated proteins, such as PcG proteins, in Xenopus neural
induction.

PMCID: PMC99588
PMID: 11158321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Pathol. 2000 Sep;157(3):709-15.

Coexpression of BMI-1 and EZH2 polycomb group genes in Reed-Sternberg cells of
Hodgkin's disease.

Raaphorst FM(1), van Kemenade FJ, Blokzijl T, Fieret E, Hamer KM, Satijn DP, Otte
AP, Meijer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Hospital, Amsterdam. University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. fm.raaphorst@azvu.nl

The human BMI-1 and EZH2 polycomb group (PcG) proteins are constituents of two
distinct complexes of PcG proteins with gene regulatory activity. PcG proteins
ensure correct embryonic development by suppressing homeobox genes, and they also
contribute to regulation of lymphopoiesis. The two PcG complexes are thought to
regulate different target genes and probably have different tissue distributions.
Altered expression of PcG genes is linked to transformation in cell lines and
induction of tumors in mutant mice, but the role of PcG genes in human cancers is
relatively unexplored. Using antisera specific for human PcG proteins, we used
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence to detect BMI-1 and EZH2 PcG proteins
in Reed-Sternberg cells of Hodgkin's disease (HRS). The expression patterns were 
compared to those in follicular lymphocytes of the lymph node, the normal
counterparts of HRS cells. In the germinal center, expression of BMI-1 is
restricted to resting Mib-1/Ki-67(-) centrocytes, whereas EZH2 expression is
associated with dividing Mib-1/Ki-67(+) centroblasts. By contrast, HRS cells
coexpress BMI-1, EZH2, and Mib-1/Ki-67. Because HRS cells are thought to
originate from germinal center lymphocytes, these observations suggests that
Hodgkin's disease is associated with coexpression of BMI-1 and EZH2 in HRS cells.

PMCID: PMC1885707
PMID: 10980109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;8(3):174-80.

The human EZH2 gene: genomic organisation and revised mapping in 7q35 within the 
critical region for malignant myeloid disorders.

Cardoso C(1), Mignon C, Hetet G, Grandchamps B, Fontes M, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U491, Faculté de Médecine de la Timone, Marseille, France.

The EZH2 gene is a homolog of the Drosophila Polycomb group (PcG) gene enhancer
of zest, a crucial regulator of homeotic gene expression. Several lines of
evidence suggest a critical role for the EZH2 protein during normal and perturbed
development of the haematopoietic and central nervous systems. Indeed, the EZH2
protein has been shown to associate with the Vav proto-oncoprotein and with the
XNP protein, the product of a mental retardation gene. The EZH2 gene was
previously reported to be located on chromosome 21q22 and was proposed as a
candidate gene for some characteristics of the Down syndrome phenotype. We report
here the genomic structure and fine mapping of the EZH2 gene. We demonstrate that
the functional gene actually maps to chromosome 7q35 and that the sequence
previously isolated from a chromosome 21 cosmid corresponds to a pseudogene.
Finally, the nature of the EZH2 protein and its mapping to the critical region
for malignant myeloid disorders lead us to propose the EZH2 gene is involved in
the pathogenesis of 7q35-q36 aberrations in myeloid leukaemia.

PMID: 10780782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nat Genet. 1999 Dec;23(4):474-8.

Transcriptional repression mediated by the human polycomb-group protein EED
involves histone deacetylation.

van der Vlag J(1), Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)E.C. Slater Instituut, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Polycomb-group (PcG) proteins form multimeric protein complexes, which are
involved in maintaining the transcriptional repressive state of genes over
successive cell generations. Components of PcG complexes and their mutual
interactions have been identified and analysed through extensive genetic and
biochemical analyses. Molecular mechanisms underlying PcG-mediated repression of 
gene activity, however, have remained largely unknown. Previously we reported the
existence of two distinct human PcG protein complexes. The EED/EZH protein
complex contains the embryonic ectoderm development (EED) and enhancer of zeste 2
(EZH2; refs 9,10) PcG proteins. The HPC/HPH PcG complex contains the human
polycomb 2 (HPC2; ref. 11), human polyhomeotic (HPH), BMI1 (ref. 13 ) and RING1
(refs 14, 15) proteins. Here we show that EED (refs 4, 5, 6, 7, 8) interacts,
both in vitro and in vivo, with histone deacetylase (HDAC) proteins. This
interaction is highly specific because the HDAC proteins do not interact with
other vertebrate PcG proteins. We further find that histone deacetylation
activity co-immunoprecipitates with the EED protein. Finally, the histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (ref. 17) relieves transcriptional
repression mediated by EED, but not by HPC2, a human homologue of polycomb. Our
data indicate that PcG-mediated repression of gene activity involves histone
deacetylation. This mechanistic link between two distinct, global gene repression
systems is accomplished through the interaction of HDAC proteins with a
particular PcG protein, EED.

PMID: 10581039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Mamm Genome. 1999 Mar;10(3):311-4.

The murine polycomb-group genes Ezh1 and Ezh2 map close to Hox gene clusters on
mouse chromosomes 11 and 6.

Laible G(1), Haynes AR, Lebersorger A, O'Carroll D, Mattei MG, Denny P, Brown SD,
Jenuwein T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP) @ The Vienna Biocenter, Dr.
Bohrgasse 7, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

PMID: 10051331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Oct;18(10):5634-42.

Point mutations in the WD40 domain of Eed block its interaction with Ezh2.

Denisenko O(1), Shnyreva M, Suzuki H, Bomsztyk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA.

The Polycomb group proteins are involved in maintenance of the silenced state of 
several developmentally regulated genes. These proteins form large aggregates
with different subunit compositions. To explore the nature of these complexes and
their function, we used the full-length Eed (embryonic ectoderm development)
protein, a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila Polycomb group protein Esc, as a
bait in the yeast two-hybrid screen. Several strongly interacting cDNA clones
were isolated. The cloned cDNAs all encoded the 150- to 200-amino-acid N-terminal
fragment of the mammalian homolog of the Drosophila Enhancer of zeste [E(z)]
protein, Ezh2. The full-length Ezh2 bound strongly to Eed in vitro, and Eed
coimmunoprecipitated with Ezh2 from murine 70Z/3 cell extracts, confirming the
interaction between these proteins observed in yeast. Mutations T1031A and T1040C
in one of the WD40 repeats of Eed, which account for the hypomorphic and lethal
phenotype of eed in mouse development, blocked binding of Ezh2 to Eed in a
two-hybrid interaction in yeast and in mammalian cells. These mutations also
blocked the interaction between these proteins in vitro. In mammalian cells, the 
Gal4-Eed fusion protein represses the activity of a promoter bearing Gal4 DNA
elements. The N-terminal fragment of the Ezh2 protein abolished the
transcriptional repressor activity of Gal4-Eed protein when they were coexpressed
in mammalian cells. Eed and Ezh2 were also found to bind RNA in vitro, and RNA
altered the interaction between these proteins. These findings suggest that
Polycomb group proteins Eed and Ezh2 functionally interact in mammalian cells, an
interaction that is mediated by the WD40-containing domain of Eed protein.

PMCID: PMC109149
PMID: 9742080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jun;18(6):3586-95.

Characterization of interactions between the mammalian polycomb-group proteins
Enx1/EZH2 and EED suggests the existence of different mammalian polycomb-group
protein complexes.

Sewalt RG(1), van der Vlag J, Gunster MJ, Hamer KM, den Blaauwen JL, Satijn DP,
Hendrix T, van Driel R, Otte AP.

Author information: 
(1)E. C. Slater Instituut, BioCentrum Amsterdam, University of Amsterdam, 1018 TV
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

In Drosophila melanogaster, the Polycomb-group (PcG) and trithorax-group (trxG)
genes have been identified as repressors and activators, respectively, of gene
expression. Both groups of genes are required for the stable transmission of gene
expression patterns to progeny cells throughout development. Several lines of
evidence suggest a functional interaction between the PcG and trxG proteins. For 
example, genetic evidence indicates that the enhancer of zeste [E(z)] gene can be
considered both a PcG and a trxG gene. To better understand the molecular
interactions in which the E(z) protein is involved, we performed a two-hybrid
screen with Enx1/EZH2, a mammalian homolog of E(z), as the target. We report the 
identification of the human EED protein, which interacts with Enx1/EZH2. EED is
the human homolog of eed, a murine PcG gene which has extensive homology with the
Drosophila PcG gene extra sex combs (esc). Enx1/EZH2 and EED coimmunoprecipitate,
indicating that they also interact in vivo. However, Enx1/EZH2 and EED do not
coimmunoprecipitate with other human PcG proteins, such as HPC2 and BMI1.
Furthermore, unlike HPC2 and BMI1, which colocalize in nuclear domains of U-2 OS 
osteosarcoma cells, Enx1/EZH2 and EED do not colocalize with HPC2 or BMI1. Our
findings indicate that Enx1/EZH2 and EED are members of a class of PcG proteins
that is distinct from previously described human PcG proteins.

PMCID: PMC108940
PMID: 9584199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Hum Mol Genet. 1998 Apr;7(4):679-84.

Specific interaction between the XNP/ATR-X gene product and the SET domain of the
human EZH2 protein.

Cardoso C(1), Timsit S, Villard L, Khrestchatisky M, Fontès M, Colleaux L.

Author information: 
(1)Unit INSERM U406, Génétique Médicale et Développement, Faculté de Médecine de 
la Timone, 27 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13385 Marseille cedex 05, France.

Mutations in the XNP gene result in different inherited disorders, including the 
ATR-X syndrome which is characterized by mental retardation (MR) associated with 
alpha-thalaessemia. Amino acid sequence analysis revealed that the XNP protein is
a new member of the SNF2-like family, which comprises numerous members involved
in a broad range of biological functions: transcriptional regulation, DNA repair 
and chromosome segregation. Since experiments on fibroblasts from ATR-X patients 
have provided no evidence for either a DNA repair defect or abnormal chromosome
breakage or segregation, it seems more likely that the XNP protein is somehow
involved in regulation of gene expression. Recent genetic and biochemical studies
have led to the emerging concept that SNF2-like proteins are components of a
large protein complex which may exert its functions by modulating chromatin
structure. To investigate whether XNP could mediate the activity of gene-specific
activators through chromatin remodelling, we performed a yeast two-hybrid
analysis using XNP and several human heterochromatin-associated proteins. We
found a specific interaction between the XNP and the EZH2 proteins. In light of
these observations, we discuss how the XNP protein may regulate gene
transcription at the chromatin level.

PMID: 9499421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 2;16(11):3219-32.

Mammalian homologues of the Polycomb-group gene Enhancer of zeste mediate gene
silencing in Drosophila heterochromatin and at S. cerevisiae telomeres.

Laible G(1), Wolf A, Dorn R, Reuter G, Nislow C, Lebersorger A, Popkin D, Pillus 
L, Jenuwein T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna, Austria.

Gene silencing is required to stably maintain distinct patterns of gene
expression during eukaryotic development and has been correlated with the
induction of chromatin domains that restrict gene activity. We describe the
isolation of human (EZH2) and mouse (Ezh1) homologues of the Drosophila
Polycomb-group (Pc-G) gene Enhancer of zeste [E(z)], a crucial regulator of
homeotic gene expression implicated in the assembly of repressive protein
complexes in chromatin. Mammalian homologues of E(z) are encoded by two distinct 
loci in mouse and man, and the two murine Ezh genes display complementary
expression profiles during mouse development. The E(z) gene family reveals a
striking functional conservation in mediating gene repression in eukaryotic
chromatin: extra gene copies of human EZH2 or Drosophila E(z) in transgenic flies
enhance position effect variegation of the heterochromatin-associated white gene,
and expression of either human EZH2 or murine Ezh1 restores gene repression in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae mutants that are impaired in telomeric silencing.
Together, these data provide a functional link between Pc-G-dependent gene
repression and inactive chromatin domains, and indicate that silencing
mechanism(s) may be broadly conserved in eukaryotes.

PMCID: PMC1169939
PMID: 9214638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Genomics. 1996 Nov 15;38(1):30-7.

Cloning of a human homolog of the Drosophila enhancer of zeste gene (EZH2) that
maps to chromosome 21q22.2.

Chen H(1), Rossier C, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Switzerland.

To identify genes that map on human chromosome 21 (HC21) and that may contribute 
to the phenotype of Down syndrome (DS), exon trapping was applied to cosmid DNA
from an HC21-specific library LL21NCO2-Q. More than 550 potential exons were
cloned and partially characterized. One of these, hmc23b04 (GenBank X88270)
showed strong homology to the Drosophila Enhancer of zeste protein (GenBank
U00180) from amino acid 665 to 694 (p = 7.6 x 10(-11). We have cloned the
full-length cDNA for this human homolog of the Drosophila E(z) gene (termed EZH2)
and mapped it to within YACs 64f11 and 809b11 between markers D21S65 and ERG on
human chromosome 21q22.2. Sequence analysis indicates that EZH2 encodes a
746-amino-acid polypeptide that shows 60.5% identity to the Drosophila E(z)
protein and contains a trithorax-like domain and a DNA-binding motif. Northern
blot analysis revealed that EZH2 is expressed in several tissues. Alternatively
spliced mRNA species have been observed. The Drosophila E(z) protein is a member 
of the polycomb group genes that maintain homeotic gene repression and are
thought to control gene expression by regulating chromatin. The strong sequence
conservation suggests a possible function of EZH2 in regulation of gene
transcription and chromatin structure; it may therefore contribute to certain
phenotypes of Down syndrome by altered regulation of its target genes.

PMID: 8954776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


