
1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 29;10(12):e0145438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145438.
eCollection 2015.

Sexual Fate Reprogramming in the Steroid-Induced Bi-Directional Sex Change in the
Protogynous Orange-Spotted Grouper, Epinephelus coioides.

Wu GC(1,)(2), Tey WG(1), Li HW(1), Chang CF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224,
Taiwan. (2)Center of Excellence for the Oceans, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung 20224, Taiwan.

Androgen administration has been widely used for masculinization in fish. The
mechanism of the sex change in sexual fate regulation is not clear. Oral
administration or pellet implantation was applied. We orally applied an aromatase
inhibitor (AI, to decrease estrogen levels) and 17a-methyltestosterone (MT, to
increase androgen levels) to induce masculinization to clarify the mechanism of
the sex change in the protogynous orange-spotted grouper. After 3 mo of AI/MT
administration, male characteristics were observed in the female-to-male sex
change fish. These male characteristics included increased plasma
11-ketotestosterone (11-KT), decreased estradiol (E2) levels, increased
male-related gene (dmrt1, sox9, and cyp11b2) expression, and decreased
female-related gene (figla, foxl2, and cyp19a1a) expression. However, the reduced
male characteristics and male-to-female sex change occurred after
AI/MT-termination in the AI- and MT-induced maleness. Furthermore, the MT-induced
oocyte-depleted follicle cells (from MT-implantation) had increased proliferating
activity, and the sexual fate in a portion of female gonadal soma cells was
altered to male function during the female-to-male sex change. In contrast, the
gonadal soma cells were not proliferative during the early process of the
male-to-female sex change. Additionally, the male gonadal soma cells did not
alter to female function during the male-to-female sex change in the
AI/MT-terminated fish. After MT termination in the male-to-female sex-changed
fish, the differentiated male germ cells showed increased proliferating
activities together with dormancy and did not show characteristics of both sexes 
in the early germ cells. In conclusion, these findings indicate for the first
time in a single species that the mechanism involved in the replacement of soma
cells is different between the female-to-male and male-to-female sex change
processes in grouper. These results also demonstrate that sexual fate
determination (secondary sex determination) is regulated by endogenous sex
steroid levels.

PMCID: PMC4694621
PMID: 26714271  [PubMed - in process]


2. Hum Reprod Update. 2015 Nov-Dec;21(6):787-808. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmv036. Epub
2015 Aug 4.

Genetics of primary ovarian insufficiency: new developments and opportunities.

Qin Y(1), Jiao X(1), Simpson JL(2), Chen ZJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital, Shandong
University, National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Jinan 250001, China. (2)Research and Global Programs March of Dimes
Foundation, White Plains, NY, USA Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami,
FL, USA. (3)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital,
Shandong University, National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive
Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for Reproductive
Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Medicine, Jinan 250001, China Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, China chenzijiang@vip.163.com.

BACKGROUND: Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by marked
heterogeneity, but with a significant genetic contribution. Identifying exact
causative genes has been challenging, with many discoveries not replicated. It is
timely to take stock of the field, outlining the progress made, framing the
controversies and anticipating future directions in elucidating the genetics of
POI.
METHODS: A search for original articles published up to May 2015 was performed
using PubMed and Google Scholar, identifying studies on the genetic etiology of
POI. Studies were included if chromosomal analysis, candidate gene screening and 
a genome-wide study were conducted. Articles identified were restricted to
English language full-text papers.
RESULTS: Chromosomal abnormalities have long been recognized as a frequent cause 
of POI, with a currently estimated prevalence of 10-13%. Using the traditional
karyotype methodology, monosomy X, mosaicism, X chromosome deletions and
rearrangements, X-autosome translocations, and isochromosomes have been detected.
Based on candidate gene studies, single gene perturbations unequivocally having a
deleterious effect in at least one population include Bone morphogenetic protein 
15 (BMP15), Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1), and Fragile X
mental retardation 1 (FMR1) premutation on the X chromosome; Growth
differentiation factor 9 (GDF9), Folliculogenesis specific bHLH transcription
factor (FIGLA), Newborn ovary homeobox gene (NOBOX), Nuclear receptor subfamily
5, group A, member 1 (NR5A1) and Nanos homolog 3 (NANOS3) seem likely as well,
but mostly being found in no more than 1-2% of a single population studied. Whole
genome approaches have utilized genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to reveal 
loci not predicted on the basis of a candidate gene, but it remains difficult to 
locate causative genes and susceptible loci were not always replicated.
Cytogenomic methods (array CGH) have identified other regions of interest but
studies have not shown consistent results, the resolution of arrays has varied
and replication is uncommon. Whole-exome sequencing in non-syndromic POI kindreds
has only recently begun, revealing mutations in the Stromal antigen 3 (STAG3),
Synaptonemal complex central element 1 (SYCE1), minichromosome maintenance
complex component 8 and 9 (MCM8, MCM9) and ATP-dependent DNA helicase homolog
(HFM1) genes. Given the slow progress in candidate-gene analysis and relatively
small sample sizes available for GWAS, family-based whole exome and whole genome 
sequencing appear to be the most promising approaches for detecting potential
genes responsible for POI.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, the cytogenetic, cytogenomic (array CGH) and exome
sequencing approaches have revealed a genetic causation in ~20-25% of POI cases. 
Uncovering the remainder of the causative genes will be facilitated not only by
whole genome approaches involving larger cohorts in multiple populations but also
incorporating environmental exposures and exploring signaling pathways in
intragenic and intergenic regions that point to perturbations in regulatory genes
and networks.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology.

PMCID: PMC4594617
PMID: 26243799  [PubMed - in process]


3. Iran Biomed J. 2015;19(4):220-5. Epub 2015 Jul 22.

Effect of Human Ovarian Tissue Vitrification/Warming on the Expression of Genes
Related to Folliculogenesis.

Shams Mofarahe Z(1), Ghaffari Novin M(1), Jafarabadi M(2), Salehnia M(3),
Noroozian M(1), Ghorbanmehr N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Reproductive Health Research
Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (3)Dept. of
Anatomical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (4)Biotechnology
Group, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Alzahra University, Tehran , Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ovarian tissue cryopreservation is an alternative strategy to
preserve the fertility of women predicted to undergo premature ovarian failure.
This study was designed to evaluate the expression of folliculogenesis-related
genes, including factor in the germline alpha (FIGLA), growth differentiation
factor-9 (GDF-9), follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), and KIT LIGAND
after vitrification/warming of human ovarian tissue.
METHODS: Human ovarian tissue samples were collected from five transsexual women.
In the laboratory, the ovarian medullary part was removed by a surgical blade,
and the cortical tissue was cut into small pieces. Some pieces were vitrified and
warmed and the others were considered as non-vitrified group (control).
Follicular normality was assessed with morphological observation by a light
microscope, and the expression of FIGLA, KIT LIGAND, GDF-9,, and FSHR genes was
examined using real-time RT-PCR in both the vitrified and non-vitrified groups.
RESULTS: Overall, 85% of the follicles preserved their normal morphologic feature
after warming. The percentage of normal follicles and the expression of FIGLA,
KIT LIGAND, GDF-9, and FSHR genes were similar in both vitrified and
non-vitrified groups (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Vitrification/warming of human ovarian tissue had no remarkable
effect on the expression of folliculogenesis-related genes.

PMCID: PMC4649857
PMID: 26175108  [PubMed - in process]


4. Biol Reprod. 2015 Jul;93(1):22. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.118604. Epub 2015 Jun
3.

Lats1 Deletion Causes Increased Germ Cell Apoptosis and Follicular Cysts in Mouse
Ovaries.

Sun T(1), Pepling ME(2), Diaz FJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health, Department of Animal Science, The 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania. (2)Department of
Biology, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York. (3)Center for Reproductive
Biology and Health, Department of Animal Science, The Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania fjd10@psu.edu.

The Hippo signaling pathway is essential for regulating proliferation and
apoptosis in mammalian cells. The LATS1 kinase is a core member of the Hippo
signaling pathway that phosphorylates and inactivates the transcriptional
co-activators YAP1 and WWTR1. Deletion of Lats1 results in low neonate survival
and ovarian stromal tumors in surviving adults, but the effects of Lats1 on early
follicular development are not understood. Here, the expression of Hippo pathway 
components including Wwtr1, Stk4, Stk3, Lats2, and Yap1 transcripts were
decreased by 50% in mouse ovaries between 2 and 8 days of age while expression
was maintained from 8 days to 21 days and after priming with eCG. LATS1, LATS2,
and MOB1B were localized to both germ and somatic cells of primordial to antral
follicles. Interestingly, YAP1 was predominantly cytoplasmic, whereas WWTR1 was
nuclear in oocytes and somatic cells. Deletion of Lats1 caused an increase in
germ cell apoptosis from 1.7% in control ovaries to 3.6% in Lats1 mutant ovaries 
and a 58% and 32% decrease in primordial and activated follicle numbers in
cultured mutant ovaries. Surprisingly, there was an increase in Bmp15 but not
Gdf9, Figla, Nobox transcripts or the somatic-specific transcripts Amh and Wnt4
in cultured Lats1 mutant ovaries. Last, Lats1 mutant ovaries developed ovarian
cysts at a higher frequency (43%) than heterozygous (24%) and control ovaries
(8%). Results showed that the Hippo pathway is active in ovarian follicles and
that LATS1 is required to maintain the pool of germ cells and primordial
follicles.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 26040669  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 20;10(4):e0123900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0123900.
eCollection 2015.

Figla Favors Ovarian Differentiation by Antagonizing Spermatogenesis in a
Teleosts, Nile Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus).

Qiu Y(1), Sun S(1), Charkraborty T(2), Wu L(1), Sun L(1), Wei J(1), Nagahama
Y(2), Wang D(1), Zhou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), School of Life Science, Southwest University, Beibei, Chongqing,
China. (2)South Ehime Fisheries Research Center, Ehime University, Funakoshi,
Ainan, Ehime, Japan.

Figla (factor in the germ line, alpha), a female germ cell-specific transcription
factor, had been shown to activate genetic hierarchies in oocytes. The ectopic
expression of Figla was known to repress spermatogenesis-associated genes in male
mice. However, the potential role of Figla in other vertebrates remains elusive. 
The present work was aimed to identify and characterize the functional relevance 
of Figla in the ovarian development of Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus).
Tissue distribution and ontogeny analysis revealed that tilapia Figla gene was
dominantly expressed in the ovary from 30 days after hatching.
Immunohistochemistry analysis also demonstrated that Figla was expressed in the
cytoplasm of early primary oocytes. Intriguingly, over-expression of Figla in XY 
fish resulted in the disruption of spermatogenesis along with the depletion of
meiotic spermatocytes and spermatids in testis. Dramatic decline of sycp3
(synaptonemal complex protein 3) and prm (protamine) expression indicates that
meiotic spermatocytes and mature sperm production are impaired. Even though
Sertoli cell (dmrt1) and Leydig cell (star and cyp17a1) marker genes remained
unaffected, hsd3b1 expression and 11-KT production were enhanced in
Figla-transgene testis. Taken together, our data suggest that fish Figla might
play an essential role in the ovarian development by antagonizing
spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4404364
PMID: 25894586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 13;10(2):e0115050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115050.
eCollection 2015.

Associations among Sebox and other MEGs and its effects on early embryogenesis.

Park MW(1), Kim KH(1), Kim EY(1), Lee SY(1), Ko JJ(1), Lee KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Pangyo-Ro 335, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, 463-400, Korea.

In a previous report, we identified Sebox as a new candidate maternal effect gene
that is essential for embryonic development and primarily impacts the two-cell
(2C) stage. The present study was conducted to determine the mechanism of action 
for Sebox in this capacity, as shown by changes in the expression levels of other
known MEG mRNAs after Sebox RNA interference (RNAi) in oocytes. Sebox-knockdown
metaphase II (Mll) oocytes displayed normal morphology, but among the 23 MEGs
monitored, 8 genes were upregulated, and 15 genes were unchanged. We hypothesized
that the perturbed gene expression of these MEGs may cause the arrest of embryo
development at the 2C stage and examined the expression of several marker genes
for the degradation of maternal factors and zygotic genome activation. We found
that some maternal mRNAs, c-mos, Gbx2, and Gdf9, were not fully degraded in
Sebox-knockdown 2C embryos, and that several zygotic genome activation markers,
Mt1a, Rpl23, Ube2a and Wee1, were not fully expressed in conjunction with
diminished embryonic transcriptional activity. In addition, Sebox may be involved
in the formation of the subcortical maternal complex through its regulation of
the upstream regulator, Figla. Therefore, we concluded that Sebox is important in
preparing oocytes for embryonic development by orchestrating the expression of
other important MEGs.

PMCID: PMC4331730
PMID: 25679966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 May;176(1):66-75. doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1523-4.
Epub 2015 Feb 5.

A lentiviral vector visualizing the germ cell specification in vitro under the
control of Figla promoter.

Chu Z(1), Niu B, Li N, Hu Y, Li J, Yu P, Wu C, Yan X, Lei A, Hua J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering and
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, 712100, China.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is affecting more and more women, which is the
loss of function of the ovaries before age 40. To elucidate the underlying
mechanisms of the oogenesis is of importance to understand the causes of impaired
fertility and POF. However, mammalian oogenesis in vivo is a complex process.
Thus, building an oogenesis visualizing system is beneficial for the study of
oogenesis. In this study, we found that Figla is specifically expressed in female
mice oocyte. Then, we constructed a lentiviral vector (pTRIP-Figla-EGFP-puro)
under the control of Figla promoter, which drived enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) as an indicator and used the lentiviral vector transduction the
ovarian cells and induced germ cells derived from human umbilical cord
mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs), and the results showed that the lentiviral
vector we constructed was able to specifically express green fluorescent protein 
(GFP) in the ovarian oocyte and induced oocyte-like cells derived from hUC-MSCs, 
which was Figla-positive cells. These results suggest that pTRIP-Figla-EGFP
vector provides a new system to study the role of Figla in oogenesis, and an
approach to study the development and the differentiation of germ cells derived
from stem cells.

PMID: 25652828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Menopause. 2015 May;22(5):520-6. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000000340.

Mutational analysis of the FIGLA gene in women with idiopathic premature ovarian 
failure.

Tosh D(1), Rani HS, Murty US, Deenadayal A, Grover P.

Author information: 
(1)From the 1Biology Division, CSIR Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
Hyderabad, India; 2Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India; 
and 3Infertility Institute and Research Center, Secunderabad, India.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to identify the association of FIGLA (factor 
in the germ line a) gene variants with premature ovarian failure (POF) in the
Indian population.
METHODS: Two hundred nineteen women with idiopathic POF and 230 healthy controls 
were recruited for this study. All exons, intron-exon boundaries, and
untranslated regions of the FIGLA gene were analyzed by polymerase chain reaction
and sequencing. All FIGLA variants were analyzed in silico, using PolyPhen, SIFT,
MutationTaster, PMUT, I-Mutant, Mupro, Align-GVGD, PROVEAN, and HOPE software, to
predict pathogenicity and changes in protein stability.
RESULTS: Seven different FIGLA variants were detected among women with POF. Two
exon 3 variants, c.427G <U+2192> C and c.557C <U+2192> T, showed strong association between
cases and controls (P = 0.02 and P = 0.02, respectively). Significant differences
in both of these variants were observed between cases and controls in genotype
and dominant models. No significant difference between controls and women with
POF was found on haplotype analysis. A nonsynonymous variant, p.(Arg83Cys), was
found only in POF cases. Variant p.(Arg83Cys) lies in the functional domain of
the FIGLA gene (basic helix-loop-helix), and protein alignments reveal that it is
highly conserved among mammals. In silico analysis suggests the functional
involvement of p.(Arg83Cys) and p.(Ser141Thr) variants in POF pathogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: We have established a strong association between FIGLA gene variants
and POF in Indian women, which may be a potential genetic risk factor in the
development of idiopathic POF. However, further independent genetic and
functional studies are necessary to confirm our findings.

PMID: 25314148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics. 2014 Oct;12(5):239-48. doi:
10.1016/j.gpb.2014.08.002. Epub 2014 Sep 20.

A comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of infant and adult mouse ovary.

Pan L(1), Gong W(2), Zhou Y(2), Li X(1), Yu J(3), Hu S(4).

Author information: 
(1)James D. Watson Institute of Genome Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China; CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (2)CAS
Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (3)CAS Key Laboratory of
Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: junyu@big.ac.cn. (4)CAS
Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address:
husn@big.ac.cn.

Ovary development is a complex process involving numerous genes. A well-developed
ovary is essential for females to keep fertility and reproduce offspring. In
order to gain a better insight into the molecular mechanisms related to the
process of mammalian ovary development, we performed a comparative transcriptomic
analysis on ovaries isolated from infant and adult mice by using next-generation 
sequencing technology (SOLiD). We identified 15,454 and 16,646 transcriptionally 
active genes at the infant and adult stage, respectively. Among these genes, we
also identified 7021 differentially expressed genes. Our analysis suggests that, 
in general, the adult ovary has a higher level of transcriptomic activity.
However, it appears that genes related to primordial follicle development, such
as those encoding Figla and Nobox, are more active in the infant ovary, whereas
expression of genes vital for follicle development, such as Gdf9, Bmp4 and Bmp15,
is upregulated in the adult. These data suggest a dynamic shift in gene
expression during ovary development and it is apparent that these changes
function to facilitate follicle maturation, when additional functional gene
studies are considered. Furthermore, our investigation has also revealed several 
important functional pathways, such as apoptosis, MAPK and steroid biosynthesis, 
that appear to be much more active in the adult ovary compared to those of the
infant. These findings will provide a solid foundation for future studies on
ovary development in mice and other mammals and help to expand our understanding 
of the complex molecular and cellular events that occur during postnatal ovary
development.

Copyright © 2014. Production and hosting by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4411413
PMID: 25251848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 1;200:44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.02.018. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Responsiveness of four gender-specific genes, figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a to
17a-ethinylestradiol in adult rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus.

Yuan C(1), Wu T(1), Zhang Y(1), Gao J(1), Yang Y(1), Qin F(1), Liu S(1), Zheng
Y(1), Wang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, China. Electronic address: zzwang@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Proteins encoded by figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a play important roles in gonad
differentiation and reproduction. In the present study, we aimed to determine the
responsiveness of figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a to 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) in
the gonads of adult Gobiocypris rarus. Full-length cDNAs of figla, scp3 and sox9a
were cloned and characterized by RT-PCR and RACE methods. Expression patterns in 
adult tissues were investigated. Results indicated that figla was predominantly
expressed in adult ovaries and scp3 was restrictively expressed in the male
testes and sox9a was principally expressed in the brains of both genders and the 
testes of males. Gene expression profiles of figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a were
analyzed in the gonads of adult G. rarus exposed to EE2 at 1, 5, 25, and 125ng/L 
for 3 and 6days. Three-day EE2 treatment at 1-125ng/L all caused a significant
increase of figla transcript in testes and foxl2 transcript in ovaries. However, 
six-day EE2 exposure at 1-125ng/L repressed figla and scp3 transcript in testes
and foxl2 transcript in ovaries. The present study indicates that the testicular 
transcripts of figla and scp3 in males and the ovarian foxl2 transcript in
females have high responsiveness to EE2 and they can be used as sensitive
molecular biomarkers for early warning to monitor the environmental estrogenic
chemicals in fresh water environment. The present study also suggests that the
effective EE2 dosage for feminization in male G. rarus might be at least 25ng/L.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2014 May;55(4):343-53. doi: 10.1002/em.21847. Epub 2014 Jan 
24.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate and bisphenol A exposure impairs mouse primordial
follicle assembly in vitro.

Zhang T(1), Li L, Qin XS, Zhou Y, Zhang XF, Wang LQ, De Felici M, Chen H, Qin GQ,
Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Germ Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and
Germplasm Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) and diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) are estrogenic compounds
widely used in commercial plastic products. Previous studies have shown that
exposure to such compounds have adverse effects on various aspects of mammalian
reproduction including folliculogenesis. The objective of this study was to
examine the effects of BPA and DEHP exposure on primordial follicle formation. We
found that germ cell nest breakdown and primordial follicle assembly were
significantly reduced when newborn mouse ovaries were exposed to 10 or 100 µM BPA
and DEHP in vitro. Moreover, BPA and DEHP exposure increased the number of TUNEL 
positive oocytes and the mRNA level of the pro-apoptotic gene Bax in oocytes.
These effects were associated with decreased expression of oocyte specific genes 
such as LIM homeobox 8 (Lhx8), factor in the germline alpha (Figla),
spermatogenesis and oogenesis helix-loop-helix (Sohlh2), and newborn ovary
homeobox (Nobox). Interestingly, BPA and DEHP exposure also prevented DNA
demethylation of CpG sites of the Lhx8 gene in oocytes, a process normally
associated with folliculogenesis. Finally, folliculogenesis was severely impaired
in BPA and DEHP exposed ovaries after transplantation into the kidney capsules of
immunodeficient mice. In conclusion, BPA and DEHP exposures impair mouse
primordial follicle assembly in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24458533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Mar;41(3):1891-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3038-4. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Primordial follicle assembly was regulated by Notch signaling pathway in the
mice.

Chen CL(1), Fu XF, Wang LQ, Wang JJ, Ma HG, Cheng SF, Hou ZM, Ma JM, Quan GB,
Shen W, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Germ Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and
Germplasm Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China,
chenchunlei2659798@126.com.

Notch signaling pathway, a highly conserved cell signaling system, exists in most
multicellular organisms. The objective of this study was to examine Notch
signaling pathway in germ cell cyst breakdown and primordial follicle formation. 
The receptor and ligand genes of Notch pathway (Notch1, Notch2, Jagged1, Jagged2 
and Hes1) were extremely down-regulated after newborn mouse ovaries were cultured
then exposed to DAPT or L-685,458 in vitro (P < 0.01). Since DAPT or L-685,548
inhibits Notch signaling pathway, the expression of protein LHX8 and NOBOX was
significantly reduced during the formation of the primordial follicles.
Down-regulated mRNA expression of specific genes including Lhx8, Figla, Sohlh2
and Nobox, were also observed. The percentages of female germ cells in germ cell 
cysts and primordial follicles were counted after culture of newborn ovaries for 
3 days in vitro. The result showed female germ cells in cysts was remarkably
up-regulated while as the oocytes in primordial follicles was significantly
down-regulated (P < 0.05). In conclusion, Notch signaling pathway may regulate
the formation of primordial follicle in mice.

PMID: 24430295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 6;9(1):e84477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084477. eCollection 
2014.

Figla-Cre transgenic mice expressing myristoylated EGFP in germ cells provide a
model for investigating perinatal oocyte dynamics.

Lin RS(1), Jimenez-Movilla M(1), Dean J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(3):e93347.

FIGLA (Factor in the germline, alpha) is a bHLH transcription factor expressed
abundantly in female and less so in male germ cells. Mice lacking FIGLA do not
form primordial follicles in the ovary and females are sterile, but there is no
obvious phenotype in males. Using the Figla promoter to express Cre recombinase, 
we have established mEGFP/mTomato reporter mice with green germ cells and red
somatic tissue. These mice were crossed into the Figla null background to
accelerate perinatal oocyte loss. Live imaging of cultured newborn ovaries
provides evidence that few oocytes egress and the vast majority disappear within 
the confines of the ovary. Although a cohort of mobile, phagocytic cells was
observed, macrophage depletion in Csf1(op/op) mice did not affect oocyte loss.
Investigations with TUNEL assays and caspase inhibitors suggest that apoptosis
plays a role in the perinatal loss of oocyte in female mice. These results
establish the utility of Figla-EGFP/Cre; mTomato/mEGFP in investigating germ cell
dynamics in prepubertal mice.

PMCID: PMC3882233
PMID: 24400092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e76114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076114. eCollection
2013.

MicroRNA-212 post-transcriptionally regulates oocyte-specific
basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor, factor in the germline alpha
(FIGLA), during bovine early embryogenesis.

Tripurani SK(1), Wee G, Lee KB, Smith GW, Wang L, Jianboyao.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Division of Animal and
Nutritional Sciences, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, United
States of America.

Factor in the germline alpha (FIGLA) is an oocyte-specific basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor essential for primordial follicle formation and expression
of many genes required for folliculogenesis, fertilization and early embryonic
survival. Here we report the characterization of bovine FIGLA gene and its
regulation during early embryogenesis. Bovine FIGLA mRNA expression is restricted
to gonads and is detected in fetal ovaries harvested as early as 90 days of
gestation. FIGLA mRNA and protein are abundant in germinal vesicle and metaphase 
II stage oocytes, as well as in embryos from pronuclear to eight-cell stage but
barely detectable at morula and blastocyst stages, suggesting that FIGLA might be
a maternal effect gene. Recent studies in zebrafish and mice have highlighted the
importance of non-coding small RNAs (microRNAs) as key regulatory molecules
targeting maternal mRNAs for degradation during embryonic development. We
hypothesized that FIGLA, as a maternal transcript, is regulated by microRNAs
during early embryogenesis. Computational predictions identified a potential
microRNA recognition element (MRE) for miR-212 in the 3' UTR of the bovine FIGLA 
mRNA. Bovine miR-212 is expressed in oocytes and tends to increase in four-cell
and eight-cell stage embryos followed by a decline at morula and blastocyst
stages. Transient transfection and reporter assays revealed that miR-212
represses the expression of FIGLA in a MRE dependent manner. In addition, ectopic
expression of miR-212 mimic in bovine early embryos dramatically reduced the
expression of FIGLA protein. Collectively, our results demonstrate that FIGLA is 
temporally regulated during bovine early embryogenesis and miR-212 is an
important negative regulator of FIGLA during the maternal to zygotic transition
in bovine embryos.

PMCID: PMC3785419
PMID: 24086699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Reprod Toxicol. 2014 Apr;44:33-40. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2013.09.002. Epub 2013
Sep 16.

Prepubertal bisphenol A exposure interferes with ovarian follicle development and
its relevant gene expression.

Li Y(1), Zhang W(2), Liu J(1), Wang W(1), Li H(3), Zhu J(1), Weng S(1), Xiao
S(1), Wu T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Province Key Laboratory of Environment and Health, School of Public
Health, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. (2)Fujian Province Key 
Laboratory of Environment and Health, School of Public Health, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. Electronic address: wenchang2008@126.com.
(3)Emergency Department, Fujian Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Fuzhou, Fujian, China.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is recognized as one of several environmental estrogens.
Pre-puberty is an important part of reproductive system development, and even a
short-term exposure to BPA during this period may cause serious damage to the
reproductive system. In this study, Pre-puberty female Wistar rats were exposed
to BPA for one week. The effects of BPA on ovarian structure and function were
assessed. The expression levels of follicle development-related genes were
analyzed. Our study showed that BPA reduced rat ovarian weights and follicle
numbers, and interferes with the constituent ratio of follicles. With increasing 
doses of BPA, the expression of factor in the germline alpha (FIGLA) and
oocyte-specific histone H1 variant (H1FOO) genes decreased, and anti-mullerian
hormone (AMH) genes expression increased, suggesting that BPA exposure during the
pre-pubertal period may inhibit the development of ovaries, and follicle
development-related genes may play certain roles in this process.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24051130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Jul;31(5):365-73. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2981. Epub 2013 May
9.

Gender depended potentiality of differentiation of human umbilical cord
mesenchymal stem cells into oocyte-Like cells in vitro.

Qiu P(1), Bai Y, Pan S, Li W, Liu W, Hua J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering &
Technology, Key Lab for Animal Biotechnology of Agriculture Ministry of China,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Recent studies have demonstrated that germ-like cells could be differentiated
from human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs) in vitro. Whether the
sexuality of hUC-MSCs affects the formation efficiency of germ-like cells derived
from hUC-MSCs is still unclear. To clearly test the formation efficiency of
oocyte-like cells from male and female hUC-MSCs, obtained hUC-MSCs were induced
by 20% follicular fluid (FF) according to the method that has been proved by our 
previous studies. Results showed that hUC-MSCs differentiated into oocyte-like
structures and expressed germ cell makers. It was noted that the presence of
advanced oocyte-like cells in male hUC-MSCs (m-hUC-MSCs) was similar as that in
female hUC-MSCs (f-hUC-MSCs); however, the expression of germ cell's specific
markers in m-hUC-MSCs was delayed compared with that in f-hUC-MSCs. In addition, 
immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated that germ cell-specific markers, Oct4,
Vasa, Dazl, ZP2, ZP3 and Stra8, were expressed on the 14th day after induction in
both f-hUC-MSCs and m-hUC-MSCs. However, the size of oocyte-like cells from
f-hUC-MSCs was larger than that in m-hUC-MSCs. The level of secreted oestradiol
was significantly higher in f-hUC-MSCs than m-hUC-MSCs. We sought to determine
whether critical germ cell's transcription factor-Figla will promote the
development of oocyte-like cells. Some germ cell-specific markers were increased 
when exogenous Figla was transfected into hUC-MSCs. This process implied that
germ-like cells might be produced by over-expression of exogenous germ
cell-specific gene, and this process was similar as that in production of germ
cells in induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Finally, to verify the
feasibility that hUC-MSCs differentiate into germ cells, hUC-MSCs were
transplanted into seminiferous tubules and kidney capsule of mouse, respectively,
and we found the transplanted cells differentiated into germ-like cells in
recipient's seminiferous tubules and kidney capsule. This study will provide a
simple model to study mammalian germ cell specification using hUC-MSCs in vitro.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23657870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1384. doi: 10.1038/srep01384.

Intraovarian transplantation of primordial follicles fails to rescue chemotherapy
injured ovaries.

Park MR(1), Choi YJ, Kwon DN, Park C, Bui HT, Gurunathan S, Cho SG, Song H, Seo
HG, Min G, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Animal Bioscience & Technology,
KonKuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Busulfan and cyclophosphamide (B/C)-treated mice exhibited a marked increase in
apoptosis and a concomitant decrease in the ovarian weight. Histological and
RT-PCR analysis indicate that the period of germ cell depletion in the
B/C-treated ovaries coincides with decreased expression of genes Figla, Lhx8,
Nobox, c-kit, and Sox3. However, depletion of the ovarian germ cells is mediated 
by autophagy-independent pathways that involve Fas/FasL-, TNF-, and/or
p53-signalings. Treatment with B/C resulted in the cease of the reproductive
function to produce their offspring during the 15(th) week post-treatment period 
in female mice. Furthermore, injection of the 3 × 10(6) GFP positive primordial
follicles into the ovaries of the B/C treated mouse did not show apparent
colonization of the transplanted follicles within the recipient ovaries. The
present results suggest that B/C treatment is closely associated with an
increased risk of premature ovarian failure.

PMCID: PMC3589785
PMID: 23463338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Apr;45(4):289-95. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt008. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

Differentiation of rat iPS cells and ES cells into granulosa cell-like cells in
vitro.

Zhang J(1), Li H, Wu Z, Tan X, Liu F, Huang X, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is an ovarian defect characterized by the
premature depletion of ovarian follicles before 40 years of age, representing one
major cause of female infertility. Stem cells provide the possibility of a
potential treatment for POF. In this study, rat embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) were co-cultured with granulosa cells
(GCs) to differentiate to GC-like cells. The level of estradiol (E2) analyzed by 
radioimmunoassay showed that the E2 concentration of the culture supernatant of
co-cultured rat iPSCs and ESCs increased in a time-dependent manner, compared
with the GCs group that has an opposite trend. The expression of
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) was confirmed by immunostaining.
These results indicated that rat iPSCs and ESCs were effectively induced to
GC-like cells through indirect cell-to-cell contact. Real-time polymerase chain
reaction was performed to analyze the expression level of marker genes in POF,
including BMP15, FMR1, FSHR, INHA, AMH, NOBOX, FOXO3, EIF2B, FIGLA, and GDF9. The
BMP15, FSHR, INHA, AMH, NOBOX, and GDF9 genes were significantly up-regulated in 
iPSCs and ESCs co-cultured with GCs in comparison with cells that were not
co-cultured. Thus, here we demonstrated an available method to differentiate rat 
iPSCs and ESCs into GC-like cells in vitro for the possible cell therapy of POF.

PMID: 23403512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 1;376(1):51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.01.015. Epub 2013
Jan 21.

Acute dietary zinc deficiency before conception compromises oocyte epigenetic
programming and disrupts embryonic development.

Tian X(1), Diaz FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health and Department of Animal Science,
The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Recent findings show that zinc is an important factor necessary for regulating
the meiotic cell cycle and ovulation. However, the role of zinc in promoting
oocyte quality and developmental potential is not known. Using an in vivo model
of acute dietary zinc deficiency, we show that feeding a zinc deficient diet
(ZDD) for 3-5 days before ovulation (preconception) dramatically disrupts oocyte 
chromatin methylation and preimplantation development. There was a dramatic
decrease in histone H3K4 trimethylation and global DNA methylation in zinc
deficient oocytes. Moreover, there was a 3-20 fold increase in transcript
abundance of repetitive elements (Iap, Line1, Sineb1, Sineb2), but a decrease in 
Gdf9, Zp3 and Figla mRNA. Only 53% and 8% of mature eggs reached the 2-cell stage
after IVF in animals receiving a 3 and 5 days ZDD, respectively, while a 5 day
ZDD in vivo reduced the proportion of 2-cells to 49%. In vivo fertilized 2-cell
embryos cultured in vitro formed fewer (38%) blastocysts compared to control
embryos (74%). Likewise, fewer blastocyst and expanded blastocyst were collected 
from the reproductive tract of zinc deficient animals on day 3.5 of pregnancy.
This could be due to a decrease in Igf2 and H19 mRNA in ZDD blastocyst.
Supplementation with a methyl donor (SAM) during IVM restored histone H3K4me3 and
doubled the IVF success rate from 17% to 43% in oocytes from zinc deficient
animals. Thus, the terminal period of oocyte development is extremely sensitive
to perturbation in dietary zinc availability.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3601821
PMID: 23348678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2012 Dec;39(4):127-31. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2012.39.4.127. Epub
2012 Dec 31.

Transcription factors in the maintenance and survival of primordial follicles.

Lim EJ(1), Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, CHA University, Seoul, Korea.

Primordial follicles are formed prenatally in mammalian ovaries, and at birth
they are fated to be activated to primary follicles, to be dormant, or to die.
During the early stage of folliclulogenesis, the oocyte undergoes dynamic
alterations in expression of numerous genes, which are regulated by transcription
factors. Several germ-cell specific transcriptional regulators are critical for
formation and maintenance of follicles. These transcriptional regulators include:
Figla, Lhx8, Nobox, Sohlh1, and Sohlh2. A subset of these transcriptional
regulators is mutated in women with ovarian insufficiency and infertility.
Establishment of this oocyte pool is essential for fertility. This review focuses
on these transcriptional regulators of female primordial follicles.

PMCID: PMC3548069
PMID: 23346521  [PubMed]


21. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jan 25;88(1):19. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.104398. Print 2013
Jan.

Oocytes survive in the testis by altering the soma fate from male to female in
the protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli.

Wu GC(1), Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Marine Bioenvironment and Biotechnology, National
Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan. gcwu@mail.ntou.edu.tw

In fish, hermaphroditism is derived from gonochorism. No ancient ancestry and no 
single sex-determining mechanism are involved in the hermaphroditic fish.
Furthermore, hermaphroditic fish have a common set of transcriptional regulators 
that are involved in gonadal differentiation. However, the origins and evolution 
of hermaphroditism in fish remain far from understood. In the protandrous black
porgy (Acanthopagrus schlegeli Bleeker), the ovotestis is separated by connective
tissue, and no intersex (ectopic germ cell) characteristics are observed in
either part. We generated the abnormal testicular part of the ovotestis with
estradiol-17beta (E2) treatment, in which newly regenerated testis has ectopic
oocytes. In this study, we performed a detailed phenotypic and molecular analysis
of these E2-induced ectopic oocytes in the testicular part of the ovotestis. We
showed that the oocytes in the regenerated testis do not undergo apoptosis; thus,
a number of oocytes are in the testis. In these oocytes, Figla has a prolonged
expression with ectopic expression of Cyp19a1a. Strikingly, the cells surrounding
the oocytes are Dmrt1-positive cells (putative Sertoli cells) with high Figla
expression in the oocytes at an early stage. Then, as the Dmrt1 expression
diminishes, Cyp19a1a-positive cells (putative follicle cells) with low Figla
expression appear in the oocytes at a later stage. This finding indicates that
oocytes are competent to create a microenvironment to protect against a
testicular environment in black porgy fish. Furthermore, Figla likely is the key 
factor in the pathway of Sertoli cell transformation into follicle-like cells.
These results shed light on why the presence of more than one sex at a time
existed during an evolutionary transition from gonochorism to hermaphroditism in 
fish.

PMID: 23197163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Appl Toxicol. 2013 Sep;33(9):1001-10. doi: 10.1002/jat.2836. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Developmental disorders and altered gene expression in the tropical clawed frog
(Silurana tropicalis) exposed to 17a-ethinylestradiol.

Hirakawa I(1), Miyagawa S, Mitsui N, Miyahara M, Onishi Y, Kagami Y, Kusano T,
Takeuchi T, Ohta Y, Iguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)The United Graduate School of Veterinary Science, Yamaguchi University,
Yamaguchi, Yamaguchi, 753-8513, Japan.

Several endocrine-disrupting chemicals with estrogenic activity can affect sexual
development and reproduction in aquatic wildlife. The occurrence of oocytes in
the testis (testis-ova) is one reproductive disorder and can be used as a valid
endpoint when studying disruptive effects of estrogenic chemicals. To elucidate
the molecular basis of testis-ova induction, we conducted gene expression
analysis in the gonads of Silurana tropicalis exposed to 0, 3, 10 and 30<U+2009>ng<U+2009>l(-1)
17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) from 2<U+2009>days after fertilization to the juvenile stage 
(14<U+2009>weeks after fertilization). The frequencies of testis-ova induction or male
to female sex-reversal of the gonads increased in an EE2 dose-dependent manner.
Microarray analysis showed that expressions of a large number of genes were
significantly changed by EE2 exposure. Genes including egg envelope composition
(zp4, zpax, zpc, zp3.2 and egg cortical granule lectin), 42S particle genes
(42Sp50, 42Sp43 and 42Sp48) and regulation of female germ cells (figla) are
associated with the testis-ova and sex-reversal situation in the gonads. Of
those, expression of zpc and 42Sp50 genes is associated with testis-ova. Thus, we
propose that these genes are useful biomarkers for toxicological research in
amphibians developmentally exposed to estrogenic chemicals.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23129252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Zoolog Sci. 2012 Oct;29(10):690-701. doi: 10.2108/zsj.29.690.

Molecular cloning and expression profile of sex-specific genes, Figla and Dmrt1, 
in the protogynous hermaphroditic fish, Halichoeres poecilopterus.

Miyake Y(1), Sakai Y, Kuniyoshi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioresource Science, Graduate School of Biosphere Science,
Hiroshima University, Kagamiyama 1-4-4, Higashi-Hiroshima 739-8528, Japan.
ymiyake27@gmail.com

The genes folliculogenesis specific basic helix-loop-helix (facor in the germline
alpha, Figla) and doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1) are 
female- and male-specific genes that play key roles in sex differentiation. To
obtain a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying
female-to-male sex change, we cloned the cDNAs of these genes from an ovary and a
testis of the protogynus wrasse, Halichoeres poecilopterus. This fish has two
isoforms of Dmrt1, Dmrt1a and Dmrt1b, caused by an alternative splicing. The
Dmrt1b has an insertion of three nucleotides (CAG) in the open reading frame.
Figla and Dmrt1 displayed gonadal-specific expression and abundant in the ovaries
and in the testes, respectively. In particular, levels of Figla expression in the
ovaries were higher in the spawning season than in the non-spawning season. Once 
sex change began, Figla mRNA decreased and Dmrt1 mRNA increased with progression 
of oocyte degeneration and spermatogenesis. These expression levels were
maintained until the completion of the sex change. Low Figla and high Dmrt1 were 
also observed in testes of primary males, which functioned as a gonochoristic
male throughout its life span in this wrasse. The results of this study suggest
that these genes may regulate the gonadal transition from ovary to testis by the 
same mechanism as that of formation and maintenance of the primary testis in H.
poecilopterus.

PMID: 23030342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Dec;113(12):3629-42. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24296.

Reversine promotes porcine muscle derived stem cells (PMDSCs) differentiation
into female germ-like cells.

Lv X(1), Zhu H, Bai Y, Chu Z, Hu Y, Cao H, Liu C, He X, Peng S, Gao Z, Yang C,
Hua J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Center of Stem Cells Engineering and
Technology, Key Lab for Animal Biotechnology of Agriculture Ministry of China,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling 712100, Shaanxi, China.

A small molecular chemical-Reversine has been shown to promote cell reprogramming
and induce dedifferentiation of multiple terminally differentiated mesodermal
origin cells, and then differentiate into other cell types within mesodermal
lineages as well as neuroectodermal. However, the possibilities of these cells to
give rise to germ cell lineages have not been examined. The objective of the
current study was to detect the effect of Reversine on PMDSCs differentiation
into germ cells. PMDSCs from fetal porcine skeletal muscle and their potential of
differentiation into germ cells in vitro were investigated. The phenotype,
proliferation potential, characteristic markers of the first adhesion cells
(pp1), and the purified 2 times cells (pp3) were analyzed by growth curve, FACS, 
and RT-PCR, respectively. Then, the purified cells were induced with 10% or 20%
bovine follicular fluid (FF), the results showed that some of the induced pp3
cells were similar as porcine oocyte, and expressed germ cell and oocyte markers 
analyzed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and immunofluorescent staining. Reversine
clearly increased the potentiality of PMDSCs differentiation into large round
germ-like cells in FF induction medium analyzed by morpholgogy, QRT-PCR and
immunofluoresce. The BrdU labeled PMDSCs might differentiate into female
germ-like cells in recipient's kidney capsule, which were positive for germ cell 
and meiotic markers (Dazl, Vasa, Figla, Stra8, Scp3) and oocyte markers (Zp2,
Zp3). These findings provided an efficient model to study the mechanism of cell
proliferation and germ cell differentiation in livestock promoted by Reversine.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22821411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Apr;113(4):1111-21. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24044.

Characterization of female germ-like cells derived from mouse embryonic stem
cells through expression of GFP under the control of Figla promoter.

Hu Y(1), Sun J, Wang J, Wang L, Bai Y, Yu M, Lian Z, Zhang S, Hua J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Shaanxi Centre of Stem Cells Engineering &
Technology, Key Lab for Animal Biotechnology of Agriculture Ministry of China,
Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China.

Previous studies have demonstrated that germ cells can be derived from mouse
embryonic stem cells (ESCs). However, there is still no efficient system, which
can visualize the stage of germ cell specification in vitro, and further to
identify and enrich germ cells derived from ESCs. Figla (factor in the germline, 
alpha) gene encodes a germ cell specific transcription factor that coordinates
the expression of the oocyte-specific zona pellucida (Zp) genes and is essential 
for folliculogenesis in mouse. Here, we first constructed a pFigla-EGFP
recombinant plasmid that expressed enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)
under the control of Figla promoter, and generated and characterized an ESC line 
stably carrying this pFigla-EGFP reporter construct. Then the ESCs were induced
to differentiate into female germ-like cells by culturing adherent embryoid
bodies (EBs) in retinoic acid (RA) induction medium or transplanting ESCs under
the kidney capsule with ovarian cells. A population of differentiated ESCs
expressed GFP, and these cells were analyzed by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence.
The GFP positive cells showed the expression of germ cell markers Vasa, meiotic
specific gene Stra8, Scp3, oocyte markers Gdf9, Zp3 and Figla, indicating that
this method could be used for the purification and selection of female germ
cells. Our study establishes a new selective system of female germ-like cell
derivation and offers an approach for further research on the development and the
differentiation of germ cells derived from stem cells.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22213070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jun 5;356(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.07.049.
Epub 2011 Aug 12.

Oogenesis: transcriptional regulators and mouse models.

Jagarlamudi K(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Oocyte differentiation into a totipotent cell requires initial germ cell cyst
breakdown to form primordial follicles, recruitment of primordial follicles for
development into primary follicles and remarkable growth of the ovarian follicle 
which culminates in ovulation. During oogenesis, the oocyte undergoes dynamic
alterations in gene expression which are regulated by a set of well-coordinated
transcription factors active in the germ line and soma. A number of germ cell
specific as well as somatic expressed transcriptional regulators are critical in 
ovarian formation and folliculogenesis. These transcriptional regulators include:
Foxo3, Foxl2, Figla, Lhx8, Nobox, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2. A subset of these
transcriptional regulators is mutated in women with ovarian insufficiency and
infertility. Studies on transcriptional regulators preferentially expressed in
the ovary are important to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms of
activation and survival of ovarian follicles, as well as an understanding of
ovary specific pathways that can be modulated in the future to regulate fertility
and protect against external insults such as chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Reproduction. 2011 Aug;142(2):309-18. doi: 10.1530/REP-10-0481. Epub 2011 May 24.

Gene expression in mouse ovarian follicle development in vivo versus an ex vivo
alginate culture system.

Parrish EM(1), Siletz A, Xu M, Woodruff TK, Shea LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
2145 Sheridan Road, Tech E136, Evanston, Illinois 60208, USA.

Ovarian follicle maturation results from a complex interplay of endocrine,
paracrine, and direct cell-cell interactions. This study compared the dynamic
expression of key developmental genes during folliculogenesis in vivo and during 
in vitro culture in a 3D alginate hydrogel system. Candidate gene expression
profiles were measured within mouse two-layered secondary follicles,
multi-layered secondary follicles, and cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs). The
expression of 20 genes involved in endocrine communication, growth signaling, and
oocyte development was investigated by real-time PCR. Gene product levels were
compared between i) follicles of similar stage and ii) COCs derived either in
vivo or by in vitro culture. For follicles cultured for 4 days, the expression
pattern and the expression level of 12 genes were the same in vivo and in vitro. 
Some endocrine (cytochrome P450, family 19, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (Cyp19a1) 
and inhibin ßA subunit (Inhba)) and growth-related genes (bone morphogenetic
protein 15 (Bmp15), kit ligand (Kitl), and transforming growth factor ß receptor 
2 (Tgfbr2)) were downregulated relative to in vivo follicles. For COCs obtained
from cultured follicles, endocrine-related genes (inhibin a-subunit (Inha) and
Inhba) had increased expression relative to in vivo counterparts, whereas
growth-related genes (Bmp15, growth differentiation factor 9, and kit oncogene
(Kit)) and zona pellucida genes were decreased. However, most of the
oocyte-specific genes (e.g. factor in the germline a (Figla), jagged 1 (Jag1),
and Nlrp5 (Mater)) were expressed in vitro at the same level and with the same
pattern as in vivo-derived follicles. These studies establish the similarities
and differences between in vivo and in vitro cultured follicles, guiding the
creation of environments that maximize follicle development and oocyte quality.

PMCID: PMC3145246
PMID: 21610168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Sep;17(9):550-61. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar017. Epub 2011 Mar 
22.

DNA methylation of germ-cell-specific basic helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription 
factors, Sohlh2 and Figla during gametogenesis.

Pan B(1), Chao H, Chen B, Zhang L, Li L, Sun X, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Germ Cell Biology, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao 266109, People's Republic of China.

Regulation of germ-cell-specific transcription is essential for the
differentiation and other physiological processes of germ cells.
Germ-cell-specific transcription factors, Sohlh2 and Figla, play key roles in
gametogenesis. To elucidate whether an epigenetic mechanism is involved in the
controlled expression of Sohlh2 and Figla, we examined the dynamics of DNA
methylation at two gene loci. Results showed changes in methylation patterns in
the promoter regions of both genes during the period of germ cell
differentiation, while the methylation patterns in first exons and first introns 
(near the transcription initiation sites) remained constant. The methylation
reprogramming at the cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) locus in the Figla
promoters (P1: -812 to -568 bp and P2: -692 to -438 bp) and in the Sohlh2
promoter (sohlh2-P: -202 to 173 bp) was found to correlate with the expression of
Figla and Sohlh2 transcripts, respectively. Data therefore suggested that a
dynamic DNA CpG methylation in the Sohlh2 and Figla promoters, but not in the
intron and exon sequences, is linked to the regulation of gene expressions, even 
though CpG islands are also present in their introns or exons.

© The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21427160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biol Reprod. 2011 Apr;84(4):654-63. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.087213. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Yin-yang1 is required in the mammalian oocyte for follicle expansion.

Griffith GJ(1), Trask MC, Hiller J, Walentuk M, Pawlak JB, Tremblay KD, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA.

The multifaceted polycomb group gene Yin-Yang1 (Yy1) has been implicated in a
variety of transcriptional regulatory roles both as an activator and silencer of 
gene expression. Here we examine the role of Yy1 during oocyte growth by
conditional deletion of the locus in the growing oocyte. Our results indicate
that YY1 is required for oocyte maturation and granulosa cell expansion. In
mutant oocytes, we observe severely reduced expression of both Gdf9 and Bmp15,
suggesting a mechanism underlying the failure of granulosa cell expansion.
Consequently, we observe infertility, failure of estrus cycling, and altered
reproductive hormone levels in mutant females. Additionally, we find that
YY1-deficient oocytes exhibit altered levels of several oocyte-specific factors, 
including Pou5f1, Figla, Lhx8, Oosp1, and Sohlh2. These results document YY1's
involvement in folliculogenesis and ovarian function in the mouse and indicate
that YY1 is required specifically in the oocyte for oocyte-granulosa cell
communication.

PMID: 21123818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;129(1):25-34. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0893-5. Epub 2010 Oct
8.

Partial correlation network analyses to detect altered gene interactions in human
disease: using preeclampsia as a model.

Johansson A(1), Løset M, Mundal SB, Johnson MP, Freed KA, Fenstad MH, Moses EK,
Austgulen R, Blangero J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU), Kvinne-barn senteret, 1.etg. Øst, 7006 Trondheim, 
Norway. asa.johansson@ucr.uu.se

Differences in gene expression between cases and controls have been identified
for a number of human diseases. However, the underlying mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation remain largely unknown. Beyond comparisons of absolute
or relative expression levels, disease states may be associated with alterations 
in the observed correlational patterns among sets of genes. Here we use partial
correlation networks aiming to compare the transcriptional co-regulation for 222 
genes that are differentially expressed in decidual tissues between preeclampsia 
(PE) cases and non-PE controls. Partial correlation coefficients (PCCs) have been
calculated in cases (N = 37) and controls (N = 58) separately. For all PCCs, we
tested if they were significant non-zero in the cases and controls separately. In
addition, to examine if a given PCC is different between the cases and controls, 
we tested if the difference between two PCCs were significant non-zero. In the
group with PE cases, only five PCCs were significant (FDR p value = 0.05), of
which none were significantly different from the PCCs in the controls. However,
in the controls we identified a total of 56 statistically significant PCCs (FDR p
value = 0.05), of which 31 were also significantly different (FDR p value = 0.05)
from the PCCs in the PE cases. The identified partial correlation networks
included genes that are potentially relevant for developing PE, including both
known susceptibility genes (EGFL7, HES1) and novel candidate genes (CFH, NADSYN1,
DBP, FIGLA). Our results might suggest that disturbed interactions, or higher
order relationships between these genes play an important role in developing the 
disease.

PMCID: PMC3332147
PMID: 20931231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(14):3661-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00201-10. Epub 2010 May 
17.

FIGLA, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, balances sexually dimorphic
gene expression in postnatal oocytes.

Hu W(1), Gauthier L, Baibakov B, Jimenez-Movilla M, Dean J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Maintenance of sex-specific germ cells requires balanced activation and
repression of genetic hierarchies to ensure gender-appropriate development in
mammals. Figla (factor in the germ line, alpha) encodes a germ cell-specific
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor first identified as an activator of
oocyte genes. In comparing the ovarian proteome of normal and Figla null newborn 
mice, 18 testis-specific or -enhanced proteins were identified that were more
abundant in Figla null ovaries than in normal ovaries. Transgenic mice,
ectopically expressing Figla in male germ cells, downregulated a subset of these 
genes and demonstrated age-related sterility associated with impaired meiosis and
germ cell apoptosis. Testis-associated genes, including Tdrd1, Tdrd6, and Tdrd7, 
were suppressed in the transgenic males with a corresponding disruption of the
sperm chromatoid body and mislocalization of MVH and MILI proteins, previously
implicated in posttranscriptional processing of RNA. These data demonstrate that 
physiological expression of Figla plays a critical dual role in activation of
oocyte-associated genes and repression of sperm-associated genes during normal
postnatal oogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2897557
PMID: 20479125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jun;25(6):1569-80. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq084. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

A genome wide linkage scan for dizygotic twinning in 525 families of mothers of
dizygotic twins.

Painter JN(1), Willemsen G, Nyholt D, Hoekstra C, Duffy DL, Henders AK, Wallace
L, Healey S, Cannon-Albright LA, Skolnick M, Martin NG, Boomsma DI, Montgomery
GW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Epidemiology, Genetic Epidemiology and Neurogenetics Laboratories,
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia.
jodie.painter@qimr.edu.au

BACKGROUND: The tendency to conceive dizygotic (DZ) twins is a complex trait
influenced by genetic and environmental factors. To search for new candidate loci
for twinning, we conducted a genome-wide linkage scan in 525 families using
microsatellite and single nucleotide polymorphism marker panels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Non-parametric linkage analyses, including 523 families
containing a total of 1115 mothers of DZ twins (MODZT) from Australia and New
Zealand (ANZ) and The Netherlands (NL), produced four linkage peaks above the
threshold for suggestive linkage, including a highly suggestive peak at the
extreme telomeric end of chromosome 6 with an exponential logarithm of odds
[(exp)LOD] score of 2.813 (P = 0.0002). Since the DZ twinning rate increases
steeply with maternal age independent of genetic effects, we also investigated
linkage including only families where at least one MODZT gave birth to her first 
set of twins before the age of 30. These analyses produced a maximum expLOD score
of 2.718 (P = 0.0002), largely due to linkage signal from the ANZ cohort,
however, ordered subset analyses indicated this result is most likely a chance
finding in the combined dataset. Linkage analyses were also performed for two
large DZ twinning families from the USA, one of which produced a peak on
chromosome 2 in the region of two potential candidate genes. Sequencing of FSHR
and FIGLA, along with INHBB in MODZTs from two large NL families with family
specific linkage peaks directly over this gene, revealed a potentially functional
variant in the 5' untranslated region of FSHR that segregated with the DZ
twinning phenotype in the Utah family.
CONCLUSION: Our data provide further evidence for complex inheritance of familial
DZ twinning.

PMCID: PMC2912534
PMID: 20378614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):13-22. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077404. Epub 2009 
Jul 29.

The interactions between the stimulatory effect of follicle-stimulating hormone
and the inhibitory effect of estrogen on mouse primordial folliculogenesis.

Lei L(1), Jin S, Mayo KE, Woodruff TK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Science, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois,
USA.

The murine primordial follicle pool develops largely within 3 days after birth
through germline nest breakdown and enclosure of oocytes within pregranulosa
cells. The mechanisms that trigger primordial follicle formation likely are
influenced by a transition from the maternal to fetal hormonal milieu at the time
of birth. High levels of maternal estrogen maintain intact germline nest in fetal
ovary, and decrease of estrogen after birth is permissive of follicle formation. 
In the present study, we measured an increase in neonatal serum
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which corresponded to falling estradiol
(E(2)) levels during the critical window of primordial follicle formation
(Postnatal Days 1-3). To determine whether fetal hormones contribute in an active
manner to primordial follicle formation, mouse fetal ovaries (17.5 days
postcoitus) were cultured in vitro at two concentrations of E(2) (meant to
reflect maternal and fetal levels of E(2)) and FSH for 6 days. High levels of
E(2) (10(-6) M) inhibited germline nest breakdown, and this effect was
significantly reduced when fetal ovaries were cultured in the low E(2)
concentration (10(-10) M). FSH facilitated germline nest breakdown and primordial
follicle formation under both high and low E(2) culture conditions. Low E(2) was 
identified as being more permissive for the effects of FSH on primordial follicle
formation by stimulating the up-regulation of Fshr and activin beta A subunit
(Inhba) expression, pregranulosa cell proliferation, and oocyte survival. The
decrease of E(2) plus the presence of FSH after birth are critical for primordial
follicle formation and the expression of oocyte-specific transcription factors
(Figla and Nobox) in that inappropriate exposure to FSH or E(2) during follicle
formation resulted in premature or delayed primordial folliculogenesis. In
conclusion, with the drop of E(2) level after birth, FSH promotes primordial
follicle formation in mice by stimulating local activin signaling pathways and
the expression of oocyte-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2796699
PMID: 19641178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 28;4(7):e6401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006401.

Sex determination in the Squalius alburnoides complex: an initial
characterization of sex cascade elements in the context of a hybrid polyploid
genome.

Pala I(1), Schartl M, Thorsteinsdóttir S, Coelho MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Ambiental, Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de
Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. iapala@fc.ul.pt

BACKGROUND: Sex determination processes vary widely among different vertebrate
taxa, but no group offers as much diversity for the study of the evolution of sex
determination as teleost fish. However, the knowledge about sex determination
gene cascades is scarce in this species-rich group and further difficulties arise
when considering hybrid fish taxa, in which mechanisms exhibited by parental
species are often disrupted. Even though hybridisation is frequent among
teleosts, gene based approaches on sex determination have seldom been conducted
in hybrid fish. The hybrid polyploid complex of Squalius alburnoides was used as 
a model to address this question.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have initiated the isolation and
characterization of regulatory elements (dmrt1, wt1, dax1 and figla) potentially 
involved in sex determination in S. alburnoides and in the parental species S.
pyrenaicus and analysed their expression patterns by in situ hybridisation. In
adults, an overall conservation in the cellular localization of the gene
transcripts was observed between the hybrids and parental species. Some novel
features emerged, such as dmrt1 expression in adult ovaries, and the
non-dimorphic expression of figla, an ovarian marker in other species, in gonads 
of both sexes in S. alburnoides and S. pyrenaicus. The potential contribution of 
each gene to the sex determination process was assessed based on the timing and
location of expression. Dmrt1 and wt1 transcripts were found at early stages of
male development in S. alburnoides and are most likely implicated in the process 
of gonad development.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: For the first time in the study of this hybrid complex,
it was possible to directly compare the gene expression patterns between the
bisexual parental species and the various hybrid forms, for an extended set of
genes. The contribution of these genes to gonad integrity maintenance and
functionality is apparently unaltered in the hybrids, suggesting that no abrupt
shifts in gene expression occurred as a result of hybridisation.

PMCID: PMC2713423
PMID: 19636439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Aug;21(4):313-7.

Premature ovarian failure and gene polymorphisms.

van Dooren MF(1), Bertoli-Avellab AM, Oldenburg RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam 3016 AH,
The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) is a common disorder
affecting approximately 1% of women under the age of 40 years. Until now,
research aiming to identify genetic causes of POI was mostly based on candidate
gene approaches. Recently, several genes have been identified using this
approach, and genome-wide searches were conducted. In this review, we discuss
these studies and propose future direction for further research in this field.
RECENT FINDINGS: Candidate gene approach revealed NOBOX, NR5A1, FIGLA and PGRMC1 
as POI-genes. Genome-wide searches (linkage and association studies) are
revealing new loci/genes as well.
SUMMARY: The role in POI for most reported candidate genes is still under
discussion. Because POI families with several affected cases are rare, linkage
studies are difficult to conduct; however, the reported loci needs further
exploration/replication. In the only genome-wide association studies conducted,
the patient cohort used is very small and the reported results are awaiting
replication. Unravelling the genetics of POI will need the establishment of a
large international consortium.

PMID: 19610175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;94(4):1427-35. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2619. Epub 
2009 Mar 3.

Gene expression analysis of human fetal ovarian primordial follicle formation.

Fowler PA(1), Flannigan S, Mathers A, Gillanders K, Lea RG, Wood MJ, Maheshwari
A, Bhattacharya S, Collie-Duguid ES, Baker PJ, Monteiro A, O'Shaughnessy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied Medicine, Centre for Reproductive Endocrinology and
Medicine, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United
Kingdom. p.a.fowler@abdn.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Primordial follicle formation dictates the maximal potential female
reproductive capacity and establishes the ovarian reserve. Currently, little is
known about this process in the human.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to identify genes associated with the onset
of human fetal primordial follicle formation in morphologically normal human
fetuses.
DESIGN: We conducted an observational study of the female fetal gonad, comparing 
gene expression before and during primordial follicle formation.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the Universities of Aberdeen, Glasgow, and
Nottingham.
PATIENTS/PARTICIPANTS: Ovaries were collected from 51 morphologically normal
human female fetuses of women undergoing elective termination of normal second
trimester pregnancies.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We performed fetal ovarian transcript expression by
Affymetrix array and quantitative RT-PCR and gene product expression and
localization by Western blot and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Five transcripts were down-regulated and 61 were up-regulated in ovaries
from older fetuses (18-20 wk) in which primordial follicle formation had started 
compared with younger (15-16 wk) fetuses in which no primordial follicles were
observed. The altered genes contribute to major functions, including gene
expression, tissue morphology, and apoptosis, that are essential for ovarian
development. NALP5, the most highly regulated transcript, is an oocyte-specific
maternal effect gene that is regulated downstream of FIGLA.
CONCLUSIONS: NALP5 probably plays a key role in the onset of human primordial
follicle formation and thus the establishment of ovarian reserve in women.

PMID: 19258411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 May;76(5):514-21. doi: 10.1002/mrd.20973.

Lanosterol metabolic product(s) is involved in primordial folliculogenesis and
establishment of primordial follicle pool in mouse fetal ovary.

Zhang H(1), Xu B, Xie H, Zhou B, Ouyang H, Ning G, Li G, Zhang M, Xia G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

The primordial follicles present in neonatal ovary represent the fecundity of a
female throughout her reproductive life. Germ cell meiosis and apoptosis are two 
important events during primordial folliculogenesis. In this study, through
focusing on the cytochrome P450 lanosterol 14 alphademethylase (CYP51) and its
lanosterol metabolic product(s), we explored the possible regulatory mechanism of
the initiation of germ cell meiosis and primordial follicle formation. The
expression of CYP51 could be detected in both oocytes and granulosa cells during 
primordial folliculogenesis by immunochemistry. RS21745, which leads to the
reduction of lanosterol metabolic product(s) level, inhibited the primordial
follicle formation in a dose-dependent manner, and thus postpone the
establishment of the primordial follicle pool when the mouse fetal ovaries were
cultured in serum-free medium. In contrast, the number of primordial follicle
increased significantly with the accumulation of the lanosterol metabolic
products caused by 0.025, 0.0625, and 0.125 microM AY9944-A-7 supplements.
AY9944-A-7 also up-regulated the expression of meiotic diplotene stage marker
gene msy2 and primordial follicle formation regulatory gene fig-alpha.
Furthermore, AY9944-A-7 decreased the expression of apoptosis gene bax and
significantly prevented oocyte apoptosis from 15.37 +/- 1.97% to 3.68 +/- 0.27%
(P < 0.01) in neonatal ovary in vitro. In conclusion, our results indicate that
lanosterol metabolic product(s) is involved in the primordial folliculogenesis by
regulating the oocyte meiosis and apoptosis.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18937335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biol Reprod. 2008 Dec;79(6):1176-82. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.071217. Epub
2008 Aug 27.

Germ cell-specific transcriptional regulator sohlh2 is essential for early mouse 
folliculogenesis and oocyte-specific gene expression.

Choi Y(1), Yuan D, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Fertility Center of CHA General Hospital, CHA Research Institute, Pochon CHA
University, Seoul 135-081, Republic of Korea.

We previously discovered a germ cell-specific spermatogenesis and oogenesis basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, Sohlh2. We generated Sohlh2-deficient mice
to understand physiologic consequences of Sohlh2 deletion. We discovered that
Sohlh2-knockout adult female mice are infertile due to lack of ovarian follicles.
Sohlh2-deficient ovaries can form primordial follicles and, despite limited
oocyte growth, do not differentiate surrounding granulosa cells into cuboidal and
multilayered structures. Oocytes are rapidly lost in Sohlh2-deficient ovaries,
and few are present by 14 days of postnatal life. However, the primordial oocytes
are abnormal at the molecular level because they misexpress numerous germ cell-
and oocyte-specific genes, including Sohlh1, Nobox, Figla, Gdf9, Pou5f1, Zp1,
Zp3, Kit, Oosp1, Nlrp14, H1foo, and Stra8. Our findings show that Sohlh2 is a
critical factor for maintenance and differentiation of the oocyte during early
oogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2780471
PMID: 18753606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biol Reprod. 2008 Dec;79(6):1111-20. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.069146. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Dual roles of cyp19a1a in gonadal sex differentiation and development in the
protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli.

Wu GC(1), Tomy S, Nakamura M, Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung 202, Taiwan.

Protandrous black porgy fish, Acanthopagrus schlegeli, have a striking life
cycle, with male sex differentiation at the juvenile stage, a bisexual gonad
during first 2 yr of life, and a male-to-female sex change (with vitellogenic
oocytes) at 3 yr of age. The present study investigated the role of aromatase
(cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a) in gonadal development in this species, especially in
relation to sexual differentiation and sex change. Fish of various ages were
treated with estradiol (E2) or aromatase inhibitor (AI) to determine whether
manipulation of the hormonal environment has an impact on these processes. We
report an integrative immunohistochemical, cellular, and molecular data set
describing these interesting phenomena. During male sex differentiation, high
levels of cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a expression were observed in the undifferentiated
gonad (4 mo of age), in marked contrast to the low cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a levels
detected in the differentiated testis at the age of 5-6 mo. A low dose of E2
(0.25 mg/kg feed) stimulated testicular growth and function in sexually
differentiated fish, whereas a high dose of E2 (6 mg/kg feed) induced female
development. Furthermore, administration of AI suppressed male development and
promoted female sexual differentiation. An increased number of figla transcripts 
(an oocyte-specific gene) were observed prior to cyp19a1a expression, concomitant
with the development of oogonia and early primary oocytes in the ovaries of both 
E2- and AI-treated groups. Immunohistochemical Pcna staining showed that the
regression of testicular tissue occurred prior to the development of ovarian
tissue in both E2- and AI-induced females. The importance of cyp19a1a in female
development was further demonstrated by the increase in cyp19a1a transcripts
during the naturally occurring sex change. Transcripts of foxl2 increased in the 
gonads of 2- to 3-yr-old black porgy during the early stages of the natural sex
change, followed by a gradual elevation of cyp19a1a levels. The levels of both
genes peaked in the resulting ovarian tissue. Thus, cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a plays dual 
roles in the gonadal development, namely, in testicular development during the
initial period of sexual differentiation and later in ovarian development during 
the natural sex change.

PMID: 18667752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2008 Jun 30;6:25. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-6-25.

Expression profiles for six zebrafish genes during gonadal sex differentiation.

Jørgensen A(1), Morthorst JE, Andersen O, Rasmussen LJ, Bjerregaard P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science, Systems and Models, Roskilde University,
Universitetsvej 1, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. annejoer@ruc.dk

BACKGROUND: The mechanism of sex determination in zebrafish is largely unknown
and neither sex chromosomes nor a sex-determining gene have been identified. This
indicates that sex determination in zebrafish is mediated by genetic signals from
autosomal genes. The aim of this study was to determine the precise timing of
expression of six genes previously suggested to be associated with sex
differentiation in zebrafish. The current study investigates the expression of
all six genes in the same individual fish with extensive sampling dates during
sex determination and -differentiation.
RESULTS: In the present study, we have used quantitative real-time PCR to
investigate the expression of ar, sox9a, dmrt1, fig alpha, cyp19a1a and cyp19a1b 
during the expected sex determination and gonadal sex differentiation period. The
expression of the genes expected to be high in males (ar, sox9a and dmrt1a) and
high in females (fig alpha and cyp19a1a) was segregated in two groups with more
than 10 times difference in expression levels. All of the investigated genes
showed peaks in expression levels during the time of sex determination and
gonadal sex differentiation. Expression of all genes was investigated on cDNA
from the same fish allowing comparison of the high and low expressers of genes
that are expected to be highest expressed in either males or females. There were 
78% high or low expressers of all three "male" genes (ar, sox9a and dmrt1) in the
investigated period and 81% were high or low expressers of both "female" genes
(fig alpha and cyp19a1a). When comparing all five genes with expected sex related
expression 56% show expression expected for either male or female. Furthermore,
the expression of all genes was investigated in different tissue of adult male
and female zebrafish.
CONCLUSION: In zebrafish, the first significant peak in gene expression during
the investigated period (2-40 dph) was dmrt1 at 10 dph which indicates
involvement of this gene in the early gonadal sex differentiation of males.

PMCID: PMC2500022
PMID: 18590525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jul 16;289(1-2):10-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.01.029.
Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Zona pellucida components are present in human fetal ovary before follicle
formation.

Törmälä RM(1), Jääskeläinen M, Lakkakorpi J, Liakka A, Tapanainen JS, Vaskivuo
TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oulu, and Clinical
Research Center, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.

The zona pellucida is a glycoprotein matrix surrounding oocytes and early-stage
embryos in mammals. To elucidate the roles of the zona pellucida glycoproteins
ZP1 and ZP3 and their key regulatory factor FIGLA in human ovarian development
and folliculogenesis, their expression and localization was studied in human
fetal and adult ovaries. FIGLA mRNA and ZP3 mRNA/protein were localized mainly in
the oocytes, and during fetal development their maximal expression was observed
around the 20th week, the time of follicle formation. The expression of ZP1 mRNA 
was low both in fetal and adult ovaries. Present findings demonstrate that ZP3
and FIGLA transcripts are expressed in the oocytes from early ovarian
development. The function of ZP proteins during early fetal life is not clear,
but the simultaneous expression of FIGLA and ZP3 suggests, that they may have a
role in the development of primordial follicle before zona pellucida formation.

PMID: 18502569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jun;82(6):1342-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.04.018. Epub 2008
May 22.

Transcription factor FIGLA is mutated in patients with premature ovarian failure.

Zhao H(1), Chen ZJ, Qin Y, Shi Y, Wang S, Choi Y, Simpson JL, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.

Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a genetically heterogenous disorder that leads
to hypergonadotropic ovarian failure and infertility. We screened 100 Chinese
women with POF for mutations in the oocyte-specific gene FIGLA and identified
three variants in four women: missense mutation c.11C --> A (p.A4E) was found in 
two women; deletion c. 15-36 del (p.G6fsX66), resulting in a frameshift that
leads to haploinsufficiency, was found in one woman; and deletion c.419-421
delACA (p.140 delN) was found in one. Functional analyses by the yeast two-hybrid
assay demonstrated that the p.140 delN mutation disrupted FIGLA binding to the
TCF3 helix-loop-helix (HLH) domain. Our findings show that a subset of Chinese
women with sporadic, premature ovarian failure harbor mutations in FIGLA.

PMCID: PMC2427265
PMID: 18499083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Semin Reprod Med. 2007 Jul;25(4):243-51.

Oocyte-specific genes affect folliculogenesis, fertilization, and early
development.

Zheng P(1), Dean J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. zhengp@niddk.nih.gov

Although cell-autonomous genetic programs pursued by germ and somatic cells are
of critical import, intimate interplays between the two cell types are also
essential for normal development of the female gonad. Recent studies demonstrate 
that oocytes play active roles in coordinating the growth and differentiation of 
somatic cells during folliculogenesis and affect successful outcomes at
fertilization and early development. Mouse transgenesis has been particularly
useful in defining germ-cell specific genes and their roles in folliculogenesis
(e.g., DAZLA, FIGLA, NOBOX, SOHLH1, YBX2, CPEB1, GDF9), fertilization (e.g., ZP1,
ZP2, ZP3), and preimplantation embryonic development (e.g., NPM2, ZAR1, NALP5,
DPPA3). Continued identification of novel oocyte-specific genes and the
annotation of their functions will provide additional insight into the genetic
pathways regulating ovarian development. The knowledge gained from mouse models
will no doubt benefit the understanding of human biology and treatment of
reproductive failure.

PMID: 17594605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 13;7:67.

Ovarian gene expression in the absence of FIGLA, an oocyte-specific transcription
factor.

Joshi S(1), Davies H, Sims LP, Levy SE, Dean J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. saurabhj@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Ovarian folliculogenesis in mammals is a complex process involving
interactions between germ and somatic cells. Carefully orchestrated expression of
transcription factors, cell adhesion molecules and growth factors are required
for success. We have identified a germ-cell specific, basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor, FIGLA (Factor In the GermLine, Alpha) and demonstrated its 
involvement in two independent developmental processes: formation of the
primordial follicle and coordinate expression of zona pellucida genes.
RESULTS: Taking advantage of Figla null mouse lines, we have used a combined
approach of microarray and Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) to identify 
potential downstream target genes. Using high stringent cutoffs, we find that
FIGLA functions as a key regulatory molecule in coordinating expression of the
NALP family of genes, genes of known oocyte-specific expression and a set of
functionally un-annotated genes. FIGLA also inhibits expression of male germ cell
specific genes that might otherwise disrupt normal oogenesis.
CONCLUSION: These data implicate FIGLA as a central regulator of oocyte-specific 
genes that play roles in folliculogenesis, fertilization and early development.

PMCID: PMC1906760
PMID: 17567914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(3):353-7.

Candidate genes for premature ovarian failure.

Suzumori N(1), Pangas SA, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1 Kawasumi, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
og.n.suz@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the cessation of ovarian function
under the age of 40 years and is characterized by amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism,
and elevated serum gonadotropin concentrations. POF affects 1% of all women and
occurs in approximately 0.1% before the age of 30 years. To date, mutations
associated with POF have been identified in a small number of genes, including
those encoding inhibin alpha (INHA), the FSH receptor and the LH/chorio
gonadotrophin receptor. Germ cell specific genes such as Gdf9, Bmp15, and Rfpl4
may also play important roles in human oogenesis. Transcription factors that
regulate oocyte gene expression in animal models and include Nobox, Taf4b, Figla,
Lhx8, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2 are likely to be key mediators of fertility in humans. In
this review, after summarizing the general background on human POF, we focus on
insights gained from the animal models with regards to mammalian
folliculogenesis. Studies in animal models provide new candidate genes for
ovarian failure in humans.

PMID: 17305537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Fertil Steril. 2007 Mar;87(3):677-90. Epub 2006 Nov 27.

Distinct sets of developmentally regulated genes that are expressed by human
oocytes and human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang P(1), Kerkelä E, Skottman H, Levkov L, Kivinen K, Lahesmaa R, Hovatta O,
Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition at NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet,
Huddinge, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To identify genes that are expressed differently during final oocyte
maturation and early embryonic development in humans.
DESIGN: Comparison of gene expression profiles of human germinal vesicle oocytes 
(hGVO), human embryonic stem cells (hESC) and human foreskin fibroblasts.
SETTING: Research centers and a fertility unit in a university hospital.
PATIENT(S): Fifty-five healthy women donated 76 hGVO.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Gene expression profiles were analyzed and compared with
the use of microarray and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULT(S): Altogether, 10,183 genes were expressed in hGVO, and 45% of these
genes were unclassified by biologic function. Four oocyte-specific genes (MATER, 
ZAR1, NPM2 and FIGLA) were detected in hGVO for the first time. Known components 
of 4 signaling pathways (MOS-MPF, transforming growth factor-beta, WNT, and
NOTCH) were also found expressed in hGVO, with some components detected in hGVO
for the first time. Distinct sets of genes that were revealed by comparison of
expression profiles between hGVO, hESC, and human foreskin fibroblasts appear to 
be involved in oocyte maturation and early embryonic development.
CONCLUSION(S): We obtained, for the first time, a large amount of information on 
gene expression of hGVO as compared with hESC. These data, from a unique research
material-human oocytes, can now be used to understand the molecular mechanisms of
early human development.

PMID: 17126334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(8):1014-8. Epub 2006 Apr 30.

Sohlh2 is a germ cell-specific bHLH transcription factor.

Ballow DJ(1), Xin Y, Choi Y, Pangas SA, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA.

Germ cell-specific transcriptional regulation is essential to understand pathways
that confer germ cells their unique biology. Germ cell-specific transcription
factors such as Figla and Nobox are critical in oogenesis, while Zfp148 and Taf4b
are also critical in spermatogenesis. Identification and characterization of the 
full complement of germ cell-specific transcription factors is necessary to
understand germ cell-specific regulatory networks. Here, we describe a discovery 
of a novel spermatogenesis- and oogenesis-specific basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) 
transcription factor, Sohlh2. Sohlh2 is expressed both in the male and female
germline. In females, Sohlh2 transcripts are detectable in the female embryonic
gonad but confined to oocytes of small follicles in the immature ovary. In adult 
ovaries, SOHLH2 protein is present in primordial follicles but not detected in
growing oocytes. SOHLH2 expression in testes is confined to spermatogonia. The
expression pattern of SOHLH2 suggests that it may be a critical regulator of
early germ cell development.

PMID: 16765102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 23;103(21):8090-5. Epub 2006 May 11.

Oogenesis requires germ cell-specific transcriptional regulators Sohlh1 and Lhx8.

Pangas SA(1), Choi Y, Ballow DJ, Zhao Y, Westphal H, Matzuk MM, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mammalian oogenesis requires oocyte-specific transcriptional regulators. The full
complement of oocyte-specific transcription factors is unknown. Here, we describe
the finding that Sohlh1, a spermatogenesis and oogenesis basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor in females, is preferentially expressed in oocytes and
required for oogenesis. Sohlh1 disruption perturbs follicular formation in part
by causing down-regulation of two genes that are known to disrupt
folliculogenesis: newborn ovary homeobox gene (Nobox) and factor in the germ-line
alpha (Figla). In addition, we show that Lhx8 is downstream of Sohlh1 and
critical in fertility. Thus, Sohlh1 and Lhx8 are two germ cell-specific, critical
regulators of oogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1472434
PMID: 16690745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Mar;63(5):579-90.

Genetics of early mammalian folliculogenesis.

Choi Y(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Faculty
Center, 1709 Dryden Street, Suite 1100, Houston 77030, USA.

Early ovarian folliculogenesis begins with the breakdown of germ cell clusters
and formation of primordial follicles. Primordial follicles are the smallest
ovarian follicle units continuously recruited to grow into primary and more
advanced ovarian follicles. Genes expressed in the germ cells such as Figla,
Nobox, Kit and Ntrk2, as well as genes expressed in the surrounding somatic cells
such as Foxl2, Kitl and Ngf, play critical functions during early
folliculogenesis. Transgenic mice continue to provide important insights into the
genetic pathways that regulate early mammalian folliculogenesis. Genes critical
in early folliculogenesis are important determinants of reproductive life span
and represent candidate genes for human ovarian failure.

PMID: 16416028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Reprod Update. 2006 Jan-Feb;12(1):65-76. Epub 2005 Sep 2.

Transcriptional regulation of early oogenesis: in search of masters.

Pangas SA(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Transcription factors in the germline play important roles in ovary formation and
folliculogenesis, and control both oocyte development and somatic cell function. 
Factor in the germline (Figla) and newborn ovary homeobox gene (Nobox) represent 
a growing number of oocyte-specific transcription factors that regulate genes
unique to oocytes. Studies on oocyte-specific transcription factors are important
in understanding the genetic pathways essential for oogenesis, pluripotency, and 
embryonic development. Likely, these genes regulate reproductive life span and
represent candidate genes for reproductive disorders, such as premature ovarian
failure, and infertility. Therefore, oocyte-specific transcription factors, and
oocyte-specific genes regulated by such factors, are attractive tissue-specific
pharmacological targets to regulate human fertility.

PMID: 16143663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Differentiation. 2005 Feb;73(1):1-17.

How to make an egg: transcriptional regulation in oocytes.

Song JL(1), Wessel GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown University,
69 Brown Street, Box G-J4, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The oocyte is a highly differentiated cell. It makes organelles specialized to
its unique functions and progresses through a series of developmental stages to
acquire a fertilization competent phenotype. This review will integrate the
biology of the oocyte with what is known about oocyte-specific gene regulation
and transcription factors involved in oocyte development. We propose that
oogenesis is reliant on a dynamic gene regulatory network that includes
oocyte-specific transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 15733063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Hum Reprod. 2004 Jun;10(6):373-81. Epub 2004 Mar 25.

Increased expression of the FIGLA transcription factor is associated with
primordial follicle formation in the human fetal ovary.

Bayne RA(1), Martins da Silva SJ, Anderson RA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Centre for Reproductive Biology,
University of Edinburgh Chancellor's Building, 49 Little France Crescent,
Edinburgh EH16 4SB, UK. r.bayne@hrsu.mrc.ac.uk

The process of primordial follicle formation is central to the determination of a
woman's reproductive lifespan, and in humans occurs towards the end of
mid-gestation. Gene knockout analysis in the mouse has shown that Figla, a
transcription factor specifically expressed in germ cells, is essential for
oocytes to survive and form primordial follicles. Our objective was to
investigate whether a human homologue present in the genome database plays a
similar role in human ovary development. Standard and real-time RT-PCR
demonstrated that the human FIGLA gene is expressed in the fetal ovary but not by
a range of other tissues, and that expression increases across mid-gestation,
rising some 40-fold by the time of primordial follicle formation. The entire
coding sequence was cloned and new exonic sequences identified. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays with in vitro-expressed human FIGLA protein showed that, as
in the mouse, FIGLA can heterodimerize with E12 protein and bind to the E-box of 
the human ZP2 promoter. Similar mobility shifts were identified in human fetal
ovary extracts. These results suggest that FIGLA is involved in continued oocyte 
survival as primordial follicles form in the human as in the rodent ovary.

PMID: 15044608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Dyn. 2003 Nov;228(3):393-404.

Transgene driving GFP expression from the promoter of the zona pellucida gene zpc
is expressed in oocytes and provides an early marker for gonad differentiation in
zebrafish.

Onichtchouk D(1), Aduroja K, Belting HG, Gnügge L, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology 1, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, 
Germany. onichtchouk@develogen.com

Although mechanisms of sex differentiation have been studied intensely in
mammals, insects, and worms, little is known about this process in lower
vertebrates. To establish a marker for female gonad differentiation in zebrafish,
we generated a transgenic line in which 412 bp from the promoter and 5' mRNA
leader of the female-specific zebrafish zona pellucida gene zpc are fused to the 
coding region of green fluorescent protein (GFP). The zpc0.5:GFP transgene is
expressed exclusively in oocytes, starting from the onset of female-specific
differentiation, and closely resembles the expression pattern of the wild-type
zpc. Strong GFP expression persists throughout oogenesis and is visible through
the body wall of females. We have also characterized a putative upstream factor
of zpc, FIGalpha, and show that distribution of FIGalpha RNA is compatible with
its postulated role in the regulation of zpc. The zpc0.5:GFP transgenic line
described here will be useful for studying oocyte development and the mechanisms 
that determine sex-specific gene expression in the zebrafish. It is also the
first promoter characterized to date to drive stable and efficient expression
specifically in the zebrafish female germline.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14579378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2002 Nov;19(11):531-5.

Isolation and expression analysis of the testis-specific gene, STRA8, stimulated 
by retinoic acid gene 8.

Miyamoto T(1), Sengoku K, Takuma N, Hasuike S, Hayashi H, Yamauchi T, Yamashita
T, Ishikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asahikawa Medical College, Hokkaido, 
Japan. toshim@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Retinoids are known to be required for vertebrate reproduction, and in the male, 
for the maintenance of normal testicular structure and function. Previously
several novel retinoic acid responsive genes, collectively designated as the Stra
genes, had been isolated in the mouse. The Stra8 gene encodes a cytoplasmic
protein and is expressed specific to the developing male gonad during mouse
embryogenesis. In adult mouse, its expression is restricted to the premeiotic
germ cells. Thus it has been suggested that the mouse Stra8 protein may play a
role in the premeiotic phase of spermatogenesis. Recently a lot of genes that are
expressed only in male germ cells have been isolated in the mouse. The mouse
Stra8, Rnh2, Piwil2, Tex17, and Tuba7 were identified as testis-specific
expressed genes. In addition, the Figla was known to be a testis- and
ovary-specific gene. Recently we had reported the isolation of the human RNH2
cDNA and its expression, which is limited to the human testis. In the present
study, we have isolated full-length cDNA of S TRA8 and partial cDNAs of PIWIL2,
FIGLA, TEX17, and TUBA7, and analyzed their expression patterns in human tissues.

PMCID: PMC3455343
PMID: 12489526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Dec;8(12):1087-95.

Isolation, characterization and expression of the human Factor In the Germline
alpha (FIGLA) gene in ovarian follicles and oocytes.

Huntriss J(1), Gosden R, Hinkins M, Oliver B, Miller D, Rutherford AJ, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Paediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Leeds,
D Floor, Clarendon Wing, Leeds General Infirmary, Belmont Grove, Leeds LS2 9NS,
UK. medjhu@leeds.ac.uk

The Factor In the Germline alpha (FIGalpha) transcription factor regulates
expression of the zona pellucida proteins ZP1, ZP2 and ZP3 and is essential for
folliculogenesis in the mouse. Using the published mouse Figla sequence, BLAST
searches identified a human chromosome 2 BAC clone with high sequence identity.
Using PCR primers derived from this clone, amplicons derived from ovarian
follicles and mature oocytes revealed 100% identity with the appropriate human
BAC clone, the expected homology with the mouse Figla gene sequence, and homology
on translation with the FIGalpha protein identified in the Japanese rice fish,
medaka (Oryzias latipes). PCR expression profiling of this transcript revealed
FIGLA mRNA expression in cDNA derived from ovarian follicles (5/5 samples from
the primordial through to the secondary stage) mature oocytes (6/9 samples), and 
less frequently in preimplantation embryos (2/7 samples). Subsequent BLAST
searches revealed the predicted full length coding sequence of the human FIGalpha
protein which demonstrates 68 and 25% similarity overall to mouse and medaka
proteins respectively, with 96 and 57% identity respectively within the basic
helix-loop-helix region. This confirms our identification of the human homologue 
for this gene which maps to chromosome 2p12. Further work is required to
understand its role in normal human oocyte development and the potential
involvement in human infertility.

PMID: 12468641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 22;187(1-2):5-9.

Functional analysis of oocyte-expressed genes using transgenic models.

Rajkovic A(1), Matzuk MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, One
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

An oocyte's journey is highly distinct from the vast majority of cells in the
body. As one of the largest and rarest cells, oocytes express unique genes
required for the genesis of healthy and competent eggs. The function of only a
handful of oocyte-specific genes is beginning to be unraveled. Transgenic mouse
models have proven to be extremely valuable in studying the effects of gene
deletions on oocytes and surrounding somatic cells. Growth differentiation factor
9 (Gdf9), bone morphogenetic protein 15 (Bmp15), zona pellucida genes (Zp1, Zp2
and Zp3), factor in the germline alpha (Figla), and the c-mos protooncogene
(c-mos) are some of the genes preferentially expressed in oocytes which play
important roles during folliculogenesis. In order to identify other novel genes
preferentially expressed in oocytes, we have utilized subtractive hybridization
and in silico subtraction. The combination of these identification approaches,
coupled with the use of knockout mice, will lead to many future functional
studies of genes uniquely devoted to oogenesis and folliculogenesis.

PMID: 11988305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):377-81.

Cloning of HOXD1 from unfertilised human oocytes and expression analyses during
murine oogenesis and embryogenesis.

Pitera JE(1), Milla PJ, Scambler P, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Department, Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street,
WC1N 1EH, London, UK

We describe the cloning of HOXD1 in human unfertilised oocytes and detailed
expression analyses during mouse oogenesis and embryogenesis. The cDNA of 1991bp 
has an open reading frame of 987bp encoding a protein of 329 amino acids. A
comparison of the amino acid sequence with the mouse homologue revealed an
overall homology of 85.5% with 99% identity within the homeodomain. Expression
was detected in unfertilised human oocytes and 2-, 4-, 8-cell and blastocyst
stage embryos. Expression analyses in mature mouse ovaries, early embryos and
isolated gut revealed expression in the oocytes of the primary and secondary
ovarian follicles, and in embryonal mesodermal derivatives such as dermatomes,
urogenital tubercle, tail bud, kidney, ovaries, testes and enteric mesoderm
adjacent to the caecum where expression was up-regulated in vitro in response to 
increasing doses of retinoic acid. Our observations indicate a possible role for 
HOXD1/Hoxd1 in the ovarian oocytes and the establishment of mesodermal
derivatives during embryogenesis.

PMID: 11731253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Reprod Immunol. 2002 Jan;53(1-2):171-80.

Oocyte-specific genes regulate follicle formation, fertility and early mouse
development.

Dean J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Building 50, Room 3134, 50 South DR MSC 8028, Bethesda, MD 20892-
8028, USA. jurrien@helix.nih.gov

Gene products expressed in oocytes play important roles in folliculogenesis,
fertilization and pre-implantation development. Factor in the Germline, alpha
(FIGalpha) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor first detected
in oocytes at E13.5 that persists in adults. Female mice lacking FIGalpha are
unable to form primordial follicles which results in massive depletion of oocytes
and sterility. FIGalpha is also required for expression of the zona pellucida
genes that encode ZP1, ZP2, and ZP3. Mice lacking ZP1 form structurally abnormal 
zonae and have decreased fecundity. Mice lacking ZP3 have no zona matrix despite 
the presence of the other two zona proteins. Although, folliculogenesis occurs in
Zp3 null mice, few eggs are ovulated and females are sterile. Transgenic mice
expressing human ZP3 have been crossed with Zp3 null mice and reconstitute a
chimeric zona pellucida matrix (moZP1, moZP2, huZP3). Unexpectedly, human sperm
do not bind to 'humanized' zonae pellucidae in vitro, but mouse sperm do.
Although, late in oogenesis, oocytes becomes transcriptionally inactive and
maternal RNA is degraded, the activation of early development requires
pre-existing maternal products from the egg. Maternal antigen that embryos
require (Mater) is a single-copy gene that is transcribed in growing oocytes and,
although its transcripts are degraded during meiotic maturation, MATER protein
persists into the blastocyst. Female mice lacking this 125 kDa cytoplasmic
protein produce no off-spring because of an embryonic block at the early cleavage
stage. Thus, Mater represents one of the few documented maternal effect genes in 
mammalian development.

PMID: 11730914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2000 Nov;127(21):4645-54.

FIGalpha, a germ cell-specific transcription factor required for ovarian follicle
formation.

Soyal SM(1), Amleh A, Dean J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. ss278v@nih.gov

Primordial follicles are formed perinatally in mammalian ovaries and at birth
represent the lifetime complement of germ cells. With cyclic periodicity, cohorts
enter into a growth phase that culminates in ovulation of mature eggs, but little
is known about the regulatory cascades that govern these events. FIGalpha, a
transcription factor implicated in postnatal oocyte-specific gene expression, is 
detected as early as embryonic day 13. Mouse lines lacking FIGalpha were
established by targeted mutagenesis in embryonic stem cells. Although embryonic
gonadogenesis appeared normal, primordial follicles were not formed at birth, and
massive depletion of oocytes resulted in shrunken ovaries and female sterility.
Fig(&agr;) (the gene for FIGalpha null males have normal fertility. The
additional observation that null females do not express Zp1, Zp2 or Zp3 indicates
that FIGalpha plays a key regulatory role in the expression of multiple
oocyte-specific genes, including those that initiate folliculogenesis and those
that encode the zona pellucida required for fertilization and early embryonic
survival. The persistence of FIGalpha in adult females suggests that it may
regulate additional pathways that are essential for normal ovarian development.

PMID: 11023867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 1997 Dec;124(24):4939-47.

FIGalpha, a germ cell specific transcription factor involved in the coordinate
expression of the zona pellucida genes.

Liang L(1), Soyal SM, Dean J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, NIDDK, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mouse zona pellucida is composed of three glycoproteins, ZP1, ZP2 and ZP3,
encoded by single-copy genes whose expression is temporally and spatially
restricted to oocytes. All three proteins are required for the formation of the
extracellular zona matrix and female mice with a single disrupted zona gene lack 
a zona and are infertile. An E-box (CANNTG), located approximately 200 bp
upstream of the transcription start sites of Zp1, Zp2 and Zp3, forms a
protein-DNA complex present in oocytes and, to a much lesser extent, in testes.
It has been previously shown that the integrity of this E-box in Zp2 and Zp3
promoters is required for expression of luciferase reporter genes microinjected
into growing oocytes. The presence of the ubiquitous transcription factor E12 in 
the complex was used to identify a novel basic helix-loop-helix protein, FIGalpha
(Factor In the Germline alpha) whose expression was limited to oocytes within the
ovary. The ability of FIGalpha to transactivate reporter genes coupled to each of
the three mouse zona promoters in heterologous 10T(1/2) embryonic fibroblasts
suggests a role in coordinating the expression of the three zona pellucida genes 
during oogenesis.

PMID: 9362457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


