
1. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2016 Jan-Feb;50(1):143-50. doi: 10.7868/S0026898416010195.

[Identification of the Disease-Associated Genes in Periodontitis Using the
Co-expression Network].

[Article in Russian]

Sun GP(1,)(2), Jiang T(3), Xie PF(4), Lan J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, the Third Hospital of Ji'nan, Ji'nan, Shandong,
China. (2)guangpingsun1051@yeah.net. (3)General Department, Ji'nan Stomatological
Hospital, Ji'nan, Shandong, China. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Ji'nan Stomatological Hospital, Ji'nan, Shandong, China. (5)Department
of Prosthodontics, College of Stomatology, Shandong University, Ji'nan, Shandong,
China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the disease-associated genes in
periodontitis. In the present experiments, the topological analysis of the
differential co-expression network was proposed. Using the GSE16134 dataset
downloaded from the European Molecular Biology Laboratory-European Bioinformatics
Institute, a co-expression network was constructed after the differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between the diseased (242 samples) and
healthy (69 samples) gingival tissues from periodontitis patients. The
topological properties of the modules obtained from the network as well as an
analysis of transcription factors (TFs) were used to determine the
disease-associated genes. The gene ontology and pathway enrichment analysis was
performed to investigate the underlying mechanisms of these disease related
genes. A total of 524 DEGs, including 19 TFs were identified and a co-expression 
network with 2569 edges was obtained. Among the 7 modules gained in the network, 
the TFs (ZNF215, ZEN273, NFAT5, TRPS1, MEF2C and FLI1) were considered to be
important in periodontitis. The functional and pathway enrichment analysis
revealed that the DEGs were highly involved in the immune system. The
co-expression network analysis and TFs identified in periodontitis may provide
opportunities for biomarker development and novel insights into the therapeutics 
of periodontitis.

PMID: 27028820  [PubMed - in process]


2. Br J Pharmacol. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.1111/bph.13488. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel application assigned to toluquinol: inhibition of lymphangiogenesis by
interfering with VEGF-C/VEGFR-3 signaling pathway.

García-Caballero M(1), Blacher S(1), Paupert J(1), Quesada AR(2,)(3), Medina
MA(2,)(3), Noël A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor and Development Biology, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de
Génoprotéomique Appliqué-Cancer (GIGA-Cancer), University of Liège, Liège,
Belgium. (2)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Facultad de
Ciencias, and IBIMA (Biomedical Research Institute of Málaga), Universidad de
Málaga, Andalucía Tech, Málaga, Spain. (3)Unidad 741 de CIBER "de Enfermedades
Raras", E-29071, Málaga, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Lymphangiogenesis is an important biological process
associated with the pathogenesis of several diseases, including metastatic
dissemination, graft rejection, lymphedema and other inflammatory disorders. The 
development of new drugs blocking lymphangiogenesis has become a promising
therapeutic strategy. In this study, we aim at investigating the ability of
toluquinol, a 2-methyl-hydroquinone isolated from the culture broth of the marine
fungus Penicillium sp. HL-85-ALS5-R004, to inhibit lymphangiogenesis in vitro, ex
vivo and in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We used human lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC) to analyze
the effect of toluquinol in 2D and 3D in vitro cultures, and in the ex vivo mouse
lymphatic ring assay. For in vivo approaches, the transgenic Fli1:eGFPy1
zebrafish, the mouse ear sponges and cornea models were used. Western-blotting
and apoptosis analyses were carried out to search for drug targets.
KEY RESULTS: Toluquinol inhibited LEC proliferation, migration, tubulogenesis and
sprouting of new lymphatic vessels. Furthermore, toluquinol induced LEC apoptosis
after 14<U+2009>h of treatment in vitro, blocked the thoracic duct development in
zebrafish, and reduced the VEGF-C-induced lymphatic vessel formation and corneal 
neovascularization in mice. Mechanistically, we are providing evidence that this 
drug abrogates the VEGF-C-induced VEGFR-3 phosphorylation in a dose-dependent
manner, and represses Akt and ERK1/2 phosphorylations.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Based on these findings, we propose toluquinol as a
new candidate with pharmacological potential for the treatment of
lymphangiogenesis-related pathologies. Notably, its ability to suppress corneal
neovascularization paves the way for applications in vascular ocular pathologies.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27018653  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8214. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting the epigenetic readers in Ewing Sarcoma inhibits the oncogenic
transcription factor EWS/Fli1.

Jacques C(1,)(2), Lamoureux F(1,)(2), Baud'huin M(1,)(2,)(3), Calleja LR(1,)(2), 
Quillard T(1,)(2), Amiaud J(1,)(2), Tirode F(4), Rédini F(1,)(2), Bradner
JE(5,)(6), Heymann D(1,)(2,)(3), Ory B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR 957, Équipe Labellisée Ligue 2012, Nantes, France.
(2)Physiopathologie de la Résorption Osseuse et Thérapie des Tumeurs Osseuses
Primitives, Université de Nantes, Nantes Atlantique Universités, EA3822, Nantes, 
France. (3)Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France. (4)Institut Curie, INSERM 
U830, Paris, France. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Ewing Sarcoma is a rare bone and soft tissue malignancy affecting children and
young adults. Chromosomal translocations in this cancer produce fusion oncogenes 
as characteristic molecular signatures of the disease. The most common case is
the translocation t (11; 22) (q24;q12) which yields the EWS-Fli1 chimeric
transcription factor. Finding a way to directly target EWS-Fli1 remains a central
therapeutic approach to eradicate this aggressive cancer. Here we demonstrate
that treating Ewing Sarcoma cells with JQ1(+), a BET bromodomain inhibitor,
represses directly EWS-Fli1 transcription as well as its transcriptional program.
Moreover, the Chromatin Immuno Precipitation experiments demonstrate for the
first time that these results are a consequence of the depletion of BRD4, one of 
the BET bromodomains protein from the EWS-Fli1 promoter. In vitro, JQ1(+)
treatment reduces the cell viability, impairs the cell clonogenic and the
migratory abilities, and induces a G1-phase blockage as well as a time- and a
dose-dependent apoptosis. Furthermore, in our in vivo model, we observed a tumor 
burden delay, an inhibition of the global vascularization and an increase of the 
mice overall survival. Taken together, our data indicate that inhibiting the BET 
bromodomains interferes with EWS-FLi1 transcription and could be a promising
strategy in the Ewing tumors context.

PMID: 27006472  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Int J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar 21. pii: 1066896916639371. [Epub ahead of print]

Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor of the Stomach: A Case Report.

Song MJ(1), An S(1), Lee SS(1), Kim BS(1), Kim J(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Ulsan Collage of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. (2)University of Ulsan Collage of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul,
Republic of Korea jihunkim@amc.seoul.kr.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) is a highly aggressive
small round cell tumor that mainly occurs in the bone or soft tissue of children 
or young adults but is extremely rare in the stomach. A 55-year-old man presented
with melena and anemia. On endoscopy, an ulcerofungating mass was observed in the
high body and total gastrectomy was performed. Histologically, the mass consisted
of small round cells with scanty cytoplasm and inconspicuous nucleoli. They often
formed perivascular pseudorosettes and multinucleated giant cells were frequently
observed. The tumor cells strongly expressed CD99, FLI1, and chromogranin and
weakly expressed synaptophysin and CD56.EWS-FLI1fusion transcript was confirmed
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. ES/PNET is frequently
misdiagnosed because of its similarity with small cell carcinoma. Although
gastric ES/PNET is very rare, it should be included in differential diagnoses of 
small round cell tumor in the stomach.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 27006299  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


6. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 16. pii: S2213-6711(16)00060-6. doi:
10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.02.009. [Epub ahead of print]

An EWS-FLI1-Induced Osteosarcoma Model Unveiled a Crucial Role of Impaired
Osteogenic Differentiation on Osteosarcoma Development.

Komura S(1), Semi K(2), Itakura F(3), Shibata H(3), Ohno T(4), Hotta A(2),
Woltjen K(5), Yamamoto T(6), Akiyama H(4), Yamada Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Oncology, Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center
for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu
University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (2)Laboratory of
Stem Cell Oncology, Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center for iPS Cell
Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences 
(WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell 
Oncology, Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center for iPS Cell Research and 
Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan. (4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate
School of Medicine, Gifu 501-1194, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Stem Cell Oncology,
Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan; Hakubi Center for Advanced Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. (6)Laboratory of Stem Cell Oncology, Department of Life Science 
Frontiers, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University,
53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for
Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, 
Japan; AMED-CREST, AMED 1-7-1 Otemach, Chiyodaku, Tokyo 100-0004, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Stem Cell Oncology, Department of Life Science Frontiers, Center
for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan; Institute for Integrated Cell-Material 
Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. Electronic
address: y-yamada@cira.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

EWS-FLI1, a multi-functional fusion oncogene, is exclusively detected in Ewing
sarcomas. However, previous studies reported that rare varieties of osteosarcomas
also harbor EWS-ETS family fusion. Here, using the doxycycline-inducible EWS-FLI1
system, we established an EWS-FLI1-dependent osteosarcoma model from murine bone 
marrow stromal cells. We revealed that the withdrawal of EWS-FLI1 expression
enhances the osteogenic differentiation of sarcoma cells, leading to mature bone 
formation. Taking advantage of induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology,
we also show that sarcoma-derived iPSCs with cancer-related genetic abnormalities
exhibited an impaired differentiation program of osteogenic lineage irrespective 
of the EWS-FLI1 expression. Finally, we demonstrate that EWS-FLI1 contributed to 
secondary sarcoma development from the sarcoma iPSCs after osteogenic
differentiation. These findings demonstrate that modulating cellular
differentiation is a fundamental principle of EWS-FLI1-induced osteosarcoma
development. This in vitro cancer model using sarcoma iPSCs should provide a
unique platform for dissecting relationships between the cancer genome and
cellular differentiation.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997645  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: clincanres.2624.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of mithramycin analogs with improved targeting of the EWS-FLI1
transcription factor.

Osgood CL(1), Maloney N(1), Kidd CG(1), Kitchen-Goosen SM(2), Segars LE(3),
Gebregiorgis M(4), Woldemichael GM(5), He M(6), Sankar S(7), Lessnick SL(8), Kang
MH(9), Smith MA(10), Turner L(11), Madaj ZB(12), Winn ME(13), Núñez LE(14),
González-Sabín J(15), Helman LJ(16), Morís F(17), Grohar PJ(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University. (2)Laboratory of Cell
Structure & Signal Integration, Van Andel Research Institute. (3)Pediatric
Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Branch, , Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health. (5)Molecular Targets Laboratory, Leidos
Biomedical Research Inc. (6)Developmental Therapeutics Program, National Cancer
Institute. (7)Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine.
(8)Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children's
Hospital. (9)Cancer Center, Dept of Cell Biology & Biochemistry and Pharmacology,
School of Medicine Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center. (10)Cancer
Therapy Evaulation Program, National Cancer Institute. (11)Pathology and
Biorepository Core, Van Andel Research Institute. (12)Bioinformatics and
Biostatistics, Van Andel Institute. (13)Bioinformatics Core, Van Andel Research
Institute. (14)molecular biology, EntreChem. SL. (15)Biocatalysis, EntreChem. SL.
(16)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, NCI. (17)EntreChem SL,
EntreChem SL. (18)Cancer and Cell Biology, Van Andel Institute
patrick.grohar@vai.org.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to identify second-generation mithramycin
analogs that better target the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor for Ewing sarcoma.
We previously established mithramycin as an EWS-FLI1 inhibitor, but the
compound's toxicity prevented its use at effective concentrations in patients.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We screened a panel of mithralogs to establish their ability
to inhibit EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma. We compared the IC50 to the maximum
tolerated dose established in mice to determine the relationship between efficacy
and toxicity. We confirmed the suppression of EWS-FLI1 at the promoter, mRNA,
gene signature, and protein levels. We established an improved therapeutic window
by using time-lapse microscopy to model the effects on cellular proliferation in 
Ewing sarcoma cells relative to HepG2 control cells. Finally, we established an
improved therapeutic window using a xenograft model of Ewing sarcoma.
RESULTS: EC-8105 was found to be the most potent analog and was able to suppress 
EWS-FLI1 activity at concentrations nontoxic to other cell types. EC-8042 was
substantially less toxic than mithramycin in multiple species but maintained
suppression of EWS-FLI1 at similar concentrations. Both compounds markedly
suppressed Ewing sarcoma xenograft growth and inhibited EWS-FLI1 in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a basis for the continued development of
EC-8042 and EC-8105 as EWS-FLI1 inhibitors for the clinic.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26979396  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 11;35(1):44. doi: 10.1186/s13046-016-0321-3.

Inhibition of SOX2 induces cell apoptosis and G1/S arrest in Ewing's sarcoma
through the PI3K/Akt pathway.

Ren C(1,)(2), Ren T(1,)(2), Yang K(1,)(2), Wang S(1,)(2), Bao X(1,)(2), Zhang
F(1,)(2), Guo W(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, No. 11
Xizhimen South Street, Beijing, 100044, People's Republic of China. (2)Beijing
Key Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Tumor, Beijing, 100044, People's Republic of
China. (3)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, No. 
11 Xizhimen South Street, Beijing, 100044, People's Republic of China.
bonetumor@163.com. (4)Beijing Key Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Tumor, Beijing,
100044, People's Republic of China. bonetumor@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma is an aggressive bone and soft tissue tumor with a
high incidence in children and adolescents. Due to its high malignancy and poor
prognosis, identification of novel biomarkers for intervention therapies is
necessary to improve outcome. The EWS/FLI1 fusion gene is a characteristic of
Ewing's sarcoma in most cases. Sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2) is a primary
target of EWS/FLI1. It has been identified as an oncogene and linked to apoptotic
resistance in several types of cancer. However, its role and regulatory
mechanisms in Ewing's sarcoma are largely unknown.
METHODS: We systematically investigated the role of SOX2 in Ewing's sarcoma cell 
lines, human tissue samples and xenograft models. The expression of SOX2 was
detected in Ewing's sarcoma samples by WB and IHC. siRNAs were used to knockdown 
EWS/FLI1 and SOX2 in A673 and RD-ES cell lines with the efficiencies tested by
qRT-PCR and WB. The effect of SOX2 on cell cycle and apoptosis was determined by 
Flow cytometric and TUNEL assays. Akt overexpression was performed with plasmid. 
The protein expression of the corresponding factors was examined by WB analysis. 
Inhibition of SOX2 in vivo was performed by siRNA against SOX2 in xenograft
models, and the protein expression of the regulators testified in vitro was
examined in xenograft tumors by IHC and WB.
RESULTS: The results confirmed that SOX2 was highly expressed in Ewing's sarcoma 
and was the target of EWS/FLI1. SOX2 advanced Ewing's sarcoma cell survival and
proliferation by regulating p21, p27 and cyclin-E to facilitate G1/S phase
transition and mediating caspase-3, PARP via both extrinsic (Fas and caspase-8)
and intrinsic (caspase-9, Bad, Bcl-2 and XIAP) apoptotic pathways to restrain
cell apoptotsis. Additionally, SOX2 regulated the cell-cycle progression and
apoptosis via activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. The mechanisms were
proved both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that SOX2 played a central role in promoting
Ewing's sarcoma cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo with the underlying
mechanisms expounded. These findings suggest that SOX2 may serve as a potential
biomarker for targeted intervention in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4788902
PMID: 26969300  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 9. pii: jbc.M115.701375. [Epub ahead of print]

Englerin A inhibits EWS-FLI1 DNA Binding in Ewings Sarcoma Cells.

Caropreso V(1), Darvishi E(1), Turbyville TJ(2), Ratnayake R(1), Grohar PJ(3),
McMahon JB(1), Woldemichael G(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute-Frederick, United States; (2)Leidos Biomedical
Research, Inc., at Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, United
States; (3)Van Andel Institute/Helen DeVos Childrens Hospital, United States.
(4)Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., at Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, United States; woldemichaelg@mail.nih.gov.

High-throughput screening of extracts from plants, marine and micro-organisms led
to the identification of the extract from the plant Phyllanthus engleri as the
most potent inhibitor of EWS-FLI1 induced luciferase reporter expression. Testing
of compounds isolated from this extract in turn led to the identification of
englerin A (EA) as the active constituent of the extract. EA induced both
necrosis and apoptosis in Ewing cells subsequent to a G2M accumulation of cells
in the cell cycle. It also impacted clonogenic survival and anchorage independent
proliferation while also decreasing the proportion of chemotherapy-resistant
cells identified by high ALDH activity. EA also caused a sustained increase in
cytosolic calcium levels. EA appears to exert its effect on Ewing cells through a
decrease in phosphorylation of EWS-FLI1 and its ability to bind DNA. This effect 
is mediated, at least in part, through a decrease in the levels of the calcium
dependent protein kinase PKC-ßI after a transient upregulation.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26961871  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Cancer Res. 2016 Mar 8. pii: canres.1572.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

CRM1 inhibition promotes cytotoxicity in Ewing sarcoma cells by repressing
EWS-FLI1-dependent IGF-1 signaling.

Sun H(1), Lin DC(2), Cao Q(2), Guo X(3), Marijon H(2), Zhao Z(4), Gery S(2), Xu
L(5), Yang H(6), Pang B(7), Lee VK(8), Lim HJ(7), Doan N(9), Said JW(10), Chu
P(11), Mayakonda A(5), Thomas T(2), Forscher C(3), Baloglu E(12), Shacham S(13), 
Rajalingam R(14), Koeffler HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sugery, University of California, San Francisco
frenksun@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medicine, Cedars Sinai Medical Center.
(3)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. (4)Department of
Musculoskeletal Oncology, First Af<U+FB01>liated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (5)National Cancer Institute,Cancer Science Institute,,
National University of Singapore. (6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore,
National University of Singapore. (7)Department of Pathology, National University
Hospital Singapore. (8)Pathology, National University Hospital. (9)Pathology,
University of California Los Angeles. (10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles. (11)Department of Pathology, City
of Hope National Medical Center. (12)Karyopharm Therapeutics Inc. (13)Drug
Discovery at Karyopharm, Karyopharm Therapeutics Inc. (14)Department of Surgery, 
University of California, San Francisco.

Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is an aggressive bone malignancy that mainly affects children
and young adults. The mechanisms by which EWS (EWSR1) fusion genes drive the
disease are not fully understood. CRM1 (XPO1) traffics proteins from the nucleus,
including tumor suppressors and growth factors, and is overexpressed in many
cancers. A small-molecule inhibitor of CRM1, KPT-330, has shown therapeutic
promise, but has yet to be investigated in the context of EWS. In this study, we 
demonstrate that CRM1 is also highly expressed in EWS. shRNA-mediated or
pharmacological inhibition of CRM1 in EWS cells dramatically decreased cell
growth while inducing apoptosis, cell cycle arrest, and protein expression
alterations to several cancer-related factors. Interestingly, silencing of CRM1
markedly reduced EWS-FLI1 fusion protein expression at the post-transcriptional
level and upregulated the expression of the well-established EWS-FLI1 target
gene, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), which inhibits
IGF-1. Accordingly, KPT-330 treatment attenuated IGF-1-induced activation of the 
IGF-1R/AKT pathway. Furthermore, knockdown of IGFBP3 increased cell growth and
rescued the inhibitory effects on IGF-1 signaling triggered by CRM1 inhibition.
Finally, treatment of EWS cells with a combination of KPT-330 and the IGF-1R
inhibitor, linsitinib, synergistically decreased cell proliferation both in vitro
and in vivo. Taken together, these findings provide a strong rationale for
investigating the efficacy of combinatorial inhibition of CRM1 and IGF-1R for the
treatment of EWS.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26956669  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 29. pii: 201521827. [Epub ahead of print]

High-throughput small molecule screen identifies inhibitors of aberrant chromatin
accessibility.

Pattenden SG(1), Simon JM(2), Wali A(3), Jayakody CN(1), Troutman J(4), McFadden 
AW(5), Wooten J(3), Wood CC(1), Frye SV(1), Janzen WP(1), Davis IJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302; Division of Chemical
Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Eshelman School of Pharmacy, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27302; (2)Department of Genetics, School
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; 
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Curriculum in Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, 
NC 27599; (3)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599; Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (4)Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (5)Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; (6)Department of Genetics, School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599;
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Pediatrics, School 
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; 
Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, School of Medicine, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 ian_davis@med.unc.edu.

Mutations in chromatin-modifying proteins and transcription factors are commonly 
associated with a wide variety of cancers. Through gain- or loss-of-function,
these mutations may result in characteristic alterations of accessible chromatin,
indicative of shifts in the landscape of regulatory elements genome-wide. The
identification of compounds that reverse a specific chromatin signature could
lead to chemical probes or potential therapies. To explore whether chromatin
accessibility could serve as a platform for small molecule screening, we adapted 
formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements (FAIRE), a chemical method
to enrich for nucleosome-depleted genomic regions, as a high-throughput,
automated assay. After demonstrating the validity and robustness of this
approach, we applied this method to screen an epigenetically targeted small
molecule library by evaluating regions of aberrant nucleosome depletion mediated 
by EWSR1-FLI1, the chimeric transcription factor critical for the bone and soft
tissue tumor Ewing sarcoma. As a class, histone deacetylase inhibitors were
greatly overrepresented among active compounds. These compounds resulted in
diminished accessibility at targeted sites by disrupting transcription of
EWSR1-FLI1. Capitalizing on precise differences in chromatin accessibility for
drug discovery efforts offers significant advantages because it does not depend
on the a priori selection of a single molecular target and may detect novel
biologically relevant pathways.

PMCID: PMC4801272 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26929321  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Mol Ther. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1038/mt.2016.41. [Epub ahead of print]

A role for the long non-coding RNA SENCR in commitment and function of
endothelial cells.

Boulberdaa M(1,)(2), Scott E(1), Ballantyne M(1), Garcia R(1), Descamps B(3),
Angelini GD(3,)(4), Brittan M(2), Hunter A(2), McBride M(1), McClure J(1), Miano 
JM(5), Emanueli C(3,)(4), Mills NL(2), Mountford JC(1,)(6), Baker AH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, BHF Glasgow Cardiovascular
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, G128TA, UK. (2)BHF/University
Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4UU, 
UK. (3)Bristol Heart Institute, School of Clinical Sciences, University of
Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2HW, UK. (4)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College London, London, W12 0HS, UK. (5)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, New York, NY 14586, US.
(6)Research, Development & Innovation, Scottish National Blood Transfusion
Service, Ellen's Glen Road, Edinburgh, E177QT, Scotland, UK.

Despite the increasing importance of long non-coding RNA in physiology and
disease, their role in endothelial biology remains poorly understood. Growing
evidence has highlighted them to be essential regulators of human embryonic stem 
cell differentiation. SENCR, a vascular-enriched long non-coding RNA, overlaps
the Friend Leukemia Integration virus 1 (FLI1) gene, a regulator of endothelial
development. Therefore, we wanted to test the hypothesis that SENCR may
contribute to mesodermal and endothelial commitment as well as in endothelial
function. We thus developed new differentiation protocols allowing generation of 
endothelial cells from human embryonic stem cells using both directed and
haemogenic routes. The expression of SENCR was markedly regulated during
endothelial commitment using both protocols. SENCR did not control the
pluripotency of pluripotent cells; however its overexpression significantly
potentiated early mesodermal and endothelial commitment. In HUVEC, SENCR induced 
proliferation, migration and angiogenesis. SENCR expression was altered in
vascular tissue and cells derived from patients with critical limb ischemia and
premature coronary artery disease compared to controls. Here, we showed that
SENCR contributes to the regulation of endothelial differentiation from
pluripotent cells and controls the angiogenic capacity of HUVEC. These data give 
novel insight into the regulatory processes involved in endothelial development
and function.Molecular Therapy (2016); doi:10.1038/mt.2016.41.

PMID: 26898221  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 14. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7377. [Epub ahead of print]

The RNA helicase A in malignant transformation.

Fidaleo M(1,)(2), Paola E(1,)(2), Paronetto MP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome "Foro
Italico", Rome, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology,
CERC, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy.

The RNA helicase A (RHA) is involved in several steps of RNA metabolism, such as 
RNA processing, cellular transit of viral molecules, ribosome assembly,
regulation of transcription and translation of specific mRNAs. RHA is a
mutifunctional protein whose roles depend on the specific interaction with
different molecular partners, which have been extensively characterized in
physiological situations. More recently, the functional implication of RHA in
human cancer has emerged. Interestingly, RHA was shown to cooperate with both
tumor suppressors and oncoproteins in different tumours, indicating that its
specific role in cancer is strongly influenced by the cellular context. For
instance, silencing of RHA and/or disruption of its interaction with the
oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 rendered Ewing sarcoma cells more sensitive to genotoxic
stresses and affected tumor growth and maintenance, suggesting possible
therapeutic implications.Herein, we review the recent advances in the cellular
functions of RHA and discuss its implication in oncogenesis, providing a
perspective for future studies and potential translational opportunities in human
cancer.

PMID: 26885691  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 9. pii: clincanres.2516.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of Two Measures of Micrometastatic Disease on Clinical Outcomes in
Patients with Newly Diagnosed Ewing Sarcoma: A Report from the Children's
Oncology Group.

Vo KT(1), Edwards JV(2), Epling CL(3), Sinclair E(3), Hawkins DS(4), Grier HE(5),
Janeway KA(6), Barnette P(7), McIlvaine E(8), Krailo M(9), Barkauskas DA(10),
Matthay KK(11), Womer RB(12), Gorlick R(13), Lessnick SL(14), Mackall CL(15),
Dubois SG(16).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, University of California, San
Francisco School of Medicine. (2)Pediatrics, Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
(3)Experimental Medicine Core Immunology Laboratory, University of California,
San Francisco School of Medicine. (4)Hematology/Oncology, Seattle Children's
Hospital. (5)Dana-Farber, Boston. (6)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston
Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard Medical School.
(7)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Center for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah. (8)Statistics, University of Southern
California Keck School of Medicine. (9)Statistics and Data Center, Children's
Oncology Group. (10)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of
the University of Southern California. (11)Pediatrics, UCSF. (12)Division of
Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. (13)Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, The Children's Hospital at Montefiore. (14)Center for Childhood Cancer 
and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children's Hospital. (15)Pediatric Oncology
Branch, National Cancer Institute. (16)Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute steven_dubois@dfci.harvard.edu.

PURPOSE: Flow cytometry and RT-PCR can detect occult Ewing sarcoma (ES) cells in 
the blood and bone marrow (BM). These techniques were used to evaluate the
prognostic significance of micrometastatic disease in ES.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Newly diagnosed patients with ES were enrolled on two
prospective multi-center studies. In the flow cytometry cohort, patients were
defined as "positive" for BM micrometastatic disease if their CD99+/CD45- values 
were above the upper limit in 22 control patients. In the PCR cohort, RT-PCR on
blood or BM samples classified the patients as "positive" or "negative" for
EWSR1/FLI1 translocations. The association between micrometastatic disease burden
with clinical features and outcome was assessed. Co-expression of IGF-1R on
detected tumor cells was performed in a subset of flow cytometry samples.
RESULTS: The median total BM CD99+CD45- percent was 0.0012% (range 0-1.10%) in
the flow cytometry cohort, with 14/109 (12.8%) of ES patients defined as
"positive." In the PCR cohort, 19.6% (44/225) patients were "positive" for any
EWSR1/FLI1 translocation in blood or BM. There were no differences in baseline
clinical features or event-free or overall survival between patients classified
as "positive" vs. "negative" by either method. CD99+CD45- cells had significantly
higher IGF-1R expression compared to CD45+ hematopoietic cells (mean geometric
mean fluorescence intensity 982.7 vs. 190.9; p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The detection of micrometastatic disease at initial diagnosis by
flow cytometry or RT-PCR is not associated with outcome in newly diagnosed
patients with ES. Flow cytometry provides a tool to characterize occult
micrometastatic tumor cells for proteins of interest.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26861456  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 2. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7124. [Epub ahead of print]

Therapeutic opportunities in Ewing sarcoma: EWS-FLI inhibition via LSD1
targeting.

Theisen ER(1), Pishas KI(1,)(2), Saund RS(1), Lessnick SL(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Disorders, The Research Institute at
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (2)Cancer Therapeutics
Laboratory, Centre for Personalized Cancer Medicine, Discipline of Medicine,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (3)Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Bone Marrow Transplant at The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive primary pediatric bone tumor, often diagnosed in
adolescents and young adults. A pathognomonic reciprocal chromosomal
translocation results in a fusion gene coding for a protein which derives its
N-terminus from a FUS/EWS/TAF15 (FET) protein family member, commonly EWS, and
C-terminus containing the DNA-binding domain of an ETS transcription factor,
commonly FLI1. Nearly 85% of cases express the EWS-FLI protein which functions as
a transcription factor and drives oncogenesis. As the primary genomic lesion and 
a protein which is not expressed in normal cells, disrupting EWS-FLI function is 
an attractive therapeutic strategy for Ewing sarcoma. However, transcription
factors are notoriously difficult targets for the development of small molecules.
Improved understanding of the oncogenic mechanisms employed by EWS-FLI to hijack 
normal cellular programming has uncovered potential novel approaches to
pharmacologically block EWS-FLI function. In this review we examine targeting the
chromatin regulatory enzymes recruited to conspire in oncogenesis with a focus on
the histone lysine specific demethylase 1 (LSD1). LSD1 inhibitors are being
aggressively investigated in acute myeloid leukemia and the results of early
clinical trials will help inform the future use of LSD1 inhibitors in sarcoma.
High LSD1 expression is observed in Ewing sarcoma patient samples and mechanistic
and preclinical data suggest LSD1 inhibition globally disrupts the function of
EWS-ETS proteins.

PMID: 26848860  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Mod Pathol. 2016 Apr;29(4):370-80. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.31. Epub 2016 Feb 
5.

Evaluation of NKX2-2 expression in round cell sarcomas and other tumors with
EWSR1 rearrangement: imperfect specificity for Ewing sarcoma.

Hung YP(1), Fletcher CD(1), Hornick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Ewing sarcoma shows considerable histologic overlap with other round cell tumors.
NKX2-2, a homeodomain transcription factor involved in neuroendocrine/glial
differentiation and a downstream target of EWSR1-FLI1, has been reported as an
immunohistochemical marker for Ewing sarcoma. We assessed the specificity of
NKX2-2 for Ewing sarcoma compared with other round cell malignant neoplasms and
other soft tissue tumors with EWSR1 translocations. We evaluated whole-tissue
sections from 270 cases: 40 Ewing sarcomas (4 with atypical/large cell features),
20 CIC-DUX4 sarcomas, 5 BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas, 9 unclassified round cell sarcomas, 
10 poorly differentiated synovial sarcomas, 10 lymphoblastic lymphomas, 10
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 Merkel cell
carcinomas, 10 small cell carcinomas, 20 melanomas, 5 NUT midline carcinomas, 10 
Wilms tumors, 10 neuroblastomas, 10 olfactory neuroblastomas, 12 mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 10 angiomatoid fibrous histiocytomas, 10 clear cell sarcomas, 5 
gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma-like tumors, 5 desmoplastic small round cell 
tumors, 10 extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, 10 soft tissue and cutaneous
myoepitheliomas, and 19 myoepithelial carcinomas. NKX2-2 positivity was defined
as moderate-to-strong nuclear immunoreactivity in at least 5% of cells. NKX2-2
was positive in 37/40 (93%) Ewing sarcomas, including all atypical Ewing sarcomas
and cases with known EWSR1-FLI1 or EWSR1-ERG fusion; 85% of Ewing sarcomas showed
diffuse (>50%) staining. NKX2-2 was positive in 9 (75%) mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 8 (80%) olfactory neuroblastomas, 1 CIC-DUX4 sarcoma, 1 poorly
differentiated synovial sarcoma, 1 neuroblastoma, 2 unclassified round cell
sarcomas, and 3 small cell carcinomas; all other EWSR1-associated tumors were
negative for NKX2-2, apart from 1 desmoplastic small round cell tumor, 1
myoepithelioma, and 1 myoepithelial carcinoma. In summary, NKX2-2 is a sensitive 
but imperfectly specific marker for Ewing sarcoma. Nonetheless, NKX2-2 may be
helpful to distinguish Ewing sarcoma from some histologic mimics including
CIC-DUX4 and BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas. Most other EWSR1-associated soft tissue tumors 
are negative for NKX2-2.

PMID: 26847175  [PubMed - in process]


17. J Biol Chem. 2016 Apr 1;291(14):7242-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.710665. Epub 2016 
Feb 4.

Phenotype-based Discovery of 2-[(E)-2-(Quinolin-2-yl)vinyl]phenol as a Novel
Regulator of Ocular Angiogenesis.

Reynolds AL(1), Alvarez Y(1), Sasore T(1), Waghorne N(1), Butler CT(1), Kilty
C(1), Smith AJ(1), McVicar C(2), Wong VH(2), Galvin O(1), Merrigan S(1), Osman
J(3), Grebnev G(1), Sjölander A(3), Stitt AW(2), Kennedy BN(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the University College Dublin School of Biomolecular and Biomedical
Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland. (2)the Centre for Experimental Medicine, Queen's University Belfast,
Wellcome-Wolfson Building, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT9 7BL, United Kingdom,
and. (3)the Division of Cell and Experimental Pathology, Department of
Translational Medicine, Lund University, Skåne University Hospital, 20502 Malmö, 
Sweden. (4)From the University College Dublin School of Biomolecular and
Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin
4, Ireland, brendan.kennedy@ucd.ie.

Retinal angiogenesis is tightly regulated to meet oxygenation and nutritional
requirements. In diseases such as proliferative diabetic retinopathy and
neovascular age-related macular degeneration, uncontrolled angiogenesis can lead 
to blindness. Our goal is to better understand the molecular processes
controlling retinal angiogenesis and discover novel drugs that inhibit retinal
neovascularization. Phenotype-based chemical screens were performed using the
ChemBridge Diverset(TM)library and inhibition of hyaloid vessel angiogenesis in
Tg(fli1:EGFP) zebrafish. 2-[(E)-2-(Quinolin-2-yl)vinyl]phenol, (quininib)
robustly inhibits developmental angiogenesis at 4-10 µmin zebrafish and
significantly inhibits angiogenic tubule formation in HMEC-1 cells, angiogenic
sprouting in aortic ring explants, and retinal revascularization in
oxygen-induced retinopathy mice. Quininib is well tolerated in zebrafish, human
cell lines, and murine eyes. Profiling screens of 153 angiogenic and inflammatory
targets revealed that quininib does not directly target VEGF receptors but
antagonizes cysteinyl leukotriene receptors 1 and 2 (CysLT1-2) at micromolar
IC50values. In summary, quininib is a novel anti-angiogenic small-molecule CysLT 
receptor antagonist. Quininib inhibits angiogenesis in a range of cell and tissue
systems, revealing novel physiological roles for CysLT signaling. Quininib has
potential as a novel therapeutic agent to treat ocular neovascular pathologies
and may complement current anti-VEGF biological agents.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 26846851  [PubMed - in process]


18. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 18. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6937. [Epub ahead of print]

The second European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research summit - A joint
effort to deconstructing the multiple layers of a complex disease.

Kovar H(1,)(2), Amatruda J(3), Brunet E(4), Burdach S(5), Cidre-Aranaz F(6), de
Alava E(7), Dirksen U(8), van der Ent W(9,)(10), Grohar P(11), Grünewald TG(12), 
Helman L(13), Houghton P(14), Iljin K(15), Korsching E(16), Ladanyi M(17), Lawlor
E(18), Lessnick S(19), Ludwig J(20), Meltzer P(21), Metzler M(22), Mora J(23),
Moriggl R(24,)(25), Nakamura T(26), Papamarkou T(27), Radic Sarikas B(28), Rédini
F(29), Richter GH(5), Rossig C(8), Schadler K(30), Schäfer BW(31), Scotlandi
K(32), Sheffield NC(28), Shelat A(33), Snaar-Jagalska E(10), Sorensen P(34),
Stegmaier K(35), Stewart E(36), Sweet-Cordero A(37), Szuhai K(38), Tirado OM(39),
Tirode F(9), Toretsky J(40), Tsafou K(40), Üren A(40), Zinovyev A(9,)(41,)(42),
Delattre O(9).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics, Molecular Biology and Internal Medicine, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (4)Museum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Paris, France. (5)Children's
Cancer Research Center and Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technical University and Comprehensive Cancer Center Munich (CCCM), Munich,
Germany. (6)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana,
Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain. (7)Institute of Biomedicine of Sevilla (IBiS), Virgen del Rocio
University Hospital /CSIC/University de Sevilla, Department of Pathology,
Seville, Spain. (8)University Children´s Hospital Muenster, Pediatric Hematology 
and Oncology, Muenster, Germany. (9)INSERM U830, Laboratoire de Génétique et
Biologie des Cancers, Institut Curie, Paris, France. (10)Institute of Biology,
Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. (11)Van Andel Institute, Center for
Cancer and Cell Biology and Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI,
USA. (12)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology of the 
LMU Munich, Munich, Germany. (13)Center for Cancer Rearch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
MA, USA. (14)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (15)VTT Technical Research Centre of
Finland Ltd, Espoo, Finland. (16)Institute of Bioinformatics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (17)Department of Pathology 
and Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA. (18)Department of Pediatrics and Department of
Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (19)Center for Childhood
Cancer and Blood Disorders, Nationwide Children's Hospital, and the Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/BMT, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. 
(20)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA. (21)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (22)Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University
Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (23)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Sant 
Joan de Déu Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. (24)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer
Research, Vienna, Austria. (25)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics,
University of Veterinary Medicine and Medical University, Vienna, Austria.
(26)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (27)University of Glasgow, School of Mathematics
and Statistics, Glasgow, UK. (28)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of
the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria. (29)INSERM UMR957, Université 
de Nantes, Nantes, France. (30)Department of Pediatrics Research, MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (31)Department of Oncology and Children's
Research Center, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. (32)CRS
Development of Biomolecular Therapies, Experimental Oncology Lab, Rizzoli
Institute, Bologna, Italy. (33)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics,
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,TN, USA. (34)Department of
Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (35)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (36)Department of
Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA. (37)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA, USA. (38)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (39)Sarcoma Research Group,
Molecular Oncology Lab, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL),
L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (40)Department of Oncology,
Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington DC, USA. (41)INSERM, U900,
Paris, France. (42)Ecole des Mines ParisTech, Fontainbleau, France.

Despite multimodal treatment, long term outcome for patients with Ewing sarcoma
is still poor. The second "European interdisciplinary Ewing sarcoma research
summit" assembled a large group of scientific experts in the field to discuss
their latest unpublished findings on the way to the identification of novel
therapeutic targets and strategies. Ewing sarcoma is characterized by a quiet
genome with presence of an EWSR1-ETS gene rearrangement as the only and defining 
genetic aberration. RNA-sequencing of recently described Ewing-like sarcomas with
variant translocations identified them as biologically distinct diseases. Various
presentations adressed mechanisms of EWS-ETS fusion protein activities with a
focus on EWS-FLI1. Data were presented shedding light on the molecular
underpinnings of genetic permissiveness to this disease uncovering interaction of
EWS-FLI1 with recently discovered susceptibility loci. Epigenetic context as a
consequence of the interaction between the oncoprotein, cell type, developmental 
stage, and tissue microenvironment emerged as dominant theme in the discussion of
the molecular pathogenesis and inter- and intra-tumor heterogeneity of Ewing
sarcoma, and the difficulty to generate animal models faithfully recapitulating
the human disease. The problem of preclinical development of biologically
targeted therapeutics was discussed and promising perspectives were offered from 
the study of novel in vitro models. Finally, it was concluded that in order to
facilitate rapid pre-clinical and clinical development of novel therapies in
Ewing sarcoma, the community needs a platform to maintain knowledge of
unpublished results, systems and models used in drug testing and to continue the 
open dialogue initiated at the first two Ewing sarcoma summits.

PMID: 26802024  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 20;6:19304. doi: 10.1038/srep19304.

Efficient extravasation of tumor-repopulating cells depends on cell
deformability.

Chen J(1), Zhou W(1), Jia Q(1), Chen J(1), Zhang S(1), Yao W(1), Wei F(1), Zhang 
Y(1), Yang F(1), Huang W(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang H(2), Zhang Y(2), Huang B(2,)(3), 
Zhang Z(4), Jia H(1), Wang N(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cellular Biomechanics and Regenerative Medicine, Department of 
Biomedical Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030 China. (3)Department of Immunology, Institute of 
Basic Medical Sciences of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005
China. (4)Britton Chance Center for Biomedical Photonics, Wuhan National
Laboratory for Optoelectronics-Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China. (5)Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, 
College of Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL
61801 USA.

Cancer metastasis is the most deadly stage in cancer progression. Despite
significant efforts over the past decades, it remains elusive why only a very
small fraction of cancer cells is able to generate micrometastasis and metastatic
colonization. Recently we have shown that tumor-repopulating cells (TRCs), a
highly tumorigenic subpopulation of mouse melanoma cells, can be selected by
being cultured and grown in 3D soft fibrin gels. Here we show that when injected 
into the yolk of a 2 day-post-fertilization (dpf) embryo of Tg (fli1:EGFP or
kdrl:mCherry) zebrafish, TRCs are much more efficient in surviving and growing at
various secondary sites to generate micrometastasis and metastatic colonization
than control melanoma cells that are grown on rigid plastic. The metastasis of
TRCs is dependent on the presence of Sox2, a self-renewal gene, and silencing
Sox2 leads to the inhibition of TRC metastasis. High-resolution of 3D confocal
images of the TRCs at the secondary sites show that extravasation and formation
of micrometastases by TRCs are more efficient than by the control cells.
Remarkably, efficient extravasation of TRCs in vivo and transmigration in vitro
are determined by TRC deformability, as a result of low Cdc42 and high Sox2. Our 
findings suggest that tumor cell deformability is a key factor in controlling
extravasation dynamics during metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4726408
PMID: 26787224  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Dermatol. 2016 Jan;43(1):19-28. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.13185.

Recent advances in animal models of systemic sclerosis.

Asano Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disease characterized
by the three cardinal pathological features, comprising aberrant immune
activation, vasculopathy and tissue fibrosis, with unknown etiology. Although
many inducible and genetic animal models mimicking the selected aspects of SSc
have been well documented, the lack of models encompassing the full clinical
manifestations hindered the development and preclinical testing of therapies
against this disease. Under this situation, three new genetic animal models have 
recently been established, such as Fra2 transgenic mice, urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor deficient mice and Klf5(+/-) ;Fli1(+/-) mice, all 
of which recapitulate the pathological cascade of SSc. The former two murine
models demonstrate endothelial cell apoptosis and capillary loss followed by
tissue fibrosis, whereas the immune systems show no remarkable abnormality.
Klf5(+/-) ;Fli1(+/-) mice develop immune activation, vasculopathy and tissue
fibrosis in this sequence, eventually resulting in the development of dermal
fibrosis, interstitial lung disease and pulmonary vascular involvement resembling
those of SSc. Because Krueppel-like factor (KLF)5 and Friend leukemia integration
1 transcription factor (Fli1) are the transcription factors epigenetically
suppressed in SSc dermal fibroblasts, the reproduction of SSc manifestations in
Klf5(+/-) ;Fli1(+/-) mice supports the canonical idea that environmental
influences play a central role in the development of SSc in genetically
predisposed individuals. These new animal models offer important clues for the
better understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms of SSc pathology and 
the identification of potential molecular targets for the treatment of this
incurable disease.

© 2016 Japanese Dermatological Association.

PMID: 26782003  [PubMed - in process]


21. Cell Rep. 2016 Jan 26;14(3):598-610. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.12.063. Epub 2016
Jan 14.

Functional Genomic Screening Reveals Splicing of the EWS-FLI1 Fusion Transcript
as a Vulnerability in Ewing Sarcoma.

Grohar PJ(1), Kim S(2), Rangel Rivera GO(3), Sen N(2), Haddock S(2), Harlow
ML(4), Maloney NK(5), Zhu J(6), O'Neill M(7), Jones TL(2), Huppi K(2), Grandin
M(2), Gehlhaus K(2), Klumpp-Thomas CA(8), Buehler E(8), Helman LJ(9), Martin
SE(8), Caplen NJ(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA; Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (2)Gene Silencing
Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Gene Silencing Section, Genetics Branch, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; NIH
Academy, Office of Intramural Training and Education, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (4)Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA. (6)Molecular Genetics Section,
Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (7)Protein Characterization Laboratory, Leidos
Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. (8)Trans-NIH RNAi Screening Facility, Division of
Preclinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences,
NIH, Rockville, MD 20850, USA. (9)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology 
Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA. (10)Gene Silencing Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic
address: ncaplen@mail.nih.gov.

Ewing sarcoma cells depend on the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcription factor for cell
survival. Using an assay of EWS-FLI1 activity and genome-wide RNAi screening, we 
have identified proteins required for the processing of the EWS-FLI1 pre-mRNA. We
show that Ewing sarcoma cells harboring a genomic breakpoint that retains exon 8 
of EWSR1 require the RNA-binding protein HNRNPH1 to express in-frame EWS-FLI1. We
also demonstrate the sensitivity of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts to the loss of
function of the U2 snRNP component, SF3B1. Disrupted splicing of the EWS-FLI1
transcript alters EWS-FLI1 protein expression and EWS-FLI1-driven expression. Our
results show that the processing of the EWS-FLI1 fusion RNA is a potentially
targetable vulnerability in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4755295
PMID: 26776507  [PubMed - in process]


22. Mod Pathol. 2016 Feb;29(2):182-93. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.144. Epub 2016 Jan
15.

High-definition CpG methylation of novel genes in gastric carcinogenesis
identified by next-generation sequencing.

Sepulveda JL(1), Gutierrez-Pajares JL(1), Luna A(1), Yao Y(2), Tobias JW(3),
Thomas S(1), Woo Y(4), Giorgi F(5), Komissarova EV(5), Califano A(5), Wang TC(6),
Sepulveda AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Department of
Surgery, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of Systems
Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (6)Department of Medicine,
Division of Gastroenterology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Gastric cancers are the most frequent gastric malignancy and usually arise in the
sequence of Helicobacter pylori-associated chronic gastritis. CpG methylation is 
a central mechanism of epigenetic gene regulation affecting cancer-related genes,
and occurs early in gastric carcinogenesis. DNA samples from non-metaplastic
gastric mucosa with variable levels of gastritis (non-metaplastic mucosa),
intestinal metaplasia, or gastric cancer were screened with methylation arrays
for CpG methylation of cancer-related genes and 30 gene targets were further
characterized by high-definition bisulfite next-generation sequencing. In
addition, data from The Cancer Genome Atlas were analyzed for correlation of
methylation with gene expression. Overall, 13 genes had significantly increased
CpG methylation in gastric cancer vs non-metaplastic mucosa (BRINP1, CDH11, CHFR,
EPHA5, EPHA7, FGF2, FLI1, GALR1, HS3ST2, PDGFRA, SEZ6L, SGCE, and SNRPN).
Further, most of these genes had corresponding reduced expression levels in
gastric cancer compared with intestinal metaplasia, including novel
hypermethylated genes in gastric cancer (FLI1, GALR1, SGCE, and SNRPN),
suggesting that they may regulate neoplastic transformation from non-malignant
intestinal metaplasia to cancer. Our data suggest a tumor-suppressor role for
FLI1 in gastric cancer, consistent with recently reported data in breast cancer. 
For the genes with strongest methylation/expression correlation, namely FLI1, the
expression was lowest in microsatellite-unstable tumors compared with other
gastric cancer molecular subtypes. Importantly, reduced expression of
hypermethylated BRINP1 and SGCE was significantly associated with favorable
survival in gastric cancer. In summary, we report novel methylation gene targets 
that may have functional roles in discrete stages of gastric carcinogenesis and
may serve as biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.

PMID: 26769141  [PubMed - in process]


23. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Jan;53:171-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.09.009. Epub 2016 Jan 
5.

Ewing sarcoma: The clinical relevance of the insulin-like growth factor 1 and the
poly-ADP-ribose-polymerase pathway.

van Maldegem AM(1), Bovée JV(2), Peterse EF(3), Hogendoorn PC(4), Gelderblom
H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
a.m.van_maldegem@lumc.nl. (2)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
j.v.m.g.bovee@lumc.nl. (3)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
e.f.p.peterse@lumc.nl. (4)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
p.c.w.hogendoorn@lumc.nl. (5)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University
Medical Centre, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: a.j.gelderblom@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: In the last three decades the outcome for patients with localised
Ewing sarcoma (ES) has improved significantly since the introduction of
multimodality primary treatment. However, for patients with (extra-) pulmonary
metastatic and/or non-resectable relapsed disease the outcome remains poor and
new treatment options are urgently needed. Currently the insulin-like growth
factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) pathway and the
poly-ADP(adenosinediphosphate)-ribose-polymerase (PARP) pathway are being
investigated for potential targeted therapies. IGF-1R: The IGF-1R pathway is
known to be deregulated by the EWSR1-FLI1 translocation which makes it a
potential target for therapy. Clinical trials have been reported in which only ES
patients were treated with an IGF-1R inhibitor, either as single agent or in
combination. In total 291 ES patients were included in these trials, in which two
(0.7%) complete responses, 32 (11%) partial responses of which some durable, and 
61 (21%) stable diseases were observed. PARP: In the presence of a PARP inhibitor
DNA strand breaks cannot be efficiently repaired, leading to cell death. The
first phase II trial with ES patients was recently published and showed no
clinical responses, which may have been due to the drug being non-effective as a 
single agent.
DISCUSSION: The IGF-1R pathway is an interesting target for ES and should be
explored further, as biomarkers to select patients that might benefit from
treatment are lacking. PARP inhibitors as single agent have so far failed to show
improvement in outcome. Future directions include dual insulin receptor/IGF-1R
blockade with linsitinib as well as chemotherapy-PARP combinations. Both
therapeutic strategies are currently being explored.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26765686  [PubMed - in process]


24. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2016 Apr;55(4):340-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22336. Epub 2015
Dec 22.

Ewing sarcoma with ERG gene rearrangements: A molecular study focusing on the
prevalence of FUS-ERG and common pitfalls in detecting EWSR1-ERG fusions by FISH.

Chen S(1), Deniz K(2), Sung YS(1), Zhang L(1), Dry S(3), Antonescu CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY.
(2)Department of Pathology, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Department of
Pathology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA.

The genetics of Ewing sarcoma (ES) are characterized by a canonical fusion
involving EWSR1 gene and a member of the ETS family of transcription factors,
such as FLI1 and ERG. In fact, ERG gene rearrangements represent the second most 
common molecular alteration, with EWSR1-ERG being identified in 5-10% of cases,
while only a handful of reports document a FUS-ERG fusion. In this study, we
focus on ES with ERG gene abnormalities, specifically to investigate the
prevalence and clinicopathologic features of FUS-ERG fusions in a large cohort of
small blue round cell tumors (SBRCTs) and compare to the eight reported
FUS-positive ES. Among the 85 SBRCTs tested, seven (8.2%) cases harbored FUS gene
rearrangements; six fused to ERG and one with FEV. During this investigation we
came across a number of ERG-rearranged ES lacking both EWSR1 and FUS
abnormalities by FISH. In one case, RNA sequencing identified an EWSR1-ERG
transcript despite the negative EWSR1 rearrangements by FISH. Additional 3-color 
FISH fusion assay demonstrated the fusion of EWSR1 and ERG signals in all four
cases negative for break-apart EWSR1 FISH. These results emphasize a potential
pitfall of relying on EWSR1 FISH assay alone for diagnosis of ES. In cases with
classic morphology and/or strong CD99 and ERG immunoreactivity, additional
molecular testing should be applied, such as ERG FISH or RT-PCR/next generation
sequencing, for a more definitive diagnosis. Although our study group is small,
there were no differences noted between the clinical, morphologic features and
immunoprofile of the different subsets of ERG-rearranged SBRCTs. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26690869  [PubMed - in process]


25. Oncogenesis. 2015 Dec 21;4:e179. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.41.

MN1-Fli1 oncofusion transforms murine hematopoietic progenitor cells into acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia cells.

Wenge DV(1), Felipe-Fumero E(1), Angenendt L(1), Schliemann C(1), Schmidt E(1),
Schmidt LH(1), Thiede C(2), Ehninger G(2), Berdel WE(1), Arteaga MF(1), Mikesch
JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine A, Hematology and Oncology, University of Münster,
Münster, Germany. (2)Department of Medicine I, University of Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

Long-term outcome of acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) patients without
Down's syndrome remains poor. Founding mutations and chimeric oncogenes
characterize various AMKL subtypes. However, for around one third of all cases
the underlying mechanisms of AMKL leukemogenesis are still largely unknown.
Recently, an in-frame fusion of meningeoma 1-friend leukemia virus integration 1 
(MN1-Fli1) gene was detected in a child with AMKL. We intended to investigate the
potential role of this oncofusion in leukemogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia.
Strikingly, expression of MN1-Fli1 in murine hematopoietic progenitor cells was
sufficient to induce leukemic transformation generating immature myeloid cells
with cytomorphology and expression of surface markers typical for AMKL.
Systematic structure function analyses revealed FLS and 3'ETS domains of Fli1 as 
decisive domains for the AMKL phenotype. Our data highlight an important role of 
MN1-Fli1 in AMKL leukemogenesis and provide a basis for research assessing the
value of this oncofusion as a future diagnostic marker and/or therapeutic target 
in AMKL patients.

PMCID: PMC4688398
PMID: 26690545  [PubMed]


26. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2015 Nov 10. pii: S0278-2391(15)01439-1. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2015.10.029. [Epub ahead of print]

Primary Ewing Family of Tumors of the Jaw Has a Better Prognosis Compared to
Tumors of Extragnathic Sites.

Owosho AA(1), Ko E(2), Rosenberg HI(3), Yom SK(4), Antonescu CR(5), Huryn JM(6), 
Estilo CL(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dental Oncology Research Fellow, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (2)Former Research Fellow, Dental Service,
Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY;
Clinical Assistant Professor, School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI. (3)Research Study Assistant, Dental Service, Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (4)Assistant Attending,
Dental Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY. (5)Attending, Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY. (6)Chief, Dental Service, Department of Surgery,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY. (7)Attending, Dental
Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY. Electronic address: estiloc@mskcc.org.

PURPOSE: Primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw is rare. The aim of this study was to
describe new cases of primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw and investigate reported
prognostic factors of Ewing sarcoma in this series and treatment outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six patients with primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw were
treated at the Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) from 1992 through
2013. Clinical data, pathology reports, treatment prescribed, treatment regimens,
outcome, and follow-up information were reviewed.
RESULTS: Five of 6 patients were female and 5 cases were in the mandible. No
patient presented with metastatic disease at diagnosis. All cases were positive
for CD99, and 3 patients with genetic confirmation were positive for EWS-FLI1
fusion or EWSR1 gene rearrangement. All patients received induction multiagent
chemotherapy and surgical resection and 2 patients received adjuvant
radiotherapy. Total (grade IV) or nearly total (grade III) tumor necrosis in 3 of
5 patients (60%) assessed for histologic response to chemotherapy indicated
intense sensitivity. All patients were alive and free of disease, with no history
of local recurrence, at a median follow-up period of 6.5 years.
CONCLUSION: Patients with primary Ewing sarcoma of the jaw have a good prognosis 
and metastasis is an uncommon occurrence at initial presentation.

Copyright © 2015 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26679553  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Gastrointest Tumors. 2015 Sep;2(2):83-8. doi: 10.1159/000430881. Epub 2015 May
29.

Unusual Clinical Presentation of Gastrointestinal Clear Cell Sarcoma.

Raskin GA(1), Pozharisski KM(1), Iyevleva AG(2), Rikov IV(3), Orlova RV(3),
Imyanitov EN(4).

Author information: 
(1)Russian Research Center for Radiology and Surgical Technologies, Saint
Petersburg, Russia. (2)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg,
Russia ; Saint Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg,
Russia. (3)Saint Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, 
Russia. (4)N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; Saint
Petersburg State University, Medical Faculty, Saint Petersburg, Russia ; I.I.
Mechnikov North-Western State Medical University, Saint Petersburg, Russia.

BACKGROUND: Use of molecular assays is gradually becoming a mandatory part of the
clinical management of soft tissue tumors, however the choice and the
interpretation of these tests may present a challenge.
SUMMARY: This report demonstrates an unusual presentation of sarcoma, which was
initially diagnosed as a tumor of unknown primary site. Given the presence of
vimentin, Fli-1, CD99 and S100 markers, lack of immunostaining for melan A,
HMB45, MITF, synaptophysin, CD56, myf4, CKAE1/3 and WT-1, as well as the presence
of EWSR1 translocation determined by a break-apart FISH assay, Ewing's sarcoma
(ES) diagnosis seemed to be well justified. However, polymerase chain reaction
testing for ES-specific rearrangements (EWSR1/FLI1, EWSR1/ERG, EWSR1/ETV1,
EWSR1/ETV4, EWS/FEV) failed to confirm the ES origin of the neoplastic tissue. We
further considered clinical, morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular
diagnostic features of other types of EWSR1-rearranged sarcomas and performed
molecular testing for gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma. The polymerase chain
reaction assay revealed EWSR1ex7/ATF1ex5 fusion, thus confirming the latter
diagnosis. Subsequent high-precision computed tomography of the abdominal cavity 
revealed a 5-cm tumor of the small bowel, which was subjected to surgical
resection.
KEY MESSAGE: This report exemplifies that the use of anonymous cytogenetic
assays, such as break-apart FISH EWSR1 testing, may not be sufficient even in
case of a perfect match with relevant morphological and immunohistochemical tumor
features.
PRACTICAL IMPLICATIONS: Explicit identification of the translocation gene
partners is indeed important for proper sarcoma diagnosis management.

PMCID: PMC4668799
PMID: 26675070  [PubMed]


28. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 9. [Epub ahead of print]

In search of underlying mechanisms and potential drugs of melphalan-induced
vascular toxicity through retinal endothelial cells using bioinformatics
approach.

Yang Y(1), Xing Y(1), Liang C(1), Hu L(2), Xu F(2), Mei Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430060, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Avenue 1095,
Wuhan, 430030, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Avenue 1095,
Wuhan, 430030, China. borismq@163.com.

We aimed to explore molecular mechanism and drug candidates of vascular
toxicities associated with melphalan after treating human retinal endothelial
cells (RECs). GSE34381 microarray data was firstly downloaded and used to
identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in human REC treated with
melphalan vs. untreated cells by limma package in R language. The transcription
network was constructed based on TRANSFAC database and the top five transcription
factors (TFs) were select with a measure of regulatory impact factor, followed by
the construction of function modules. Gene ontology enrichment analyses were
performed to explore the enriched functions. Connectivity Map analysis was
conducted to predict the potential drugs overcoming the melphalan's actions on
REC. Totally, 75 DEGs were identified, including 70 up-regulated and five
down-regulated genes. Transcription network with 1311 nodes and 1875 edges was
constructed and the top five TFs were CREM, MYC, FLI1, NF-<U+03BA>B1, and JUN.
Functional modules indicated that NF-<U+03BA>B1 and MYC were the important nodes. The
upregulated genes as well as the genes involved in the modules mainly
participated in biological process of immune response, cell proliferation, and
cell motion. Five small molecules were predicted to be potential drug candidates,
including doxorubicin, fipexide, daunorubicin, tiabendazole, and GW-8510. Based
on these results, we speculate that NF-<U+03BA>B1 and MYC might involve in the molecular
mechanism of vascular toxicity induced by melphalan through regulating their
target genes. Five small molecules might be drug candidates to overcome the
melphalan-induced vascular toxicity via targeting to MYC and JUN.

PMID: 26662105  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Exp Dermatol. 2016 Apr;25(4):287-92. doi: 10.1111/exd.12920. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

A potential contribution of altered cathepsin L expression to the development of 
dermal fibrosis and vasculopathy in systemic sclerosis.

Yamashita T(1), Asano Y(1), Taniguchi T(1), Nakamura K(1), Saigusa R(1),
Takahashi T(1), Ichimura Y(1), Toyama T(1), Yoshizaki A(1), Miyagaki T(1), Sugaya
M(1), Sato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Cathepsin L (CTSL) is a lysosomal proteolytic enzyme involved in inflammation and
vascular and extracellular matrix remodelling, which are the three cardinal
pathological events associated with systemic sclerosis (SSc). To elucidate the
potential role of CTSL in the development of SSc, we here investigated CTSL
expression in the lesional skin of patients with SSc and SSc animal models and
the clinical correlation of serum CTSL levels. CTSL expression was elevated in
dermal small vessels of SSc patients compared with those of healthy controls.
Consistently, CTSL mRNA levels were increased in SSc lesional skin samples, but
not in cultivated SSc dermal fibroblasts, compared with corresponding control
samples from healthy individuals. Serum CTSL levels were significantly higher in 
SSc patients than in healthy controls and inversely correlated with skin score.
Furthermore, the elevation of serum CTSL levels was linked to SSc vasculopathy.
Supporting these results, Ctsl mRNA levels were decreased in the skin of
bleomycin-treated mice, an SSc animal model recapitulating its fibrotic aspect,
and CTSL expression was enhanced in dermal small vessels of endothelial
cell-specific Fli1 knockout mice, reminiscent of SSc vasculopathy. Importantly,
gene silencing of FLI1 induced CTSL mRNA expression and Fli1 occupied the CTSL
promoter in human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. Collectively, these
results suggest that endothelial CTSL up-regulation partially due to Fli1
deficiency may contribute to the development of vasculopathy, while the decrease 
in dermal CTSL expression is likely associated with dermal fibrosis in SSc.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26661692  [PubMed - in process]


30. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;889:201-30. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-23730-5_11.

microRNA and Bone Cancer.

Nugent M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma and Orthopaedics, St. James Hospital, Dublin 8, Ireland. 
nugentmary@gmail.com.

MicroRNA molecules have a variety of roles in cellular development and
proliferation processes, including normal osteogenesis. These effects are exerted
through post-translational inhibition of target genes. Altered miRNA expression
has been demonstrated in several cancers, both in the tumor tissue and in the
peripheral circulation. This may influence carcinogenesis if the specific miRNA
targets are encoded by tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes. To date, most
research investigating the role of microRNAs and primary bone tumors has focused 
on osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. Several microRNAs including the miR-34 family 
have been implicated in osteosarcoma tumorigenesis via effects on the Notch
signaling pathway. Progression, invasion, and metastasis of osteosarcoma tumor
cells is also influenced by microRNA expression. In addition, microRNA expression
may affect the response to chemotherapy in osteosarcoma and thus hold potential
for future use as either a prognostic indicator or a therapeutic target. The
EWS-FLI1 fusion protein produced in Ewing sarcoma has been shown to induce
changes in miRNA expression. MicroRNA expression profiling may have some
potential for prediction of disease progression and survival in Ewing sarcoma.
There is limited evidence to support a role for microRNAs in other primary bone
tumors, either malignant or benign; however, early work is suggestive of
involvement in chondrosarcoma, multiple osteochondromatosis, and giant cell
tumors of bone.

PMID: 26659003  [PubMed - in process]


31. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 12;7(2):1451-63. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6385.

Targeting the EWS-ETS transcriptional program by BET bromodomain inhibition in
Ewing sarcoma.

Hensel T(1,)(2), Giorgi C(3), Schmidt O(1,)(2), Calzada-Wack J(4), Neff F(4),
Buch T(4,)(5), Niggli FK(3), Schäfer BW(3), Burdach S(1,)(2), Richter GH(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Children's
Cancer Research Centre and Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. (2)Comprehensive Cancer Center
Munich (CCCM), Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Oncology and Children's Research
Center, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. (4)Institute of
Pathology, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental
Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany. (5)Institute of Laboratory Animal Science,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing sarcomas (ES) are highly malignant bone or soft tissue tumors. Genetically,
ES are defined by balanced chromosomal EWS/ETS translocations, which give rise to
chimeric proteins (EWS-ETS) that generate an oncogenic transcriptional program
associated with altered epigenetic marks throughout the genome. By use of an
inhibitor (JQ1) blocking BET bromodomain binding proteins (BRDs) we strikingly
observed a strong down-regulation of the predominant EWS-ETS protein EWS-FLI1 in 
a dose dependent manner. This was further enhanced by co-treatment with an
inhibitor of the PI3K pathway. Microarray analysis further revealed JQ1 treatment
to block a typical ES associated expression program. The effect on this
expression program was mimicked by RNA interference with BRD3 or BRD4 expression,
indicating that the EWS-FLI1 mediated expression profile is at least in part
mediated via such epigenetic readers. Consequently, contact dependent and
independent proliferation of different ES lines was strongly inhibited.
Mechanistically, treatment of ES resulted in a partial arrest of the cell cycle
as well as induction of apoptosis. Tumor development was suppressed dose
dependently in a xeno-transplant model in immune deficient mice, overall
indicating that ES may be susceptible to treatment with epigenetic inhibitors
blocking BET bromodomain activity and the associated pathognomonic EWS-ETS
transcriptional program.

PMID: 26623725  [PubMed - in process]


32. Biochemistry. 2015 Dec 22;54(50):7365-74. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b01121. Epub 
2015 Dec 10.

Structural Basis for Dimerization and DNA Binding of Transcription Factor FLI1.

Hou C(1), Tsodikov OV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Kentucky , 789 South Limestone Street, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0596, United
States.

FLI1 (Friend leukemia integration 1) is a metazoan transcription factor that is
upregulated in a number of cancers. In addition, rearrangements of the fli1 gene 
cause sarcomas, leukemias, and lymphomas. These rearrangements encode oncogenic
transcription factors, in which the DNA binding domain (DBD or ETS domain) of
FLI1 on the C-terminal side is fused to a part of an another protein on the
N-terminal side. Such abnormal cancer cell-specific fusions retain the DNA
binding properties of FLI1 and acquire non-native protein-protein or
protein-nucleic acid interactions of the substituted region. As a result, these
fusions trigger oncogenic transcriptional reprogramming of the host cell.
Interactions of FLI1 fusions with other proteins and with itself play a critical 
role in the oncogenic regulatory functions, and they are currently under intense 
scrutiny, mechanistically and as potential novel anticancer drug targets. We
report elusive crystal structures of the FLI1 DBD, alone and in complex with
cognate DNA containing a GGAA recognition sequence. Both structures reveal a
previously unrecognized dimer of this domain, consistent with its dimerization in
solution. The homodimerization interface is helix-swapped and dominated by
hydrophobic interactions, including those between two interlocking Phe362
residues. A mutation of Phe362 to an alanine disrupted the propensity of this
domain to dimerize without perturbing its structure or the DNA binding function, 
consistent with the structural observations. We propose that FLI1 DBD
dimerization plays a role in transcriptional activation and repression by FLI1
and its fusions at promoters containing multiple FLI1 binding sites.

PMID: 26618620  [PubMed - in process]


33. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.463. [Epub ahead of print]

CD99 regulates neural differentiation of Ewing sarcoma cells through
miR-34a-Notch-mediated control of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

Ventura S(1), Aryee DN(2,)(3), Felicetti F(4), De Feo A(4), Mancarella C(1),
Manara MC(1), Picci P(1), Colombo MP(5), Kovar H(2,)(3), Carè A(4), Scotlandi
K(1).

Author information: 
(1)CRS Development of Biomolecular Therapies, Experimental Oncology Laboratory,
Rizzoli Istituto Ortopedico, Bologna, Italy. (2)Children's Cancer Research
Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Medical University, Vienna, Austria. (4)Department of Hematology,
Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(5)Molecular Immunology Unit, Department of Experimental Oncology and Molecular
Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS 'Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori', Milan, Italy.

Sarcomas are mesenchymal tumors characterized by blocked differentiation process.
In Ewing sarcoma (EWS) both CD99 and EWS-FLI1 concur to oncogenesis and
inhibition of differentiation. Here, we demonstrate that uncoupling CD99 from
EWS-FLI1 by silencing the former, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling is
inhibited and the neural differentiation program is re-established. NF-<U+03BA>B
inhibition passes through miR-34a-mediated repression of Notch pathway. CD99
counteracts EWS-FLI1 in controlling NF-<U+03BA>B signaling through the miR-34a, which is
increased and secreted into exosomes released by CD99-silenced EWS cells.
Delivery of exosomes from CD99-silenced cells was sufficient to induce neural
differentiation in recipient EWS cells through miR-34a inhibition of Notch-NF-<U+03BA>B 
signaling. Notably, even the partial delivery of CD99 small interfering RNA may
have a broad effect on the entire tumor cell population owing to the spread
operated by their miR-34a-enriched exosomes, a feature opening to a new
therapeutic option.Oncogene advance online publication, 30 November 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.463.

PMID: 26616853  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Future Oncol. 2016 Jan;12(1):1-4. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.298. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Next steps in preventing Ewing sarcoma progression.

Knott MM(1), Dallmayer M(1), Grünewald TG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pediatric Sarcoma Biology, Institute of Pathology of the LMU
Munich, Munich, Germany.

PMID: 26615856  [PubMed - in process]


35. Front Oncol. 2015 Oct 27;5:242. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00242. eCollection 2015.

Immunostimulation by OX40 Ligand Transgenic Ewing Sarcoma Cells.

Reuter D(1), Staege MS(1), Kühnöl CD(1), Föll J(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinic and Polyclinic for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Martin
Luther University Halle-Wittenberg , Halle , Germany. (2)University Clinic and
Polyclinic for Child and Adolescent Medicine, Martin Luther University
Halle-Wittenberg , Halle , Germany ; Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology
and Stem Cell Transplantation, University Hospital Regensburg , Regensburg ,
Germany.

Interleukin-2 (IL-2) transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells can induce tumor specific T
and NK cell responses and reduce tumor growth in vivo and in vitro. Nevertheless,
the efficiency of this stimulation is not high enough to inhibit tumor growth
completely. In addition to recognition of the cognate antigen, optimal T-cell
stimulation requires signals from so-called co-stimulatory molecules. Several
members of the tumor necrosis factor superfamily have been identified as
co-stimulatory molecules that can augment antitumor immune responses. OX40
(CD134) and OX40 ligand (OX40L<U+2009>=<U+2009>CD252; also known as tumor necrosis factor
ligand family member 4) is one example of such receptor/ligand pair with
co-stimulatory function. In the present investigation, we generated OX40L
transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells and tested their immunostimulatory activity in
vitro. OX40L transgenic Ewing sarcoma cells showed preserved expression of Ewing 
sarcoma-associated (anti)gens including lipase member I, cyclin D1 (CCND1),
cytochrome P450 family member 26B1 (CYP26B1), and the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint
region 1-friend leukemia virus integration 1 (EWSR1-FLI1) oncogene.
OX40L-expressing tumor cells showed a trend for enhanced immune stimulation
against Ewing sarcoma cells in combination with IL-2 and stimulation of CD137.
Our data suggest that inclusion of the OX40/OX40L pathway of co-stimulation might
improve immunotherapy strategies for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4621427
PMID: 26579494  [PubMed]


36. J Cell Sci. 2016 Jan 1;129(1):145-54. doi: 10.1242/jcs.177519. Epub 2015 Nov 13.

Reciprocal regulation of alternative lineages by Rgs18 and its transcriptional
repressor Gfi1b.

Sengupta A(1), Upadhyay G(1), Sen S(1), Saleque S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, The City College of New York and The Graduate Center of The 
City University of New York, 160 Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA.
(2)Dept. of Biology, The City College of New York and The Graduate Center of The 
City University of New York, 160 Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA
ssaleque@ccny.cuny.edu.

Appropriate diversification of cellular lineages from multi-potent progenitors is
essential for normal development and homeostasis. The specification of erythroid 
and megakaryocytic lineages represents an especially vital developmental event
whose molecular regulation remains incompletely defined. We now demonstrate the
role of Rgs18, a GTPase-activating protein and transcriptional target of the
repressor Gfi1b, in regulating these processes in mouse and human cells. Gfi1b
stringently represses Rgs18 expression in erythroid cells, whereas, during
megakaryocytic differentiation, declining Gfi1b levels facilitate a robust
induction of Rgs18. Concordantly, alterations in Rgs18 expression produce
disparate outcomes by augmenting megakaryocytic and potently suppressing
erythroid differentiation and vice versa. These phenotypes reflect the
differential impact of Rgs18 on signaling through p38 MAPK family proteins, and
ERK1 and ERK2 (also known as MAPK3 and MAPK1, respectively) in the two lineages, 
which in turn alter the balance between the mutually antagonistic transcription
factors Fli1 and Klf1. Overall, these results identify Rgs18 as a new and crucial
effector of Gfi1b that regulates downstream signaling and gene expression
programs to orchestrate erythro-megakaryocytic lineage choices. This dual role of
Rgs18 in reciprocally regulating divergent lineages could exemplify generic
mechanisms characteristic of multiple family members in different contexts.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4732296 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26567214  [PubMed - in process]


37. Mol Biol Cell. 2016 Jan 15;27(2):236-46. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E15-05-0280. Epub 2015 
Nov 12.

Locus-specific gene repositioning in prostate cancer.

Leshner M(1), Devine M(1), Roloff GW(1), True LD(2), Misteli T(3), Meaburn KJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. 
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195.
(3)National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
mistelit@mail.nih.gov meaburnk@mail.nih.gov.

Genes occupy preferred spatial positions within interphase cell nuclei. However, 
positioning patterns are not an innate feature of a locus, and genes can alter
their localization in response to physiological and pathological changes. Here we
screen the radial positioning patterns of 40 genes in normal, hyperplasic, and
malignant human prostate tissues. We find that the overall spatial organization
of the genome in prostate tissue is largely conserved among individuals. We
identify three genes whose nuclear positions are robustly altered in neoplastic
prostate tissues. FLI1 and MMP9 position differently in prostate cancer than in
normal tissue and prostate hyperplasia, whereas MMP2 is repositioned in both
prostate cancer and hyperplasia. Our data point to locus-specific reorganization 
of the genome during prostate disease.

© 2016 Leshner et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for
Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4713128
PMID: 26564800  [PubMed - in process]


38. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):1011-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.025.

The Molecular Taxonomy of Primary Prostate Cancer.

Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.

Collaborators: Abeshouse A, Ahn J, Akbani R, Ally A, Amin S, Andry CD, Annala M, 
Aprikian A, Armenia J, Arora A, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barbieri CE,
Bauer T, Benz CC, Bergeron A, Beroukhim R, Berrios M, Bivol A, Bodenheimer T,
Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Borges dos Reis R, Boutros PC, Bowen J, Bowlby R, Boyd J, 
Bradley RK, Breggia A, Brimo F, Bristow CA, Brooks D, Broom BM, Bryce AH, Bubley 
G, Burks E, Butterfield YS, Button M, Canes D, Carlotti CG, Carlsen R, Carmel M, 
Carroll PR, Carter SL, Cartun R, Carver BS, Chan JM, Chang MT, Chen Y, Cherniack 
AD, Chevalier S, Chin L, Cho J, Chu A, Chuah E, Chudamani S, Cibulskis K,
Ciriello G, Clarke A, Cooperberg MR, Corcoran NM, Costello AJ, Cowan J, Crain D, 
Curley E, David K, Demchok JA, Demichelis F, Dhalla N, Dhir R, Doueik A, Drake B,
Dvinge H, Dyakova N, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S, Freedland S, Fu Y, Gabriel
SB, Gao J, Gardner J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Gerstein MB,
Getz G, Godwin AK, Gopalan A, Graefen M, Graim K, Gribbin T, Guin R, Gupta M,
Hadjipanayis A, Haider S, Hamel L, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hess J, Hoadley KA,
Holbrook AH, Holt RA, Holway A, Hovens CM, Hoyle AP, Huang M, Hutter CM, Ittmann 
M, Iype L, Jefferys SR, Jones CD, Jones SJ, Juhl H, Kahles A, Kane CJ, Kasaian K,
Kerger M, Khurana E, Kim J, Klein RJ, Kucherlapati R, Lacombe L, Ladanyi M, Lai
PH, Laird PW, Lander ES, Latour M, Lawrence MS, Lau K, LeBien T, Lee D, Lee S,
Lehmann KV, Leraas KM, Leshchiner I, Leung R, Libertino JA, Lichtenberg TM, Lin
P, Linehan WM, Ling S, Lippman SM, Liu J, Liu W, Lochovsky L, Loda M, Logothetis 
C, Lolla L, Longacre T, Lu Y, Luo J, Ma Y, Mahadeshwar HS, Mallery D, Mariamidze 
A, Marra MA, Mayo M, McCall S, McKercher G, Meng S, Mes-Masson AM, Merino MJ,
Meyerson M, Mieczkowski PA, Mills GB, Mills Shaw KR, Minner S, Moinzadeh A, Moore
RA, Morris S, Morrison C, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Myers JB, Naresh R,
Nelson J, Nelson MA, Nelson PS, Newton Y, Noble MS, Noushmehr H, Nykter M,
Pantazi A, Parfenov M, Park PJ, Parker JS, Paulauskis J, Penny R, Perou CM, Piché
A, Pihl T, Pinto PA, Prandi D, Protopopov A, Ramirez NC, Rao A, Rathmell WK,
Rätsch G, Ren X, Reuter VE, Reynolds SM, Rhie SK, Rieger-Christ K, Roach J,
Robertson AG, Robinson B, Rubin MA, Saad F, Sadeghi S, Saksena G, Saller C,
Salner A, Sanchez-Vega F, Sander C, Sandusky G, Sauter G, Sboner A, Scardino PT, 
Scarlata E, Schein JE, Schlomm T, Schmidt LS, Schultz N, Schumacher SE, Seidman
J, Neder L, Seth S, Sharp A, Shelton C, Shelton T, Shen H, Shen R, Sherman M,
Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J, Shmulevich I, Simko J, Simon R, Simons JV, Sipahimalani
P, Skelly T, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Song X, Sorcini A, Sougnez C, Stepa S, Stewart
C, Stewart J, Stuart JM, Sullivan TB, Sun C, Sun H, Tam A, Tan D, Tang J,
Tarnuzzer R, Tarvin K, Taylor BS, Teebagy P, Tenggara I, Têtu B, Tewari A,
Thiessen N, Thompson T, Thorne LB, Tirapelli DP, Tomlins SA, Trevisan FA,
Troncoso P, True LD, Tsourlakis MC, Tyekucheva S, Van Allen E, Van Den Berg DJ,
Veluvolu U, Verhaak R, Vocke CD, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Q, Wang W, Wang Z, Weinhold 
N, Weinstein JN, Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wise L, Witte J, Wu CC, Wu J, Wu 
Y, Xu AW, Yadav SS, Yang L, Yang L, Yau C, Ye H, Yena P, Zeng T, Zenklusen JC,
Zhang H, Zhang J, Zhang J, Zhang W, Zhong Y, Zhu K, Zmuda E.

There is substantial heterogeneity among primary prostate cancers, evident in the
spectrum of molecular abnormalities and its variable clinical course. As part of 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we present a comprehensive molecular analysis of 
333 primary prostate carcinomas. Our results revealed a molecular taxonomy in
which 74% of these tumors fell into one of seven subtypes defined by specific
gene fusions (ERG, ETV1/4, and FLI1) or mutations (SPOP, FOXA1, and IDH1).
Epigenetic profiles showed substantial heterogeneity, including an IDH1 mutant
subset with a methylator phenotype. Androgen receptor (AR) activity varied widely
and in a subtype-specific manner, with SPOP and FOXA1 mutant tumors having the
highest levels of AR-induced transcripts. 25% of the prostate cancers had a
presumed actionable lesion in the PI3K or MAPK signaling pathways, and DNA repair
genes were inactivated in 19%. Our analysis reveals molecular heterogeneity among
primary prostate cancers, as well as potentially actionable molecular defects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4695400 [Available on 2016-11-05]
PMID: 26544944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Protoc. 2015 Dec;10(12):1975-85. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.126. Epub 2015 Nov
5.

Direct conversion of human amniotic cells into endothelial cells without
transitioning through a pluripotent state.

Ginsberg M(1), Schachterle W(2), Shido K(2), Rafii S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Angiocrine Bioscience, New York, New York, USA. (2)Division of Regenerative
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Endothelial cells (ECs) have essential roles in organ development and
regeneration, and therefore they could be used for regenerative therapies.
However, generation of abundant functional endothelium from pluripotent stem
cells has been difficult because ECs generated by many existing strategies have
limited proliferative potential and display vascular instability. The latter
difficulty is of particular importance because cells that lose their identity
over time could be unsuitable for therapeutic use. Here, we describe a 3-week
platform for directly converting human mid-gestation lineage-committed amniotic
fluid-derived cells (ACs) into a stable and expandable population of vascular ECs
(rAC-VECs) without using pluripotency factors. By transient expression of the ETS
transcription factor ETV2 for 2 weeks and constitutive expression the ETS
transcription factors FLI1 and ERG1, concomitant with TGF-ß inhibition for 3
weeks, epithelial and mesenchymal ACs are converted, with high efficiency, into
functional rAC-VECs. These rAC-VECs maintain their vascular repertoire and
morphology over numerous passages in vitro, and they form functional vessels when
implanted in vivo. rAC-VECs can be detected in recipient mice months after
implantation. Thus, rAC-VECs can be used to establish a cellular platform to
uncover the molecular determinants of vascular development and heterogeneity and 
potentially represent ideal ECs for the treatment of regenerative disorders.

PMID: 26540589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 15;195(12):5551-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500961. Epub 2015 
Nov 4.

FLI1 Levels Impact CXCR3 Expression and Renal Infiltration of T Cells and Renal
Glycosphingolipid Metabolism in the MRL/lpr Lupus Mouse Strain.

Sundararaj KP(1), Thiyagarajan T(1), Molano I(1), Basher F(2), Powers TW(3),
Drake RR(3), Nowling TK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and. (3)Department of
Cell and Molecular Pharmacology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC 29425. (4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; nowling@musc.edu.

The ETS factor Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1) is a key modulator of
lupus disease expression. Overexpressing FLI1 in healthy mice results in the
development of an autoimmune kidney disease similar to that observed in lupus.
Lowering the global levels of FLI1 in two lupus strains (Fli1(+/-)) significantly
improved kidney disease and prolonged survival. T cells from MRL/lpr Fli1(+/-)
lupus mice have reduced activation and IL-4 production, neuraminidase 1
expression, and the levels of the glycosphingolipid lactosylceramide. In this
study, we demonstrate that MRL/lpr Fli1(+/-) mice have significantly decreased
renal neuraminidase 1 and lactosylceramide levels. This corresponds with a
significant decrease in the number of total CD3(+) cells, as well as CD4(+) and
CD44(+)CD62L(-) T cell subsets in the kidney of MRL/lpr Fli1(+/-) mice compared
with the Fli1(+/+) nephritic mice. We further demonstrate that the percentage of 
CXCR3(+) T cells and Cxcr3 message levels in T cells are significantly decreased 
and correspond with a decrease in renal CXCR3(+) cells and in Cxcl9 and Cxcl10
expression in the MRL/lpr Fli1(+/-) compared with the Fli1(+/+) nephritic mice.
Our results suggest that reducing the levels of FLI1 in MRL/lpr mice may be
protective against development of nephritis in part through downregulation of
CXCR3, reducing renal T cell infiltration and glycosphingolipid levels.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4670796 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26538397  [PubMed - in process]


41. Blood. 2015 Oct 22;126(17):1973-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-667634.

Paris-Trousseau: evidence keeps pointing to FLI1.

Di Paola J(1).

Author information: 
(1)UNIVERSITY OF COLORADO SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Oct 22;126(17):2027-30.

In this issue of Blood, Stevenson et al describe a family with a homozygous
missense mutation in FLI1 that is associated with a platelet phenotype identical 
to the one observed in Paris-Trousseau syndrome, supporting existing evidence
that FLI1 is directly involved in the mechanism of thrombocytopenia observed in
this disease.

PMID: 26494917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genom Data. 2014 Sep 16;2:296-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.09.003. eCollection
2014.

Gene expression response to EWS-FLI1 in mouse embryonic cartilage.

Tanaka M(1), Aisaki K(2), Kitajima S(2), Igarashi K(2), Kanno J(2), Nakamura
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Cellular and Molecular Toxicology, 
Biosafety Research Center, National Institute of Health Science, Tokyo, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma is a rare bone tumor that affects children and adolescents. We
have recently succeeded to induce Ewing's sarcoma-like small round cell tumor in 
mice by expression of EWS-ETS fusion genes in murine embryonic osteochondrogenic 
progenitors. The Ewing's sarcoma precursors are enriched in embryonic superficial
zone (eSZ) cells of long bone. To get insights into the mechanisms of Ewing's
sarcoma development, gene expression profiles between EWS-FLI1-sensitive eSZ
cells and EWS-FLI1-resistant embryonic growth plate (eGP) cells were compared
using DNA microarrays. Gene expression of eSZ and eGP cells (total, 30 samples)
was evaluated with or without EWS-FLI1 expression 0, 8 or 48 h after gene
transduction. Our data provide useful information for gene expression responses
to fusion oncogenes in human sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4535656
PMID: 26484113  [PubMed]


43. BMJ Case Rep. 2015 Oct 19;2015. pii: bcr2015209493. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2015-209493.

Intimal (spindle cell) sarcoma of the left atrium presenting with abnormal
neurological examination.

Saith SE(1), Duzenli A(2), Zavaro D(2), Apergis G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, NYU Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, New
York, USA. (2)NYU Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, USA.

A 43-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history presented to our hospital 
with 2 weeks of headaches, ataxia and confusion. CT of the head revealed a large 
haemorrhagic cystic lesion. A subsequent chest CT revealed a large left atrial
mass. The mass was subsequently biopsied with positive immunohistochemistry
staining for MDM2, FLI1 and vimentin. Real-time PCR revealed MDM2 amplification, 
confirming the diagnosis of intimal sarcoma. The patient underwent surgical
resection and reconstruction of the atrium with subsequent discharge to
short-term rehabilitation, but his symptoms continued to progress. A repeat CT of
the head revealed a new cerebellar mass. He underwent a second resection, but
continued to experience worsening symptoms. He was diagnosed with stage IV
intimal sarcoma and referred to hospice. The patient died 5 months after initial 
presentation. Autopsy was performed and revealed the cause of death as pneumonia.
There was no involvement of the pulmonic or aortic vessels.

2015 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

PMID: 26483389  [PubMed - in process]


44. Comb Chem High Throughput Screen. 2015;18(9):855-61.

Establishment of a Primary Screening Assay for the DHX9 Helicase.

Cencic R, Senechal P, Pelletier J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rm 810, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler., McIntyre Medical Sciences Building,
Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1Y6, Canada. jerry.pelletier@mcgill.ca.

The RNA helicase DHX9 is an ATP-dependent DExH box helicase that can unwind DNA
and RNA. Much evidence has implicated DHX9 at multiple levels of gene expression 
regulation ranging from genome stability and replication, to transcriptional
control and translation regulation. Its association with the EWS-FLI1 fusion
product, as well as the finding that its suppression can be synthetic lethal with
the BCL-2 family inhibitor ABT-737 indicates a potential role in tumor
maintenance. Hence, to identify small molecules that could interfere with its
activity, we developed a homogenous RNA-dependent ATPase assay. We show that
aurintricarboxylic acid, a promiscuous protein-nucleic acid inhibitor prevents
DHX9-mediated hydrolysis demonstrating that the assay is also capable of
detecting compounds that impinge on DHX9:RNA association.

PMID: 26477352  [PubMed - in process]


45. Oncotarget. 2015 Nov 10;6(35):37678-94. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5520.

YK-4-279 effectively antagonizes EWS-FLI1 induced leukemia in a transgenic mouse 
model.

Minas TZ(1), Han J(1), Javaheri T(2), Hong SH(1), Schlederer M(2,)(3),
Saygideger-Kont Y(1), Çelik H(1), Mueller KM(4), Temel I(1), Özdemirli M(5),
Kovar H(6,)(7), Erkizan HV(1), Toretsky J(1), Kenner L(2,)(3,)(8), Moriggl
R(2,)(9,)(4), Üren A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, 
USA. (2)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Clinical Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (4)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary
Medicine, Vienna, Austria. (5)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA. (6)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St.
Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (8)Unit of Pathology of Laboratory
Animals, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. (9)Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive tumor of bone and soft tissue affecting
predominantly children and young adults. Tumor-specific chromosomal
translocations create EWS-FLI1 and similar aberrant ETS fusion proteins that
drive sarcoma development in patients. ETS family fusion proteins and
over-expressed ETS proteins are also found in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) patients. Transgenic expression of EWS-FLI1 in
mice promotes high penetrance erythroid leukemia with dense hepatic and splenic
infiltrations. We identified a small molecule, YK-4-279, that directly binds to
EWS-FLI1 and inhibits its oncogenic activity in Ewing sarcoma cell lines and
xenograft mouse models. Herein, we tested in vivo therapeutic efficacy and
potential side effects of YK-4-279 in the transgenic mouse model with EWS-FLI1
induced leukemia. A two-week course of treatment with YK-4-279 significantly
reduced white blood cell count, nucleated erythroblasts in the peripheral blood, 
splenomegaly, and hepatomegaly of erythroleukemic mice. YK-4-279 inhibited
EWS-FLI1 target gene expression in neoplastic cells. Treated animals showed
significantly better overall survival compared to control mice that rapidly
succumbed to leukemia. YK-4-279 treated mice did not show overt toxicity in
liver, spleen, or bone marrow. In conclusion, this in vivo study highlights the
efficacy of YK-4-279 to treat EWS-FLI1 expressing neoplasms and support its
therapeutic potential for patients with Ewing sarcoma and other ETS-driven
malignancies.

PMCID: PMC4741957
PMID: 26462019  [PubMed - in process]


46. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 12. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.368. [Epub ahead of print]

Modeling the initiation of Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis in differentiating human
embryonic stem cells.

Gordon DJ(1), Motwani M(1), Pellman D(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma tumors is driven by the fusion oncogene
EWS-FLI1. However, despite the well-established role of EWS-FLI1 in tumor
initiation, the development of models of Ewing sarcoma in human cells with
defined genetic elements has been challenging. Here, we report a novel approach
to model the initiation of Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis that exploits the
developmental and pluripotent potential of human embryonic stem cells. The
inducible expression of EWS-FLI1 in embryoid bodies, or collections of
differentiating stem cells, generates cells with properties of Ewing sarcoma
tumors, including characteristics of transformation. These cell lines exhibit
anchorage-independent growth, a lack of contact inhibition and a strong Ewing
sarcoma gene expression signature. Furthermore, these cells also demonstrate a
requirement for the persistent expression of EWS-FLI1 for cell survival and
growth, which is a hallmark of Ewing sarcoma tumors.Oncogene advance online
publication, 12 October 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.368.

PMID: 26455317  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 13;6(31):31740-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5033.

Genotoxic stress inhibits Ewing sarcoma cell growth by modulating alternative
pre-mRNA processing of the RNA helicase DHX9.

Fidaleo M(1,)(2), Svetoni F(1,)(2), Volpe E(2), Miñana B(3,)(4), Caporossi D(1), 
Paronetto MP(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Movement, Human and Health Sciences, University of Rome "Foro
Italico", Rome, Italy. (2)Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology and
of Neuroimmunology, CERC, Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. (3)Centre de
Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona,
Spain.

Alternative splicing plays a key role in the DNA damage response and in cancer.
Ewing Sarcomas (ES) are aggressive tumors caused by different chromosomal
translocations that yield in-frame fusion proteins driving transformation. RNA
profiling reveals genes differentially regulated by UV light irradiation in two
ES cell lines exhibiting different sensitivity to genotoxic stress. In
particular, irradiation induces a new isoform of the RNA helicase DHX9 in the
more sensitive SK-N-MC cells, which is targeted to nonsense-mediated decay (NMD),
causing its downregulation. DHX9 protein forms a complex with RNA polymerase II
(RNAPII) and EWS-FLI1 to enhance transcription. Silencing of DHX9 in ES cells
sensitizes them to UV treatment and impairs recruitment of EWS-FLI1 to target
genes, whereas DHX9 overexpression protects ES cells from genotoxic stress.
Mechanistically, we found that UV light irradiation leads to enhanced
phosphorylation and decreased processivity of RNAPII in SK-N-MC cells, which in
turn causes inclusion of DHX9 exon 6A. A similar effect on DHX9 splicing was also
elicited by treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug etoposide, indicating a more
general mechanism of regulation in response to DNA damage. Our data identify a
new NMD-linked splicing event in DHX9 with impact on EWS-FLI1 oncogenic activity 
and ES cell viability.

PMCID: PMC4741636
PMID: 26450900  [PubMed - in process]


48. Int J Genomics. 2015;2015:197603. doi: 10.1155/2015/197603. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Exploring the Functional Disorder and Corresponding Key Transcription Factors in 
Intraductal Papillary Mucinous Neoplasms Progression.

Bai G(1), Wu C(2), Gao Y(3), Shu G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Tianjin Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China 
; Key Laboratory of Artificial Cell Institute of Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin
Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China. (2)Department of Oncology, Tianjin
Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Artificial
Cell Institute of Hepatobiliary Disease, Tianjin Third Central Hospital, Tianjin 
300179, China. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Tianjin Third Central
Hospital, Tianjin 300179, China.

This study has analyzed the gene expression patterns of an IPMN microarray
dataset including normal pancreatic ductal tissue (NT), intraductal papillary
mucinous adenoma (IPMA), intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma (IPMC), and
invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) samples. And eight clusters of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) with similar expression pattern were detected by k-means
clustering. Then a survey map of functional disorder in IPMN progression was
established by functional enrichment analysis of these clusters. In addition,
transcription factors (TFs) enrichment analysis was used to detect the key TFs in
each cluster of DEGs, and three TFs (FLI1, ERG, and ESR1) were found to
significantly regulate DEGs in cluster 1, and expression of these three TFs was
validated by qRT-PCR. All these results indicated that these three TFs might play
key roles in the early stages of IPMN progression.

PMCID: PMC4573622
PMID: 26425543  [PubMed]


49. J Nanosci Nanotechnol. 2015 Mar;15(3):2140-7.

Copper Oxide Nanoparticles Reduce Vasculogenesis in Transgenic Zebrafish Through 
Down-Regulation of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Expression and Induction of
Apoptosis.

Chang J, Ichihara G, Shimada Y, Tada-Oikawa S, Kuroyanagi J, Zhang B, Suzuki Y,
Sehsah R, Kato M, Tanaka T, Ichihara S.

The present study investigated the effects of exposure to metal oxide
nanoparticles on vasculogenesis/angiogenesis using transgenic zebrafish. The
study also examined the potential mechanisms involved in those effects using
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). TG (nacre/fli1:EGFP) zebrafish
were exposed to nano-sized titanium dioxide (TiO2), silica dioxide (SiO2), and
copper oxide (CuO) particles at 0.01, 1 and 100 µg/ml concentrations from 1 to 5 
dpf (day-post-fertilization). Angiogenesis was evaluated morphologically at the
end of exposure. Exposure to CuO nanoparticles reduced the number of
transversely-running subintestinal vessels in TG zebrafish. Exposure to CuO
nanoparticles down-regulated the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and VEGF receptor in endothelial cells sorted by Fluorescence Activated
Cell Sorter (FACS). Exposure of HUVEC to CuO nanoparticles reduced cell viability
and increased apoptotic index in a dose-dependent manner. The results suggested
that CuO nanoparticles inhibit vasculogenesis through reduction of VEGF
expression and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 26413632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Br J Dermatol. 2016 Feb;174(2):338-47. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14183. Epub 2015 Nov 21.

Fli1 deficiency contributes to the downregulation of endothelial protein C
receptor in systemic sclerosis: a possible role in prothrombotic conditions.

Saigusa R(1), Asano Y(1), Yamashita T(1), Taniguchi T(1), Takahashi T(1),
Ichimura Y(1), Toyama T(1), Yoshizaki A(1), Miyagaki T(1), Sugaya M(1), Sato
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR), expressed predominantly on
endothelial cells, plays a critical role in the regulation of the coagulation
system and also mediates various cytoprotective effects by binding and activating
protein C. So far, the role of EPCR has not been studied in systemic sclerosis
(SSc).
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the potential contribution of EPCR to the development 
of SSc.
METHODS: EPCR expression was examined in skin samples and cultivated dermal
microvascular endothelial cells by immunostaining, immunoblotting and/or
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Fli1, binding to
the PROCR promoter, was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Serum EPCR
levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 65 patients with
SSc and 20 healthy subjects.
RESULTS: EPCR expression was decreased in dermal small vessels of SSc lesional
skin compared with those of healthy control skin. Transcription factor Fli1,
deficiency of which is implicated in SSc vasculopathy, occupied the PROCR
promoter, and EPCR expression was suppressed in Fli1 small interfering
RNA-treated endothelial cells and dermal small vessels of Fli1(+/-) mice. In
patients with SSc, decreased serum EPCR levels were associated with diffuse skin 
involvement, interstitial lung disease and digital ulcers. Furthermore, serum
EPCR levels inversely correlated with plasma levels of plasmin-a2-plasmin
inhibitor complex (PIC). Importantly, bosentan significantly reversed circulating
EPCR and PIC levels in patients with SSc, and the expression of Fli1 and EPCR in 
dermal small vessels was elevated in patients treated with bosentan compared with
untreated patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Endothelial EPCR downregulation due to Fli1 deficiency may
contribute to hypercoagulation status leading to tissue fibrosis and impaired
peripheral circulation in SSc.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 26399195  [PubMed - in process]


51. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Sep 10. pii: annrheumdis-2015-207483. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-207483. [Epub ahead of print]

Decreased expression of neuropilin-1 as a novel key factor contributing to
peripheral microvasculopathy and defective angiogenesis in systemic sclerosis.

Romano E(1), Chora I(2), Manetti M(3), Mazzotta C(1), Rosa I(4), Bellando-Randone
S(1), Blagojevic J(1), Soares R(5), Avouac J(6), Allanore Y(6), Ibba-Manneschi
L(3), Matucci-Cerinic M(1), Guiducci S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Division of Rheumatology,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi (AOUC), University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Division of
Rheumatology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi (AOUC), University of
Florence, Florence, Italy Department of Internal Medicine, São João Hospital
Center, Porto, Portugal. (3)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine,
Section of Anatomy and Histology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(4)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Division of Rheumatology,
Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi (AOUC), University of Florence,
Florence, Italy Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, Section of
Anatomy and Histology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. (5)Department of 
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(6)Cochin Institute, Paris Descartes University, INSERM U1016 and CNRS UMR8104,
Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: In systemic sclerosis (SSc), vascular involvement is characterised by
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A/VEGF receptor (VEGFR) system
disturbances. Neuropilin-1 (NRP1), a receptor for both class-3 semaphorins
(Sema3s) and VEGF-A, is required for optimal VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 signalling. Here, we 
investigated the possible involvement of Sema3A/NRP1 axis in SSc.
METHODS: Circulating Sema3A and soluble NRP1 (sNRP1) were measured in patients
with SSc and controls. NRP1 and Sema3A expression in skin biopsies was evaluated 
by immunofluorescence and western blotting. NRP1 expression was assessed in SSc
and healthy dermal microvascular endothelial cells (SSc-MVECs and H-MVECs), and
in SSc and control endothelial progenitor cell (EPC)-derived endothelial cells
(ECs). The possible impact of transcription factor Friend leukaemia integration 1
(Fli1) deficiency on endothelial NRP1 expression was investigated by gene
silencing. The binding of Fli1 to NRP1 gene promoter was evaluated using
chromatin immunoprecipitation. Capillary morphogenesis was performed on Matrigel.
RESULTS: Decreased sNRP1 levels in SSc were associated with active and late
nailfold videocapillaroscopy patterns and digital ulcers. No difference in Sema3A
was found between patients and controls. NRP1 was significantly decreased in
SSc-MVECs both ex vivo and in vitro. NRP1 and Fli1 significantly decreased in
H-MVECs challenged with SSc sera, while they were not different in SSc and
control EPC-derived ECs. Fli1 occupied the NRP1 gene promoter and Fli1 gene
silencing reduced NRP1 expression in H-MVECs. NRP1 gene silencing in H-MVECs
resulted in a significantly impaired angiogenic capacity comparable to that of
cells treated with SSc sera.
CONCLUSION: In SSc, NRP1 deficiency may be an additional factor in the perturbed 
VEGF-A/VEGFR-2 system contributing to peripheral microvasculopathy and defective 
angiogenesis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26359450  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. Crit Rev Oncog. 2015;20(3-4):155-71.

Twenty Years on: What Do We Really Know about Ewing Sarcoma and What Is the Path 
Forward?

Lawlor ER(1), Sorensen PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics & Communicable Diseases and Department of Pathology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (2)Department of Molecular Oncology,
British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a highly aggressive bone and soft-tissue tumor with peak
incidence among adolescents and young adults. Despite advances in local control
and systemic chemotherapy, metastatic relapse after an initial clinical remission
remains a significant clinical problem. In addition, metastasis at the time of
presentation or at relapse continues to be the leading cause of death for
patients diagnosed with ES. Since the discovery of the pathognomonic EWS-FLI1
fusion gene more than 20 years ago, much about the molecular and cellular biology
of ES pathogenesis has been learned. In addition, more recent exploitation of
advances in stem cell and developmental biology has provided key insights into
the cellular origins of ES and the role of epigenetic deregulation in tumor
initiation and maintenance. Nevertheless, the mechanisms that drive tumor relapse
and metastasis remain largely unknown. These gaps in our knowledge continue to
hamper the development of novel therapeutic strategies that may improve outcomes 
for patients with relapsed and metastatic disease. In this article we review the 
current status of ES biology research, highlighting areas of investigation that
we consider to have the greatest potential to yield findings that will translate 
into clinically significant advances.

PMCID: PMC4671490
PMID: 26349414  [PubMed - in process]


53. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):30178-93. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4903.

Functional, chemical genomic, and super-enhancer screening identify sensitivity
to cyclin D1/CDK4 pathway inhibition in Ewing sarcoma.

Kennedy AL(1,)(2), Vallurupalli M(1,)(3), Chen L(1), Crompton B(1), Cowley G(4), 
Vazquez F(4), Weir BA(4), Tsherniak A(4), Parasuraman S(5), Kim S(5), Alexe
G(1,)(4,)(6), Stegmaier K(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Boston Combined Residency
Program in Pediatrics, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Broad
Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Novartis Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (6)Bioinformatics Graduate Program,
Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive bone and soft tissue tumor in children and
adolescents, with treatment remaining a clinical challenge. This disease is
mediated by somatic chromosomal translocations of the EWS gene and a gene
encoding an ETS transcription factor, most commonly, FLI1. While direct targeting
of aberrant transcription factors remains a pharmacological challenge,
identification of dependencies incurred by EWS/FLI1 expression would offer a new 
therapeutic avenue. We used a combination of super-enhancer profiling, near-whole
genome shRNA-based and small-molecule screening to identify cyclin D1 and CDK4 as
Ewing sarcoma-selective dependencies. We revealed that super-enhancers mark Ewing
sarcoma specific expression signatures and EWS/FLI1 target genes in human Ewing
sarcoma cell lines. Particularly, a super-enhancer regulates cyclin D1 and
promotes its expression in Ewing sarcoma. We demonstrated that Ewing sarcoma
cells require CDK4 and cyclin D1 for survival and anchorage-independent growth.
Additionally, pharmacologic inhibition of CDK4 with selective CDK4/6 inhibitors
led to cytostasis and cell death of Ewing sarcoma cell lines in vitro and growth 
delay in an in vivo Ewing sarcoma xenograft model. These results demonstrated a
dependency in Ewing sarcoma on CDK4 and cyclin D1 and support exploration of
CDK4/6 inhibitors as a therapeutic approach for patients with this disease.

PMCID: PMC4745789
PMID: 26337082  [PubMed - in process]


54. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):28895-910. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5000.

PI3K/AKT signaling modulates transcriptional expression of EWS/FLI1 through
specificity protein 1.

Giorgi C(1), Boro A(1), Rechfeld F(1), Lopez-Garcia LA(1), Gierisch ME(1),
Schäfer BW(1), Niggli FK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most frequent bone cancer in childhood and is
characterized by the presence of the balanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) in 
more than 85% of cases, generating a dysregulated transcription factor EWS/FLI1. 
This fusion protein is an essential oncogenic component of ES development which
is necessary for tumor cell maintenance and represents an attractive therapeutic 
target. To search for modulators of EWS/FLI1 activity we screened a library of
153 targeted compounds and identified inhibitors of the PI3K pathway to directly 
modulate EWS/FLI1 transcription. Surprisingly, treatment of four different ES
cell lines with BEZ235 resulted in down regulation of EWS/FLI1 mRNA and protein
by ~50% with subsequent modulation of target gene expression. Analysis of the
EWS/FLI1 promoter region (-2239/+67) using various deletion constructs identified
two 14 bp minimal elements as being important for EWS/FLI1 transcription. We
identified SP1 as modulator of EWS/FLI1 gene expression and demonstrated direct
binding to one of these regions in the EWS/FLI1 promoter by EMSA and ChIP
experiments. These results provide the first insights on the transcriptional
regulation of EWS/FLI1, an area that has not been investigated so far, and offer 
an additional molecular explanation for the known sensitivity of ES cell lines to
PI3K inhibition.

PMCID: PMC4745699
PMID: 26336820  [PubMed - in process]


55. Blood. 2015 Oct 22;126(17):2027-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-06-650887. Epub 2015 
Aug 27.

Paris-Trousseau thrombocytopenia is phenocopied by the autosomal recessive
inheritance of a DNA-binding domain mutation in FLI1.

Stevenson WS(1), Rabbolini DJ(1), Beutler L(1), Chen Q(1), Gabrielli S(1), Mackay
JP(2), Brighton TA(3), Ward CM(1), Morel-Kopp MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Royal North Shore
Hospital, Sydney, Australia; Northern Blood Research Centre, Kolling Institute of
Medical Research. (2)School of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, Australia; and. (3)South Eastern Area Laboratory Services, Prince of
Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Oct 22;126(17):1973-4.

Hemizygous deletion of a variable region on chromosome 11q containing FLI1 causes
an inherited platelet-related bleeding disorder in Paris-Trousseau
thrombocytopenia and Jacobsen syndrome. These multisystem disorders are also
characterized by heart anomalies, changes in facial structure, and intellectual
disability. We have identified a consanguineous family with autosomal recessive
inheritance of a bleeding disorder that mimics Paris-Trousseau thrombocytopenia
but has no other features of the 11q23 deletion syndrome. Affected individuals in
this family have moderate thrombocytopenia; absent collagen-induced platelet
aggregation; and large, fused a-granules in 1% to 5% of circulating platelets.
This phenotype was caused by a FLI1 homozygous c.970C>T-point mutation that
predicts an arginine-to-tryptophan substitution in the conserved ETS DNA-binding 
domain of FLI1. This mutation caused a transcription defect at the promoter of
known FLI1 target genes GP6, GP9, and ITGA2B, as measured by luciferase assay in 
HEK293 cells, and decreased the expression of these target proteins in affected
members of the family as measured by Western blotting of platelet lysates. This
kindred suggests abnormalities in FLI1 as causative of Paris-Trousseau
thrombocytopenia and confirms the important role of FLI1 in normal platelet
development.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26316623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):964-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.3387.

Linking germline and somatic variation in Ewing sarcoma.

Gomez NC(1), Davis IJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and the Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1073-8.

The identification of gene-regulatory polymorphisms that influence cancer
susceptibility can identify key oncogenic pathways. A new study links a germline 
variant to Ewing sarcoma disease susceptibility and EWSR1-FLI1-mediated gene
activation.

PMID: 26313223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep 20;33(27):3036-46. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.5256. Epub
2015 Aug 24.

Ewing Sarcoma: Current Management and Future Approaches Through Collaboration.

Gaspar N(1), Hawkins DS(1), Dirksen U(1), Lewis IJ(1), Ferrari S(1), Le Deley
MC(1), Kovar H(1), Grimer R(1), Whelan J(1), Claude L(1), Delattre O(1),
Paulussen M(1), Picci P(1), Sundby Hall K(1), van den Berg H(1), Ladenstein R(1),
Michon J(1), Hjorth L(1), Judson I(1), Luksch R(1), Bernstein ML(1), Marec-Bérard
P(1), Brennan B(1), Craft AW(1), Womer RB(1), Juergens H(1), Oberlin O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nathalie Gaspar, Marie-Cecile Le Deley, and Odile Oberlin, Institut Gustave
Roussy, Villejuif; Nathalie Gaspar, Marie-Cecile Le Deley, Line Claude, Olivier
Delattre, Jean Michon, Perrine Marec-Bérard, and Odile Oberlin, Société Française
de Lutte Contre les Cancers et les Leucémies de l'Enfant et de l'Adolescent;
Marie-Cecile Le Deley, Paris-Sud University, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre; Line Claude and 
Perrine Marec-Bérard, Centre Léon-Bérard, Lyon; Olivier Delattre and Jean Michon,
Institut Curie, Paris, France; Douglas S. Hawkins, Seattle Children's Hospital,
Seattle, WA; Douglas S. Hawkins, Mark L. Bernstein, and Richard B. Womer,
Children's Oncology Group; Uta Dirksen and Heribert Juergens, University Hospital
Münster, Münster; Uta Dirksen, Michael Paulussen, and Heribert Juergens,
Gesellschaft für Pädiatrische Onkologie und Hämatologie; Michael Paulussen,
Children's and Adolescents' Hospital, Witten/Herdecke University, Datteln,
Germany; Ian J. Lewis, Alder Hey Children's National Health Service (NHS)
Foundation Trust, Liverpool; Ian J. Lewis, Robert Grimer, Bernadette Brennan, and
Alan W. Craft, Children's Cancer and Leukaemia Group; Robert Grimer, Royal
Orthopaedic Hospital, Birmingham; Jeremy Whelan, University College London
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust; Ian Judson, Royal Marsden Hospital, London;
Bernadette Brennan, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester; Alan W.
Craft, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle, United Kingdom; Stefano Ferrari and
Piero Picci, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna; Stefano Ferrari, Piero Picci, Roberto
Luksch, Italian Sarcoma Group; Roberto Luksch, Fondazione Istituto di Ricovero e 
Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy;
Heinrich Kovar and Ruth Ladenstein, Children's Cancer Institute, St Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, Wien; Heinrich Kovar and Ruth Ladenstein,
Arbeitsgemeinschaft Ambulant Tätiger Pädiatrischer Onkologen und Hämatologen,
Vienna, Austria; Jeremy Whelan and Ian Judson, European O

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive sarcoma of bone and soft tissue occurring at 
any age with a peak incidence in adolescents and young adults. The treatment of
ES relies on a multidisciplinary approach, coupling risk-adapted intensive
neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapies with surgery and/or radiotherapy for
control of the primary site and possible metastatic disease. The optimization of 
ES multimodality therapeutic strategies has resulted from the efforts of several 
national and international groups in Europe and North America and from
cooperation between pediatric and medical oncologists. Successive first-line
trials addressed the efficacy of various cyclic combinations of drugs
incorporating doxorubicin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, etoposide, 
and dactinomycin and identified prognostic factors now used to tailor therapies. 
The role of high-dose chemotherapy is still debated. Current 5-year overall
survival for patients with localized disease is 65% to 75%. Patients with
metastases have a 5-year overall survival < 30%, except for those with isolated
pulmonary metastasis (approximately 50%). Patients with recurrence have a dismal 
prognosis. The many insights into the biology of the EWS-FLI1 protein in the
initiation and progression of ES remain to be translated into novel therapeutic
strategies. Current options and future approaches will be discussed.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMID: 26304893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2015 Jul-Sep;58(3):341-4. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.162869.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of vulva, confirmed with molecular cytogenetic analysis: A 
rare case report with diagnostic and treatment implications.

Rekhi B(1), Chinnaswamy G, Vora T, Shah S, Rangarajan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Parel, Mumbai,
Maharashtra, India.

Primary vulvar Ewing sarcoma (ES)/PNET is an uncommonly documented tumor,
especially with molecular results. A 10-year-old girl presented with left vulvar 
swelling, a year ago. Her abdominopelvic ultrasound revealed a 12 cm × 8 cm
sized, mixed echogenic blood-filled lesion in the left vulva; radiologically
considered as a hematoma. Vulvectomy revealed a multinodular grey-brown tumor,
microscopically comprising malignant round cells. Immunohistochemically, tumor
cells diffusely expressed MIC2/CD99 and Fli1 and subsequently displayed EWSR1
rearrangement, confirming diagnosis of ES/PNET. Subsequently, PET-CT scan
revealed residual local lesion with lung metastases. The patient was induced on
EFT 2001 chemotherapy protocol. Three months after chemotherapy completion, there
was no metabolically active disease on PET scan. Four months later, MRI disclosed
recurrent primary and metastatic pulmonary lesions. She was planned for scar
excision and adjuvant radiotherapy, but unfortunately defaulted further
treatment. This forms the eighth case of primary vulvar ES/PNET confirmed with
molecular cytogenetic result, underscoring therapeutic value of objective
diagnosis in such cases.

PMID: 26275259  [PubMed - in process]


59. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Oct;14(10):2228-37. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0320.
Epub 2015 Aug 12.

Anticancer Properties of a Novel Class of Tetrafluorinated Thalidomide Analogues.

Beedie SL(1), Peer CJ(2), Pisle S(2), Gardner ER(2), Mahony C(3), Barnett S(3),
Ambrozak A(4), Gütschow M(4), Chau CH(5), Vargesson N(6), Figg WD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pharmacology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. School of Medical Sciences, Institute of
Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(2)Clinical Pharmacology Program, Genitourinary Malignancies Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (3)School of
Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom. (4)Pharmaceutical Institute, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (5)Molecular Pharmacology Section, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (6)School of
Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom. figgw@helix.nih.gov n.vargesson@abdn.ac.uk.
(7)Molecular Pharmacology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. Clinical Pharmacology Program, Genitourinary 
Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland. figgw@helix.nih.gov n.vargesson@abdn.ac.uk.

Thalidomide has demonstrated clinical activity in various malignancies affecting 
immunomodulatory and angiogenic pathways. The development of novel thalidomide
analogs with improved efficacy and decreased toxicity is an ongoing research
effort. We recently designed and synthesized a new class of compounds, consisting
of both tetrafluorinated thalidomide analogues (Gu973 and Gu998) and
tetrafluorobenzamides (Gu1029 and Gu992). In this study, we demonstrate the
antiangiogenic properties of these newly synthesized compounds. We examined the
specific antiangiogenic characteristics in vitro using rat aortic rings with
carboxyamidotriazole as a positive control. In addition, further in vitro
efficacy was evaluated using human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) and
PC3 cells treated with 5 and 10 µmol/L doses of each compound. All compounds were
seen to reduce microvessel outgrowth in rat aortic rings as well as to inhibit
HUVECs to a greater extent, at lower concentrations than previously tested
thalidomide analogs. The antiangiogenic properties of the compounds were also
examined in vivo in fli1:EGFP zebrafish embryos, where all compounds were seen to
inhibit the extent of outgrowth of newly developing blood vessels. In addition,
Gu1029 and Gu973 reduced the anti-inflammatory response in mpo:GFP zebrafish
embryos, whereas Gu998 and Gu992 showed no difference. The compounds' antitumor
effects were also explored in vivo using the human prostate cancer PC3 xenograft 
model. All four compounds were also screened in vivo in chicken embryos to
investigate their teratogenic potential. This study establishes these novel
thalidomide analogues as a promising immunomodulatory class with anticancer
effects that warrant further development to characterize their mechanisms of
action.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4596783
PMID: 26269604  [PubMed - in process]


60. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jun 1;8(6):7526-32. eCollection 2015.

A SMARCB1-deficient vulvar neoplasm with prominent myxoid stroma: report of a
case showing ERG and FLI1 expression.

Tajima S(1), Takahasi Y(2), Hikoaki M(3), Goto R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo 
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital
Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Department of General Education Center, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Radiology,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan.

In the vulvar region, epithelioid sarcoma (ES) is the most frequent
SMARCB1-deficient neoplasm, followed by myoepithelial carcinoma (MC). Previous
studies have demonstrated that some SMARCB1-deficient vulvar neoplasms cannot be 
classified as either ES or MC. Herein, we report of a 42-year-old woman with a
SMARCB1-deficient neoplasm with prominent myxoid stroma in the vulva. It
contained both epithelioid and spindled tumor cells, both of which showed
vimentin and EMA expression. Although other markers useful for the differential
diagnosis among SMARCB1-deficient tumors were negative, this tumor displayed
characteristic expression of ERG and FLI1. As there are no reliable data
regarding expression of ERG and FLI1 in MC, which are demonstrated to be often
expressed in ES, further classification of cases such as the one reported here
requires reliable data regarding their expression status in MC.

PMCID: PMC4525998
PMID: 26261664  [PubMed - in process]


61. Front Oncol. 2015 Jul 20;5:162. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2015.00162. eCollection 2015.

EWS/FLI1 Target Genes and Therapeutic Opportunities in Ewing Sarcoma.

Cidre-Aranaz F(1), Alonso J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana, Instituto de
Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III , Madrid ,
Spain.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive bone malignancy that affect children and young
adults. Ewing sarcoma is the second most common primary bone malignancy in
pediatric patients. Although significant progress has been made in the treatment 
of Ewing sarcoma since it was first described in the 1920s, in the last decade
survival rates have remained unacceptably invariable, thus pointing to the need
for new approaches centered in the molecular basis of the disease. Ewing sarcoma 
driving mutation, EWS-FLI1, which results from a chromosomal translocation,
encodes an aberrant transcription factor. Since its first characterization in
1990s, many molecular targets have been described to be regulated by this
chimeric transcription factor. Their contribution to orchestrate Ewing sarcoma
phenotype has been reported over the last decades. In this work, we will focus on
the description of a selection of EWS/FLI1 targets, their functional role, and
their potential clinical relevance. We will also discuss their role in other
types of cancer as well as the need for further studies to be performed in order 
to achieve a broader understanding of their particular contribution to Ewing
sarcoma development.

PMCID: PMC4507460
PMID: 26258070  [PubMed]


62. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec;67(12):3245-55. doi: 10.1002/art.39312.

Progranulin Overproduction Due to Fli-1 Deficiency Contributes to the Resistance 
of Dermal Fibroblasts to Tumor Necrosis Factor in Systemic Sclerosis.

Ichimura Y(1), Asano Y(1), Akamata K(1), Noda S(1), Taniguchi T(1), Takahashi
T(1), Toyama T(1), Tada Y(1), Sugaya M(1), Sato S(1), Kadono T(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Progranulin is a growth factor that is active in wound repair and is
an antagonist of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptors, regulating fibroblast
activation, angiogenesis, and inflammation. Because long-standing activation of
gene programs related to wound healing is a hallmark of systemic sclerosis (SSc),
we sought to investigate the role of progranulin in SSc.
METHODS: Progranulin expression levels in human and murine skin samples were
determined by immunohistochemical analysis and quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The role of progranulin in fibroblast
activation was examined using a gene-silencing technique. Progranulin levels in
serum obtained from 60 patients with SSc and 16 healthy control subjects were
determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Progranulin expression was increased in SSc dermal fibroblasts compared 
with normal dermal fibroblasts, both in vivo and in vitro. Transcription factor
Fli-1, a deficiency of which is involved in the activation of SSc dermal
fibroblasts, served as a potent repressor of the progranulin gene, and Fli-1(+/-)
mice and bleomycin-treated wild-type mice exhibited up-regulated expression of
progranulin in dermal fibroblasts. SSc dermal fibroblasts were resistant to the
antifibrotic effect of TNF, but this resistance was reversed by gene silencing of
progranulin. Serum progranulin levels were elevated in patients with early
diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), especially in those with inflammatory skin
symptoms, and were positively correlated with the C-reactive protein level.
CONCLUSION: Progranulin overproduction due to Fli-1 deficiency may contribute to 
the constitutive activation of SSc dermal fibroblasts by antagonizing the
antifibrotic effect of TNF. Progranulin may also be involved in the inflammatory 
process associated with progressive skin sclerosis in early dcSSc.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26245842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 4;10(8):e0134662. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134662.
eCollection 2015.

Irisin Induces Angiogenesis in Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells In Vitro
and in Zebrafish Embryos In Vivo via Activation of the ERK Signaling Pathway.

Wu F(1), Song H(1), Zhang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Mu Q(1), Jiang M(1), Wang F(1), Zhang
W(1), Li L(1), Li H(2), Wang Y(2), Zhang M(3), Li S(4), Yang L(4), Meng Y(5),
Tang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine, The Second Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan, 250012, P.R. China. (2)Jinan Central Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, P.R. China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, 250012, P.R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, Immunology,
and Laboratory Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, 
FL, United States of America. (5)Department of Urology, The Second Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, P.R. China.

As a link between exercise and metabolism, irisin is assumed to be involved in
increased total body energy expenditure, reduced body weight, and increased
insulin sensitivity. Although our recent evidence supported the contribution of
irisin to vascular endothelial cell (ECs) proliferation and apoptosis, further
research of irisin involvement in the angiogenesis of ECs was not conclusive. In 
the current study, it was found that irisin promoted Human Umbilical Vein
Endothelial Cell (HUVEC) angiogenesis via increasing migration and tube
formation, and attenuated chemically-induced intersegmental vessel (ISV)
angiogenic impairment in transgenic TG (fli1: GFP) zebrafish. It was further
demonstrated that expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 2 and 9 were also 
up-regulated in endothelial cells. We also found that irisin activated
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) signaling pathways. Inhibition of ERK
signaling by using U0126 decreased the pro-migration and pro-angiogenic effect of
irisin on HUVEC. Also, U0126 inhibited the elevated expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9
when they were treated with irisin. In summary, these findings provided direct
evidence that irisin may play a pivotal role in maintaining endothelium
homeostasis by promoting endothelial cell angiogenesis via the ERK signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC4524626
PMID: 26241478  [PubMed - in process]


64. Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):1073-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.3363. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

Chimeric EWSR1-FLI1 regulates the Ewing sarcoma susceptibility gene EGR2 via a
GGAA microsatellite.

Grünewald TG(1,)(2), Bernard V(3), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P(4), Raynal V(1,)(2,)(3),
Surdez D(1,)(2), Aynaud MM(1,)(2), Mirabeau O(1,)(2), Cidre-Aranaz F(5), Tirode
F(1,)(2), Zaidi S(1,)(2), Perot G(6), Jonker AH(1,)(2), Lucchesi C(1,)(2), Le
Deley MC(7), Oberlin O(8), Marec-Bérard P(9), Véron AS(10), Reynaud S(11),
Lapouble E(11), Boeva V(12,)(13), Rio Frio T(3), Alonso J(5), Bhatia S(14),
Pierron G(11), Cancel-Tassin G(15), Cussenot O(15), Cox DG(10), Morton LM(16),
Machiela MJ(16), Chanock SJ(16), Charnay P(4), Delattre O(1,)(2,)(3,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biology of Cancers Unit, Institut Curie, PSL Research University,
Paris, France. (2)INSERM U830, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris, France.
(3)Institut Curie Genomics of Excellence (ICGex) Platform, Institut Curie
Research Center, Paris, France. (4)École Normale Supérieure (ENS), Institut de
Biologie de l'ENS (IBENS), INSERM U1024, CNRS UMR8197, Paris, France.
(5)Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Madrid, Spain. (6)INSERM U916 Biology of Sarcomas, Institut Bergonié,
Bordeaux, France. (7)Département d'Epidémiologie et de Biostatistiques, Institut 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (8)Département de Pédiatrie, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France. (9)Institute for Pediatric Hematology and Oncology,
Leon-Bérard Cancer Center, University of Lyon, Lyon, France. (10)INSERM U1052,
Léon-Bérard Cancer Centre, Cancer Research Center of Lyon, Lyon, France.
(11)Unité Génétique Somatique (UGS), Institut Curie Centre Hospitalier, Paris,
France. (12)INSERM U900, Bioinformatics, Biostatistics, Epidemiology and
Computational Systems Biology of Cancer, Institut Curie Research Center, Paris,
France. (13)Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France. (14)Institute for Cancer
Outcomes and Survivorship, School of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham,
Alabama, USA. (15)Centre de Recherche sur les Pathologies Prostatiques
(CeRePP)-Laboratory for Urology, Research Team 2, UPMC, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France. (16)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics (DCEG), National Cancer 
Institute (NCI), Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Sep;47(9):964-5.

Deciphering the ways in which somatic mutations and germline susceptibility
variants cooperate to promote cancer is challenging. Ewing sarcoma is
characterized by fusions between EWSR1 and members of the ETS gene family,
usually EWSR1-FLI1, leading to the generation of oncogenic transcription factors 
that bind DNA at GGAA motifs. A recent genome-wide association study identified
susceptibility variants near EGR2. Here we found that EGR2 knockdown inhibited
proliferation, clonogenicity and spheroidal growth in vitro and induced
regression of Ewing sarcoma xenografts. Targeted germline deep sequencing of the 
EGR2 locus in affected subjects and controls identified 291 Ewing-associated
SNPs. At rs79965208, the A risk allele connected adjacent GGAA repeats by
converting an interspaced GGAT motif into a GGAA motif, thereby increasing the
number of consecutive GGAA motifs and thus the EWSR1-FLI1-dependent enhancer
activity of this sequence, with epigenetic characteristics of an active
regulatory element. EWSR1-FLI1 preferentially bound to the A risk allele, which
increased global and allele-specific EGR2 expression. Collectively, our findings 
establish cooperation between a dominant oncogene and a susceptibility variant
that regulates a major driver of Ewing sarcomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC4591073 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26214589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015 Sep;22(5):460-6. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000171.

Update on the inherited platelet disorders.

Lambert MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The inherited platelet disorders have witnessed a surge in our
understanding of molecular mechanisms of disease in the past few years due in
large to part to the introduction of next-generation sequencing for discovery of 
novel genes. The purpose of this review is to update the reader on the novel
discoveries with regard to the inherited platelet disorders, with a particular
focus on describing the novel disorders described most recently.
RECENT FINDINGS: The description of novel mechanisms of disease including
mutations in PRKACG, in a family with severe macrothrombocytopenia, RUNX1 and
FLI1 mutations in patients with inherited mild platelet function disorders and
CalDAG-GEFI resulting in a severe platelet bleeding phenotype show that there is 
still much to be learned from studying families and molecular sequencing of
patients with well phenotyped platelet disorders.
SUMMARY: The implications for clinical practice of the continually growing list
of genes described in small numbers of families makes whole exome/genome tempting
as an option for evaluation of patients, but use outside of the research setting 
still needs to be done with extreme caution as interpretation of variants is
likely to require additional studies.

PMID: 26164464  [PubMed - in process]


66. Oncotarget. 2015 Sep 15;6(27):23764-75.

Friend leukemia virus integration 1 activates the Rho GTPase pathway and is
associated with metastasis in breast cancer.

Song W(1), Li W(1), Li L(1), Zhang S(1,)(2), Yan X(1), Wen X(1), Zhang X(1), Tian
H(1), Li A(3), Hu JF(1,)(2), Cui J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, the First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China.
(2)Stanford University Medical School, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo
Alto, CA, USA. (3)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Center of
Biomedical Analysis, Beijing, China.

Breast cancer is the most prevalent malignant disease in women worldwide. In
patients with breast cancer, metastasis to distant sites directly determines the 
survival outcome. However, the molecular mechanism underlying metastasis in
breast cancer remains to be defined. In this report, we found that Friend
leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1) proto-oncogene was differentially expressed
between the aggressive MDA-MB231 and the non-aggressive MCF-7 breast cancer
cells. Congruently, immunohistochemical staining of clinical samples revealed
that FLI1 was overexpressed in breast cancers as compared with the adjacent
tissues. The abundance of FLI1 protein was strongly correlated with the advanced 
stage, poor differentiation, and lymph node metastasis in breast cancer patients.
Knockdown of FLI1 with small interfering RNAs significantly attenuated the
potential of migration and invasion in highly metastatic human breast cancer
cells. FLI1 oncoprotein activated the Rho GTPase pathway that is known to play a 
role in tumor metastasis. This study for the first time identifies FLI1 as a
clinically and functionally important target gene of metastasis, providing a
rationale for developing FLI1 inhibitors in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4695150
PMID: 26156017  [PubMed - in process]


67. Semin Immunopathol. 2015 Sep;37(5):489-500. doi: 10.1007/s00281-015-0505-5. Epub 
2015 Jul 8.

Vasculopathy in scleroderma.

Asano Y(1), Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan, yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disorder featured by 
vascular injury and fibrosis of the skin and various internal organs with
autoimmune background. Although the pathogenesis of SSc still remains elusive, it
is generally accepted that initial vascular injury due to autoimmunity and/or
environmental factors causes structural and functional abnormalities of
vasculature which eventually result in the constitutive activation of fibroblasts
in various organs. Structural alterations consist of destructive vasculopathy
(loss of small vessels) and proliferative obliterative vasculopathy (occlusion of
arterioles and small arteries with fibro-proliferative change) caused by impaired
compensatory vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. Impaired function of SSc
vasculature includes the altered expression of cell adhesion molecules
predominantly inducing Th2 and Th17 cell infiltration, endothelial dysfunction
primarily due to the low availability of nitric oxide, the activated
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition leading to fibro-proliferative vascular
change and tissue fibrosis, and the impaired coagulation/fibrinolysis system
promoting the formation of intravascular fibrin deposits. Recent new insights
into the therapeutic mechanisms of intravenous cyclophosphamide pulse and
bosentan and the establishment of a new SSc animal model (Klf5 (+/-);Fli1 (+/-)
mice) provide us useful clues to further understand the development of vascular
alterations characteristic of SSc. This article overviewed the present
understanding of the pathogenesis of SSc vasculopathy.

PMID: 26152638  [PubMed - in process]


68. Oncogene. 2015 Jul 6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.261. [Epub ahead of print]

The oncofusion protein FUS-ERG targets key hematopoietic regulators and modulates
the all-trans retinoic acid signaling pathway in t(16;21) acute myeloid leukemia.

Sotoca AM(1), Prange KH(1), Reijnders B(1), Mandoli A(1), Nguyen LN(1),
Stunnenberg HG(1), Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The ETS transcription factor ERG has been implicated as a major regulator of both
normal and aberrant hematopoiesis. In acute myeloid leukemias harboring t(16;21),
ERG function is deregulated due to a fusion with FUS/TLS resulting in the
expression of a FUS-ERG oncofusion protein. How this oncofusion protein
deregulates the normal ERG transcription program is unclear. Here, we show that
FUS-ERG acts in the context of a heptad of proteins (ERG, FLI1, GATA2, LYL1,
LMO2, RUNX1 and TAL1) central to proper expression of genes involved in
maintaining a stem cell hematopoietic phenotype. Moreover, in t(16;21) FUS-ERG
co-occupies genomic regions bound by the nuclear receptor heterodimer RXR:RARA
inhibiting target gene expression and interfering with hematopoietic
differentiation. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of t(16;21) cells as well as
FUS-ERG knockdown alleviate the myeloid-differentiation block. Together, the
results suggest that FUS-ERG acts as a transcriptional repressor of the retinoic 
acid signaling pathway.Oncogene advance online publication, 6 July 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.261.

PMID: 26148230  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


69. Med Mol Morphol. 2015 Jun 30. [Epub ahead of print]

ERG and FLI1 are useful immunohistochemical markers in phosphaturic mesenchymal
tumors.

Tajima S(1), Takashi Y, Ito N, Fukumoto S, Fukuyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan, stajima-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumors (PMT) are the most common cause of tumor-induced 
osteomalacia (TIO) related to mesenchymal neoplasms. The lineage of
differentiation of PMTs has not been elucidated in existing literature. Fourteen 
cases of PMT were analyzed for this study to elucidate its lineage. We used
vascular and/or lymphatic endothelial markers for the immunohistochemical
analysis, which included CD31, CD34, factor VIII-related antigen, podoplanin,
Freund's leukemia integration site 1 (FLI1), and avian v-ets erythroblastosis
virus E26 oncogene homolog (ERG). FLI1 and ERG were stained in all cases with
proportion of immunopositive tumor cells largely more than 50 %; staining
intensity was moderate or strong for both FLI1 and ERG. The tumor cells were
stained with CD31 and/or CD34, with significantly less staining than observed for
FLI1 and ERG. The tumor cells were completely immunonegative for factor
VIII-related antigen and podoplanin. FLI1 and ERG are known to have considerable 
specificity to endothelial cells; ERG is more widely equipped in surgical
pathology laboratories than FLI1. We concluded that ERG (or FLI1 if available) is
useful marker for the diagnosis of PMT, and that PMTs may have an endothelial
cell lineage.

PMID: 26122367  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


70. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;23(6):500-4. doi: 10.1177/1066896915591584. Epub 2015
Jun 26.

Molecular Confirmation of Ewing Sarcoma in an 85-Year-Old Woman.

Monument MJ(1), Grossmann AH(2), Baker CC(3), Randall RL(1), Liu T(2), Albertson 
DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (2)University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA. (3)ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt
Lake City, UT, USA. (4)University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA ARUP Institute
for Clinical and Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA
dan.albertson@path.utah.edu.

We report a case of a Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in an
85-year-old woman who presented with an enlarging circumscribed left flank mass. 
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 3 × 5 × 10 cm heterogeneous mass arising
from the 10th rib. Computed tomography demonstrated a small nodule in the right
middle lobe and bilateral pleural effusions. The patient underwent computed
tomography-guided biopsy followed by open biopsy. The tumor cells were
characterized by loosely cohesive sheets of tumor cells with uniform nuclei, and 
scant, granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell membranes. Frequent 
mitoses, apoptosis, and necrosis were present. The cells were positive for CD99
with a strong concentric staining pattern. Epithelial, hematopoietic, and neural 
markers were all negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed and
demonstrated EWSR1 (22q12) gene rearrangement. Sanger sequencing of the reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction product from the patient's tumor
demonstrated the EWSR1-FLI1 type 1 fusion. Following diagnosis the patient
elected to proceed with localized radiation and declined chemotherapy. She
developed progressive lung disease and subsequently died of her disease a year
after her initial diagnosis. Ewing sarcoma is predominantly a pediatric disease
and uncommon in patients older than 40 years of age. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the oldest documented case of Ewing sarcoma, diagnosed using
modern molecular techniques.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26116579  [PubMed - in process]


71. F1000Prime Rep. 2015 May 26;7:66. doi: 10.12703/P7-66. eCollection 2015.

Hematopoietic transcription factor mutations and inherited platelet dysfunction.

Songdej N(1), Rao AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Section, Department of Medicine and the Sol Sherry,
Thrombosis Research Center, Temple University School of Medicine Philadelphia, PA
USA.

The molecular and genetic mechanisms in most patients with inherited platelet
dysfunction are unknown. There is increasing evidence that mutations in
hematopoietic transcription factors are major players in the pathogenesis of
defective megakaryopoiesis and platelet dysfunction in patients with inherited
platelet disorders. These hematopoietic transcription factors include RUNX1,
FLI1, GATA-1, and GFI1B. Mutations involving these transcription factors affect
diverse aspects of platelet production and function at the genetic and molecular 
levels, culminating in clinical manifestations of thrombocytopenia and platelet
dysfunction. This review focuses on these hematopoietic transcription factors in 
the pathobiology of inherited platelet dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC4447035
PMID: 26097739  [PubMed]


72. Am J Pathol. 2015 Jul;185(7):1867-76. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.03.026.

Mice Haploinsufficient for Ets1 and Fli1 Display Middle Ear Abnormalities and
Model Aspects of Jacobsen Syndrome.

Carpinelli MR(1), Kruse EA(2), Arhatari BD(3), Debrincat MA(2), Ogier JM(1),
Bories JC(4), Kile BT(2), Burt RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; HEARing 
Cooperative Research Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia; Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of Physics, ARC Centre of
Excellence for Coherent X-Ray Science, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria,
Australia. (4)INSERM UMR 1126 Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris,
France. (5)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
HEARing Cooperative Research Centre, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia; Department of Genetics, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: rachel.burt@mcri.edu.au.

E26 transformation-specific 1 (ETS1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) are
members of the ETS family of transcription factors, of which there are 28 in
humans. Both genes are hemizygous in Jacobsen syndrome, an 11q contiguous gene
deletion disorder involving thrombocytopenia, facial dysmorphism, growth and
mental retardation, malformation of the heart and other organs, and hearing
impairment associated with recurrent ear infections. To determine whether any of 
these defects are because of hemizygosity for ETS1 and FLI1, we characterized the
phenotype of mice heterozygous for mutant alleles of Ets1 and Fli1. Fli1(+/-)
mice displayed mild thrombocytopenia, as did Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) animals.
Fli1(+/-) and Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) mice also displayed craniofacial abnormalities, 
including a small middle ear cavity, short nasal bone, and malformed interface
between the nasal bone process and cartilaginous nasal septum. They exhibited
hearing impairment, otitis media, fusions of ossicles to the middle ear wall, and
deformed stapes. Hearing impairment was more penetrant and stapes malformations
were more severe in Ets1(+/-)Fli1(+/-) mice than in Fli1(+/-) mice, indicating
partial functional redundancy of these transcription factors during auditory
development. Our findings indicate that the short nose, otitis media, and hearing
impairment in Jacobsen syndrome are likely because of hemizygosity for ETS1 and
FLI1.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26093983  [PubMed - in process]


73. Przegl Lek. 2015;72(1):25-30.

[Systemic sclerosis. Part 2. Epigenetic factors in the pathogenesis of clinical
manifestations].

[Article in Polish]

Fryc J, Midro AT, Panasiuk B, Sierakowski S.

Systemic sclerosis is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by immune
activation, fibrosis of the skin and internal organs and vasculopathy affecting
predominantly the microvessels with a predilection for women. The genetic
background of systemic sclerosis is still full of unanswered questions, with
classical genetics able to explain only some systemic sclerosis cases. Novel
advances concerning epigenetics give us new insight into pathogenesis of systemic
sclerosis. This review focuses on results of recent reports on epigenetic
modifications of the gene functions and X inactivation changes in pathogenesis of
systemic sclerosis. Current evidence demonstrates DNA heavy methylation (FLI1,
NOS3, BMPRII) and hypomethylation of regulatory genes (CD40L, CD70), histone code
modifications, abnormal expression of large spectrum of microRNAs.

PMID: 26076574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Thromb Haemost. 2015 Aug 31;114(3):593-602. doi: 10.1160/TH14-12-1090. Epub 2015 
Jun 11.

Transdifferentiation of erythroblasts to megakaryocytes using FLI1 and ERG
transcription factors.

Siripin D, Kheolamai P, U-Pratya Y, Supokawej A, Wattanapanitch M, Klincumhom N, 
Laowtammathron C, Issaragrisil S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Prof. Surapol Issaragrisil, Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700,
Thailand, Tel.: +662 419 4448 50, Fax: +662 411 2012, E-mail:
surapolsi@gmail.com.

Platelet transfusion has been widely used to prevent and treat life-threatening
thrombocytopenia; however, preparation of a unit of concentrated platelet for
transfusion requires at least 4-6 units of whole blood. At present, a platelet
unit from a single donor can be prepared using apheresis, but lack of donors is
still a major problem. Several approaches to produce platelets from other
sources, such as haematopoietic stem cells and pluripotent stem cells, have been 
attempted but the system is extremely complicated, time-consuming and expensive. 
We now report a novel and simpler technology to obtain platelets using
transdifferentiation of human bone marrow erythroblasts to megakaryocytes with
overexpression of the FLI1 and ERG genes. The obtained transdifferentiated
erythroblasts (both from CD71+ and GPA+ erythroblast subpopulations) exhibit
typical features of megakaryocytes including morphology, expression of specific
genes (cMPL and TUBB1) and a marker protein (CD41). They also have the ability to
generate megakaryocytic CFU in culture and produce functional platelets, which
aggregate with normal human platelets to form a normal-looking clot.
Overexpression of FLI1 and ERG genes is sufficient to transdifferentiate
erythroblasts to megakaryocytes that can produce functional platelets.

PMID: 26063314  [PubMed - in process]


75. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 7;6(22):18875-90.

The PARP inhibitor olaparib enhances the sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma to
trabectedin.

Ordóñez JL(1,)(2), Amaral AT(1,)(2), Carcaboso AM(3), Herrero-Martín D(4), del
Carmen García-Macías M(2), Sevillano V(2), Alonso D(2), Pascual-Pasto G(3),
San-Segundo L(2), Vila-Ubach M(3), Rodrigues T(2), Fraile S(2), Teodosio C(2),
Mayo-Iscar A(5), Aracil M(6), Galmarini CM(6), Tirado OM(4), Mora J(3), de Álava 
E(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS),
Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville,
Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Instituto de Biología Molecular y
Celular del Cáncer/Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad
de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. (3)Developmental Tumor Biology Laboratory,
Preclinical Therapeutics and Drug Delivery Research Program, Hospital Sant Joan
de Deu Barcelona, Spain. (4)Sarcoma Research Group, Laboratori d'Oncología
Molecular, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet
de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Statistics and Operations Research Department,
University of Valladolid, Spain. (6)Cell Biology and Pharmacogenomics Department,
Pharmamar, Madrid, Spain.

Recent preclinical evidence has suggested that Ewing Sarcoma (ES) bearing
EWSR1-ETS fusions could be particularly sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPinh) in
combination with DNA damage repair (DDR) agents. Trabectedin is an antitumoral
agent that modulates EWSR1-FLI1 transcriptional functions, causing DNA damage.
Interestingly, PARP1 is also a transcriptional regulator of EWSR1-FLI1, and
PARPinh disrupts the DDR machinery. Thus, given the impact and apparent
specificity of both agents with regard to the DNA damage/DDR system and
EWSR1-FLI1 activity in ES, we decided to explore the activity of combining
PARPinh and Trabectedin in in vitro and in vivo experiments. The combination of
Olaparib and Trabectedin was found to be highly synergistic, inhibiting cell
proliferation, inducing apoptosis, and the accumulation of G2/M. The drug
combination also enhanced <U+03B3>H2AX intranuclear accumulation as a result of DNA
damage induction, DNA fragmentation and global DDR deregulation, while EWSR1-FLI1
target expression remained unaffected. The effect of the drug combination was
corroborated in a mouse xenograft model of ES and, more importantly, in two ES
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models in which the tumors showed complete
regression. In conclusion, the combination of the two agents leads to a
biologically significant deregulation of the DDR machinery that elicits relevant 
antitumor activity in preclinical models and might represent a promising
therapeutic tool that should be further explored for translation to the clinical 
setting.

PMCID: PMC4662461
PMID: 26056084  [PubMed - in process]


76. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;67:86-91. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.06.004.
Epub 2015 Jun 6.

Epigenetic suppression of Fli1, a potential predisposing factor in the
pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis.

Asano Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disease featured by
immune abnormalities, vasculopathy and tissue fibrosis with unknown etiology. A
series of studies on disease-susceptibility genes and twins have demonstrated the
association of genetic factors with autoimmunity and disease severity and the
contribution of environmental factors to the induction of clinical features in
this disease. Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (Fli1), a member of Ets
transcription factor family, is epigenetically suppressed in the lesional skin of
SSc patients, suggesting that Fli1 is a potential predisposing factor of SSc
reflecting the influence of environmental factors. Consistent with this idea,
Fli1 deficiency induces SSc-like phenotypes in dermal fibroblasts and dermal
microvascular endothelial cells in vivo and in vitro at molecular levels.
Furthermore, Fli1 haploinsufficiency recapitulates tissue fibrosis, vascular
activation and inflammation characteristic of SSc to a greater extent in
bleomycin-treated mice. Importantly, bosentan, a dual endothelin receptor
antagonist with a potential disease-modifying effect on SSc vasculopathy,
reverses the expression of Fli1 protein by increasing its protein stability.
Therefore, Fli1 may serve as a predisposing factor of SSc and can be a promising 
therapeutic target of this incurable and devastating disease. This article is
part of a Directed Issue entitled: Epigenetics dynamics in development and
disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26055516  [PubMed - in process]


77. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;39(9):1267-74. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000460.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumors of the head and neck: a pitfall in the
differential diagnosis of basaloid and myoepithelial carcinomas.

Bishop JA(1), Alaggio R, Zhang L, Seethala RR, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD §Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, PA Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY Department of Pathology, Padova University Hospital, Padova, Italy.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EFTs) of the head and neck are rare and may be
difficult to diagnose, as they display significant histologic overlap with other 
more common undifferentiated small blue round cell malignancies. Occasionally,
EFTs may exhibit overt epithelial differentiation in the form of diffuse
cytokeratin immunoexpression or squamous pearls, resembling the so-called
adamantinoma-like EFTs and being challenging to distinguish from bona fide
carcinomas. Furthermore, the presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangement correlated with
strong keratin expression may suggest a myoepithelial carcinoma. Herein, we
analyze a series of 7 adamantinoma-like EFTs of the head and neck, most of them
being initially misdiagnosed as carcinomas because of their anatomic location and
strong cytokeratin immunoexpression, and subsequently reclassified as EFT by
molecular techniques. The tumors arose in the sinonasal tract (n=2), parotid
gland (n=2), thyroid gland (n=2), and orbit (n=1), in patients ranging in age
from 7 to 56 years (mean, 31 y). Microscopically, they departed from the typical 
EFT morphology by growing as nests with peripheral nuclear palisading and
prominent interlobular fibrosis, imparting a distinctly basaloid appearance.
Moreover, 2 cases exhibited overt keratinization in the form of squamous pearls, 
and 1 sinonasal tumor demonstrated areas of intraepithelial growth. All cases
were positive for CD99, pancytokeratin, and p40. A subset of cases showed
synaptophysin, S100 protein, and/or p16 reactivity, further confounding the
diagnosis. Fluorescence in situ hybridization assays showed EWSR1 and FLI1
rearrangements in all cases. Our results reinforce that a subset of head and neck
EFTs may show strong cytokeratin expression or focal keratinization, and are
therefore histologically indistinguishable from more common true epithelial
neoplasms. Thus, CD99 should be included in the immunopanel of a round cell
malignancy regardless of strong cytokeratin expression or anatomic location, and 
a strong and diffuse CD99 positivity should prompt molecular testing for the
presence of EWSR1 gene rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC4537687 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26034869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Med Mol Morphol. 2015 Sep;48(3):123-8. doi: 10.1007/s00795-015-0107-2. Epub 2015 
May 19.

Double heterozygous mice for Klf5 and Fli1 genes: a new animal model of systemic 
sclerosis recapitulating its three cardinal pathological features.

Asano Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

The lack of animal models recapitulating the three cardinal features of systemic 
sclerosis (SSc), such as immune activation, vasculopathy, and tissue fibrosis,
hinders the understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease. A series of
clinical studies has suggested that environmental factors largely contribute to
the development of SSc in individuals predisposed by genetic factors. This notion
is supported by the establishment of a new murine SSc model which recapitulates
three cardinal features of SSc by simultaneous haploinsufficiency of Klf5 and
Fli1 genes, both of which are epigenetically suppressed in SSc dermal
fibroblasts. In addition to enhanced dermal thickness, Klf5(+/-) and Fli1(+/-)
mice resemble dermal fibrosis of SSc at the ultrastructural level. Furthermore,
these mice simulate altered vascular structure and B cell activation
characteristic of SSc. Further studies on the pathological events in Klf5(+/-)
and Fli1(+/-) mice and the roles of KLF5 and Fli1 in various types of cells may
provide us with a useful clue to better understand the developmental process of
SSc.

PMID: 25986681  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Biomed Sci. 2015 May 20;22:34. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0142-2.

DNA methylation similarities in genes of black South Africans with systemic lupus
erythematosus and systemic sclerosis.

Matatiele P(1), Tikly M(2), Tarr G(3), Gulumian M(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology & Biochemistry Research Section, National Institute for
Occupational Health, National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South
Africa. puleng.matatiele@nioh.nhls.ac.za. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
tikly.mohammed01@gmail.com. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(4)Toxicology & Biochemistry Research Section, National Institute for
Occupational Health, National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South
Africa. mary.gulumian@nioh.nhls.ac.za. (5)Division of Molecular Medicine and
Haematology, School of Pathology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. mary.gulumian@nioh.nhls.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic sclerosis (SSc) are
systemic autoimmune connective tissue diseases that share overlapping
clinico-pathological features. It is highly probable that there is an overlap in 
epigenetic landscapes of both diseases. This study aimed to identify similarities
in DNA methylation changes in genes involved in SLE and SSc. Global DNA
methylation and twelve genes selected on the basis of their involvement in
inflammation, autoimmunity and/or fibrosis were analyzed using PCR arrays in
three groups, each of 30 Black South Africans with SLE and SSc, plus 40 healthy
control subjects.
RESULTS: Global methylation in both diseases was significantly lower (<25 %) than
in healthy subjects (>30 %, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0000001). In comparison to healthy controls, a 
similar gene-specific methylation pattern was observed in both SLE and SSc. Three
genes, namely; PRF1, ITGAL and FOXP3 were consistently hypermethylated while
CDKN2A and CD70 were hypomethylated in both diseases. The other genes (SOCS1,
CTGF, THY1, CXCR4, MT1-G, FLI1, and DNMT1) were generally hypomethylated in SLE
whereas they were neither hyper- nor hypo-methylated in SSc.
CONCLUSIONS: SSc and SLE patients have a higher global hypomethylation than
healthy subjects with specific genes being hypomethylated and others
hypermethylated. The majority of genes studied were hypomethylated in SLE
compared to SSc. In addition to the commonly known hypomethylated genes in SLE
and SSc, there are other hypomethylated genes (such as MT-1G and THY-1) that have
not previously been investigated in SLE and SSc though are known to be
hypermethylated in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4437745
PMID: 25986394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Oncogenesis. 2015 May 18;4:e149. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2015.12.

The oncogenic role of the cochaperone Sgt1.

Ogi H(1), Sakuraba Y(1), Kitagawa R(1), Xiao L(1), Shen C(1), Cynthia MA(2), Ohta
S(1), Arnold MA(2), Ramirez N(2), Houghton PJ(3), Kitagawa K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Diseases, The Research Institute at
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH, USA. (3)1] Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Diseases, The
Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2]
Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA [3] Children's Cancer Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, USA.
(4)1] Center for Childhood Cancer and Blood Diseases, The Research Institute at
Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Department of Pediatrics,
College of Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.

Sgt1/Sugt1, a cochaperone of Hsp90, is involved in several cellular activities
including Cullin E3 ubiqutin ligase activity. The high level of Sgt1 expression
in colorectal and gastric tumors suggests that Sgt1 is involved in tumorigenesis.
Here, we report that Sgt1 is overexpressed in colon, breast and lung tumor
tissues and in Ewing sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma xenografts. We also found that 
Sgt1 heterozygous knockout resulted in suppressed Hras-mediated transformation in
vitro and tumor formation in p53(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblast cells and
significantly increased survival of p53(-/-) mice. Moreover, depletion of Sgt1
inhibited the growth of Ewing sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma cells and destabilized
EWS-FLI1 and PAX3-FOXO1 oncogenic fusion proteins, respectively, which are
required for cellular growth. Our results suggest that Sgt1 contributes to cancer
development by stabilizing oncoproteins and that Sgt1 is a potential therapeutic 
target.

PMCID: PMC4450263
PMID: 25985210  [PubMed]


81. Mol Cell. 2015 Jun 18;58(6):1028-39. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.04.011. Epub 2015
May 14.

BET Bromodomain Inhibition Suppresses the Function of Hematopoietic Transcription
Factors in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Roe JS(1), Mercan F(1), Rivera K(1), Pappin DJ(1), Vakoc CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA. (2)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
11724, USA. Electronic address: vakoc@cshl.edu.

The bromodomain and extraterminal (BET) protein BRD4 is a validated drug target
in leukemia, yet its regulatory function in this disease is not well understood. 
Here, we show that BRD4 chromatin occupancy in acute myeloid leukemia closely
correlates with the hematopoietic transcription factors (TFs) PU.1, FLI1, ERG,
C/EBPa, C/EBPß, and MYB at nucleosome-depleted enhancer and promoter regions. We 
provide evidence that these TFs, in conjunction with the lysine acetyltransferase
activity of p300/CBP, facilitate BRD4 recruitment to their occupied sites to
promote transcriptional activation. Chemical inhibition of BET bromodomains was
found to suppress the functional output of each hematopoietic TF, thereby
interfering with essential lineage-specific transcriptional circuits in this
disease. These findings reveal a chromatin-based signaling cascade comprised of
hematopoietic TFs, p300/CBP, and BRD4 that supports leukemia maintenance and is
suppressed by BET bromodomain inhibition.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4475489 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 25982114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jul;14(7):1591-604. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0334.
Epub 2015 May 11.

An Oral Formulation of YK-4-279: Preclinical Efficacy and Acquired Resistance
Patterns in Ewing Sarcoma.

Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE(1), Menegaz BA(1), Ramamoorthy V(1), Aiyer RA(2), Maywald
RL(3), Buford AS(1), Doolittle DK(4), Culotta KS(4), O'Dorisio JE(5), Ludwig
JA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas. (2)Shasta BioVentures, San Jose, California. (3)Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (4)Laboratory of
Experimental Therapeutics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Star
Biotechnology, LLC, San Francisco, California. (6)Department of Sarcoma Medical
Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. jaludwig@mdanderson.org.

Ewing sarcoma is a transcription factor-mediated pediatric bone tumor caused by a
chromosomal translocation of the EWSR1 gene and one of several genes in the ETS
family of transcription factors, typically FLI1 or ERG. Full activity of the
resulting oncogenic fusion protein occurs only after binding RNA helicase A
(RHA), and novel biologically targeted small molecules designed to interfere with
that interaction have shown early promise in the preclinical setting. Herein, we 
demonstrate marked preclinical antineoplastic activity of an orally bioavailable 
formulation of YK-4-279 and identify mechanisms of acquired chemotherapy
resistance that may be exploited to induce collateral sensitivity. Daily enteral 
administration of YK-4-279 led to significant delay in Ewing sarcoma tumor growth
within a murine model. In advance of anticipated early-phase human clinical
trials, we investigated both de novo and acquired mechanism(s) by which Ewing
sarcoma cells evade YK-4-279-mediated cell death. Drug-resistant clones, formed
by chronic in vitro exposure to steadily increased levels of YK-4-279,
overexpressed c-Kit, cyclin D1, pStat3(Y705), and PKC isoforms. Interestingly,
cross-resistance to imatinib and enzastaurin (selective inhibitors of c-Kit and
PKC-ß, respectively), was observed and the use of YK-4-279 with enzastaurin in
vitro led to marked drug synergy, suggesting a potential role for combination
therapies in the future. By advancing an oral formulation of YK-4-279 and
identifying prominent mechanisms of resistance, this preclinical research takes
us one step closer to a shared goal of curing adolescents and young adults
afflicted by Ewing sarcoma.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25964201  [PubMed - in process]


83. J Cytol. 2015 Jan-Mar;32(1):30-2. doi: 10.4103/0970-9371.155229.

Upregulation of NKX2.2, a target of EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript, in primary
renal Ewing sarcoma.

Yamamoto Y(1), Yamazaki K(1), Ishida Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University, Chiba Medical Center, Ichihara,
Chiba, Japan.

Renal Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a rare malignant tumor characterized by fusion of the
EWSR1 gene with a member of the ETS family of oncogenes, arising at a specific
chromosomal translocation. Diagnosis of ES can be problematic, especially from
cytological or small bioptical specimens because the differential diagnoses
comprising a diverse group of small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs). We report a 
case of primary renal ES in a young male, which had a t(11;22) (q24;q12)
chromosome translocation encoding a type2 EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript. The tumor
cells showed diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for CD99 and diffuse nuclear
immunoreactivity for NKX2.2, an important oncogenic transcriptional target of
EWSR1/FLI1, not only in the histological, but also in the cytological specimens. 
From the results of this case, we speculate that NKX2.2, in combination with
CD99, may be a useful immunocytochemical marker to distinguish renal ES from
other SRBCTs of kidney.

PMCID: PMC4408675
PMID: 25948942  [PubMed]


84. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Aug;99(16):6737-44. doi:
10.1007/s00253-015-6621-2. Epub 2015 May 5.

Mutant screening for oncogenes of Ewing's sarcoma using yeast.

Kitagawa T(1), Okita H, Baron B, Tokuda K, Nakamura M, Wang Y, Akada J, Hoshida
H, Akada R, Kuramitsu Y, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi, 755-8505,
Japan, takao-k@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

Many fusion genes, which are the result of chromosomal translocation and work as 
an oncogene, have been recently identified, but their mode of actions is still
unclear. Here, we performed a yeast mutant screening for oncogenes of Ewing's
sarcoma to easily identify essential regions responsible for fusion protein
functions using a yeast genetic system. Three kinds of oncogenes including
EWS/FLI1, EWS/ERG, and EWS/E1AF exhibited growth inhibition in yeast. In this
screening, we identified 13 single amino acid substitution mutants which could
suppress growth inhibition by oncogenes. All of the point mutation positions of
the EWS/ETS family proteins were located within the ETS domain, which is
responsible for the interaction with a specific DNA motif. Eight-mutated residues
within the ETS domain matched to 13 completely conserved amino acid residues in
the human ETS domains. Moreover, mutants also showed reduced transcriptional
activities on the DKK2 promoter, which is upregulated by the EWS/ETS family,
compared to that of the wild type. These results suggest that the ETS domain in
the EWS/ETS family proteins may be a primary target for growth inhibition of
Ewing's sarcoma and that this yeast screening system can be applied for the
functional screening of the oncogenes.

PMID: 25936378  [PubMed - in process]


85. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jul 1;43(W1):W57-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv395. Epub 2015
Apr 29.

i-cisTarget 2015 update: generalized cis-regulatory enrichment analysis in human,
mouse and fly.

Imrichová H(1), Hulselmans G(1), Atak ZK(1), Potier D(1), Aerts S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Center for Human Genetics, University of 
Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Center for 
Human Genetics, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
stein.aerts@med.kuleuven.be.

i-cisTarget is a web tool to predict regulators of a set of genomic regions, such
as ChIP-seq peaks or co-regulated/similar enhancers. i-cisTarget can also be used
to identify upstream regulators and their target enhancers starting from a set of
co-expressed genes. Whereas the original version of i-cisTarget was focused on
Drosophila data, the 2015 update also provides support for human and mouse data. 
i-cisTarget detects transcription factor motifs (position weight matrices) and
experimental data tracks (e.g. from ENCODE, Roadmap Epigenomics) that are
enriched in the input set of regions. As experimental data tracks we include
transcription factor ChIP-seq data, histone modification ChIP-seq data and open
chromatin data. The underlying processing method is based on a
ranking-and-recovery procedure, allowing accurate determination of enrichment
across heterogeneous datasets, while also discriminating direct from indirect
target regions through a 'leading edge' analysis. We illustrate i-cisTarget on
various Ewing sarcoma datasets to identify EWS-FLI1 targets starting from
ChIP-seq, differential ATAC-seq, differential H3K27ac and differential gene
expression data. Use of i-cisTarget is free and open to all, and there is no
login requirement. Address: http://gbiomed.kuleuven.be/apps/lcb/i-cisTarget.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4489282
PMID: 25925574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Blood. 2015 Jun 4;125(23):3570-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-610519. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

RUNX1 represses the erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic
differentiation.

Kuvardina ON(1), Herglotz J(2), Kolodziej S(1), Kohrs N(1), Herkt S(1), Wojcik
B(3), Oellerich T(4), Corso J(5), Behrens K(2), Kumar A(1), Hussong H(1), Urlaub 
H(5), Koch J(1), Serve H(4), Bonig H(6), Stocking C(2), Rieger MA(7), Lausen
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georg-Speyer Haus, Institute for Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapy,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; (2)Heinrich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz Institute for
Experimental Virology, Hamburg, Germany; (3)Department of Medicine,
Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; (4)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe
University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; German Cancer Consortium, Heidelberg,
Germany; German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany; (5)Bioanalytical
Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
Göttingen, Germany; (6)German Red Cross Blood Service and Institute for
Transfusion Medicine and Immunohematology, Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany; and. (7)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, 
Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; German Cancer
Consortium, Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany; LOEWE Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Frankfurt, Germany.

The activity of antagonizing transcription factors represents a mechanistic
paradigm of bidirectional lineage-fate control during hematopoiesis. At the
megakaryocytic/erythroid bifurcation, the cross-antagonism of krueppel-like
factor 1 (KLF1) and friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) has such a decisive
role. However, how this antagonism is resolved during lineage specification is
poorly understood. We found that runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1)
inhibits erythroid differentiation of murine megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitors
and primary human CD34(+) progenitor cells. We show that RUNX1 represses the
erythroid gene expression program during megakaryocytic differentiation by
epigenetic repression of the erythroid master regulator KLF1. RUNX1 binding to
the KLF1 locus is increased during megakaryocytic differentiation and
counterbalances the activating role of T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1
(TAL1). We found that corepressor recruitment by RUNX1 contributes to a block of 
the KLF1-dependent erythroid gene expression program. Our data indicate that the 
repressive function of RUNX1 influences the balance between erythroid and
megakaryocytic differentiation by shifting the balance between KLF1 and FLI1 in
the direction of FLI1. Taken together, we show that RUNX1 is a key player within 
a network of transcription factors that represses the erythroid gene expression
program.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4463808
PMID: 25911237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;35(12):2165-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00239-15. Epub 2015 Apr 
13.

SMAD1 and SMAD5 Expression Is Coordinately Regulated by FLI1 and GATA2 during
Endothelial Development.

Marks-Bluth J(1), Khanna A(2), Chandrakanthan V(2), Thoms J(2), Bee T(2), Eich
C(3), Kang YC(2), Knezevic K(2), Qiao Q(2), Fitch S(4), Oxburgh L(5), Ottersbach 
K(4), Dzierzak E(6), de Bruijn MF(7), Pimanda JE(8).

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia The Weatherall Institute of
Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Lowy Cancer 
Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia. (3)Erasmus MC Stem Cell Institute,
Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
Netherlands. (4)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom Cambridge Stem Cell 
Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (5)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, Scarborough, Maine, 
USA. (6)Erasmus MC Stem Cell Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands The Queen's Medical Research
Institute, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom. (7)The Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom marella.debruijn@imm.ox.ac.uk jpimanda@unsw.edu.au.
(8)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School, The
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia Department of Haematology, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, NSW, Australia marella.debruijn@imm.ox.ac.uk
jpimanda@unsw.edu.au.

The bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/SMAD signaling pathway is a critical
regulator of angiogenic sprouting and is involved in vascular development in the 
embryo. SMAD1 and SMAD5, the core mediators of BMP signaling, are vital for this 
activity, yet little is known about their transcriptional regulation in
endothelial cells. Here, we have integrated multispecies sequence conservation,
tissue-specific chromatin, in vitro reporter assay, and in vivo transgenic data
to identify and validate Smad1+63 and the Smad5 promoter as tissue-specific
cis-regulatory elements that are active in the developing endothelium. The
activity of these elements in the endothelium was dependent on highly conserved
ETS, GATA, and E-box motifs, and chromatin immunoprecipitation showed high levels
of enrichment of FLI1, GATA2, and SCL at these sites in endothelial cell lines
and E11 dorsal aortas in vivo. Knockdown of FLI1 and GATA2 but not SCL reduced
the expression of SMAD1 and SMAD5 in endothelial cells in vitro. In contrast,
CD31(+) cKit(-) endothelial cells harvested from embryonic day 9 (E9)
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) regions of GATA2 null embryos showed reduced Smad1 
but not Smad5 transcript levels. This is suggestive of a degree of in vivo
selection where, in the case of reduced SMAD1 levels, endothelial cells with more
robust SMAD5 expression have a selective advantage.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4438244
PMID: 25870111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cancer Treat Rev. 2015 May;41(5):391-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2015.03.008. Epub
2015 Mar 27.

Targeted therapies for advanced Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Jiang Y(1), Ludwig J(2), Janku F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Clinical Trials
Program), The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic address: jaludwig@mdanderson.org.
(3)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics (Phase I Clinical Trials
Program), The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
Electronic address: fjanku@mdanderson.org.

The prognosis of adolescent and young adult patients battling metastatic Ewing
sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) remains less than 30% despite the development of 
systemic therapies. In the era of personalized medicine, novel molecular targets 
have been tested in preclinical or clinical settings in ESFT. In this review, we 
focus on early clinical and translational research that identified multiple
molecular targets, including IGF-1R; mTOR; tyrosine kinase inhibitors;
EWS-FLI1-related targets, and others. Overall, novel targeted therapies
demonstrated modest efficacy; however pronounced and durable antineoplastic
responses have been observed in small subsets of treated patients, for example
with IGF-1R antibodies. Identifying outcome-predicting biomarkers and overcoming 
treatment resistance remain major challenges. Due to the rarity of ESFT,
multi-institutional collaboration efforts of clinicians, basic and translational 
scientists are needed in order to understand biology of therapeutic response or
resistance, which can lead to development of novel therapeutic methods and
improved patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4426229 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25869102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pathologica. 2014 Dec;106(4):327-9.

A peculiar fibroma-like lesion of superficial soft tissue: morphologic and
immunophenotypic evaluation.

Filotico M, Damuri A, Filotico R.

Apeculiar lesion of superficial soft tissue characterised by fibroma-like
morphology and an immunohistochemical profile consisting of CK+, VIM+, CD34+,
CD31+/-, FLI1+ and INI-1 retained is described. The lesion entered into
differential diagnosis with the so-called fibroma-like variant of epithelioid
sarcoma, with the entities defined as ES-like/pseudomyogenic
haemangioendothelioma and the recently identified entity defined as superficial
CD34+ fibroblastic tumour. All of these entities share a common morphological
structure, but differ in their immunophenotypic profile.

PMID: 25845048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2015 Jun;75(6):1317-20. doi:
10.1007/s00280-015-2726-7. Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Targeting the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor in Ewing sarcoma.

Tancredi R(1), Zambelli A, DaPrada GA, Fregoni V, Pavesi L, Riccardi A, Burdach
S, Grohar PJ, D'Incalci M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, I.R.C.C.S. Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, Via Salvatore 
Maugeri, 10, 27100, Pavia, Italy.

PURPOSE: Preclinical data indicate there is strong synergism of action against
Ewing sarcoma in sequential treatment with trabectedin followed by irinotecan and
it appears to be related to a selective blockade of the transcription factor
EWS-FLI1. This combination was evaluated in Ewing sarcoma patient who was
progressing with standard therapies.
METHODS: Trabectedin was given as a 24-h iv infusion on day 1 at the dose of
1 mg/sqm, and irinotecan 75 mg/sqm on day 2 and then on days 2 and 4, every
3 weeks from the seventh course.
RESULTS: The therapy was well tolerated with transient hematological toxicity and
transaminitis and induced stabilization of the disease lasting for 11 courses,
with clinical improvement and marked reduction of the need for opioids. However, 
shortly before the 12th course, sudden death occurred, possibly due to cerebral
stroke, presumably not related to the drug treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The encouraging clinical benefit observed with the combination and
its good tolerability deserves further investigation in Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 25809543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 9;3:15. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2015.00015. eCollection 
2015.

Epigenetic reprogramming and re-differentiation of a Ewing sarcoma cell line.

Moore JB 4th(1), Loeb DM(2), Hong KU(3), Sorensen PH(4), Triche TJ(5), Lee DW(6),
Barbato MI(7), Arceci RJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, MD, USA ; Department of Medicine, Institute of Molecular Cardiology,
University of Louisville Louisville, KY, USA. (2)Oncology, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Institute of Molecular Cardiology, University of
Louisville Louisville, KY, USA. (4)Molecular Oncology, BC Cancer Research Centre,
University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)Department of Pathology,
Children's Hospital of Los Angeles Los Angeles, CA, USA. (6)Ron Matricaria
Institute of Molecular Medicine, Phoenix Children's Hospital, University of
Arizona Phoenix, AZ, USA. (7)Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD, USA ; Medicine, Jefferson Medical College
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (8)Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD, USA ; Ron Matricaria Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Phoenix Children's Hospital, University of Arizona Phoenix,
AZ, USA.

Developmental reprogramming techniques have been used to generate induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells from both normal and malignant cells. The derivation
of iPS cells from cancer has the potential to provide a unique scientific tool to
overcome challenges associated with the establishment of cell lines from primary 
patient samples and a readily expandable source of cells that may be used to
model the initial disease. In the current study we developmentally reprogrammed a
metastatic Ewing sarcoma (EWS) cell line to a meta-stable embryonic stem
(ES)-like state sharing molecular and phenotypic features with previously
established ES and iPS cell lines. EWS-iPS cells exhibited a pronounced drug
resistant phenotype despite persistent expression of the oncogenic EWS-FLI1
fusion transcript. This included resistance to compounds that specifically target
downstream effector pathways of EWS-FLI1, such as MAPK/ERK and PI3K/AKT, which
play an important role in EWS pathogenesis. EWS-iPS cells displayed tumor
initiation abilities in vivo and formed tumors exhibiting characteristic Ewing
histopathology. In parallel, EWS-iPS cells re-differentiated in vitro recovered
sensitivity to molecularly targeted chemotherapeutic agents, which reiterated
pathophysiological features of the cells from which they were derived. These data
suggest that EWS-iPS cells may provide an expandable disease model that could be 
used to investigate processes modulating oncogenesis, metastasis, and
chemotherapeutic resistance in EWS.

PMCID: PMC4353378
PMID: 25806369  [PubMed]


92. Haematologica. 2015 Jul;100(7):e275-9. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.124305. Epub
2015 Mar 20.

Post-transplant molecularly defined Burkitt lymphomas are frequently MYC-negative
and characterized by the 11q-gain/loss pattern.

Ferreiro JF(1), Morscio J(2), Dierickx D(3), Marcelis L(2), Verhoef G(3),
Vandenberghe P(1), Tousseyn T(2), Wlodarska I(4).

Author information: 
(1)KU Leuven, University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Belgium. (2)KU
Leuven, University of Leuven, Translational Cell and Tissue Research and KU
Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Pathology, Belgium. (3)KU
Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Department of Hematology, Belgium. (4)KU
Leuven, University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Belgium
iwona.wlodarska@uzleuven.be.

PMCID: PMC4486241
PMID: 25795716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Sep;173(3):681-9. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13779. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

A possible contribution of lipocalin-2 to the development of dermal fibrosis,
pulmonary vascular involvement and renal dysfunction in systemic sclerosis.

Takahashi T(1), Asano Y(1), Noda S(1), Aozasa N(1), Akamata K(1), Taniguchi T(1),
Ichimura Y(1), Toyama T(1), Sumida H(1), Kuwano Y(1), Tada Y(1), Sugaya M(1),
Kadono T(1), Sato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lipocalin-2 is an adipocytokine implicated in apoptosis, innate
immunity, angiogenesis, and the development of chronic kidney disease.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the role of lipocalin-2 in systemic sclerosis (SSc).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Serum lipocalin-2 levels were determined by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay in 50 patients with SSc and 19 healthy subjects. Lipocalin-2 
expression was evaluated in the skin of patients with SSc and bleomycin
(BLM)-treated mice and in Fli1-deficient endothelial cells by reverse
transcriptase-real time polymerase chain reaction, immunoblotting and/or
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Although serum lipocalin-2 levels were comparable between patients with 
SSc and healthy controls, the prevalence of scleroderma renal crisis was
significantly higher in patients with SSc with elevated serum lipocalin-2 levels 
than in those with normal levels. Furthermore, serum lipocalin-2 levels inversely
correlated with estimated glomerular filtration rate in patients with SSc with
renal dysfunction. Among patients with SSc with normal renal function, serum
lipocalin-2 levels positively correlated with skin score in patients with diffuse
cutaneous SSc with disease duration of < 3 years and inversely correlated with
estimated right ventricular systolic pressure in total patients with SSc.
Importantly, in SSc lesional skin, lipocalin-2 expression was increased in dermal
fibroblasts and endothelial cells. In BLM-treated mice, lipocalin-2 was highly
expressed in dermal fibroblasts, but not in endothelial cells. On the other hand,
the deficiency of transcription factor Fli1, which is implicated in SSc
vasculopathy, induced lipocalin-2 expression in cultivated endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Lipocalin-2 may be involved in renal dysfunction and dermal fibrosis
of SSc. Dysregulated matrix metalloproteinase-9/lipocalin-2-dependent
angiogenesis due to Fli1 deficiency may contribute to the development of
pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with SSc.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 25781362  [PubMed - in process]


94. Exp Ther Med. 2015 Apr;9(4):1299-1303. Epub 2015 Jan 30.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the mesentery and ileocecum: A
report of three cases and review of the literature.

Peng L(1), Yang L(1), Wu N(1), Wu BO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, Clinical Medical School of Southern
Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is most commonly encountered in the soft
tissue or bone in children and young adults, and its involvement in the
intestines is exceedingly rare. To the best of our knowledge, eighteen cases have
been reported to date. The present study reports three cases of PNET arising in
the mesentery and ileocecum in 59- and 22-year-old males and a 36-year-old
female. Computed tomography revealed a solid mass in the lower abdomen, with
areas of cystic changes. Microscopically, the tumors were composed of small round
cells arranged in sheets and rosettes with scant cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei
and a high mitotic rate. The tumor cells were immunopositive for CD99 and FLI1.
EWS/FLI1 translocations were detected in all cases. Case 1 and case 2 underwent
tumor resection without any preoperative radiotherapy, chemotherapy or biological
therapy. Case 3 underwent tumor resection and received eight cycles of IAP
chemotherapy (2.0 mg ifosfamide, 80 mg epirubicin, 30 mg cisplatin 30mg). Case 3 
was followed up for 34 months until they succumbed to peritoneal recurrence,
whereas the other cases were not followed up. The incidence of these small
round-cell tumors in the intestinal system, their clinical and pathological
features and differential diagnosis are discussed with a review of the
literature.

PMCID: PMC4353759
PMID: 25780425  [PubMed]


95. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;21(18):4184-93. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2112. 
Epub 2015 Mar 16.

SLFN11 Is a Transcriptional Target of EWS-FLI1 and a Determinant of Drug Response
in Ewing Sarcoma.

Tang SW(1), Bilke S(2), Cao L(2), Murai J(1), Sousa FG(3), Yamade M(1), Rajapakse
V(1), Varma S(1), Helman LJ(4), Khan J(2), Meltzer PS(2), Pommier Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics Branch, NCI, 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (2)Genetics Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics Branch, NCI, 
NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. CETROGEN, PPGFARM, UFMS, Campo Grande, Brazil.
(4)Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Developmental Therapeutics
Branch, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. pommier@nih.gov.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;21(18):4033-4.

PURPOSE: SLFN11 was identified as a critical determinant of response to
DNA-targeted therapies by analyzing gene expression and drug sensitivity of
NCI-60 and CCLE datasets. However, how SLFN11 is regulated in cancer cells
remained unknown. Ewing sarcoma, which is characterized by the chimeric
transcription factor EWS-FLI1, has notably high SLFN11 expression, leading us to 
investigate whether EWS-FLI1 drives SLFN11 expression and the role of SLFN11 in
the drug response of Ewing sarcoma cells.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Binding sites of EWS-FLI1 on the SLFN11 promoter were
analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and promoter-luciferase
reporter analyses. The relationship between SLFN11 and EWS-FLI1 were further
examined in EWS-FLI1-knockdown or -overexpressing cells and in clinical tumor
samples.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1 binds near the transcription start site of SLFN11 promoter and 
acts as a positive regulator of SLFN11 expression in Ewing sarcoma cells.
EWS-FLI1-mediated SLFN11 expression is responsible for high sensitivity of Ewing 
sarcoma to camptothecin and combinations of PARP inhibitors with temozolomide.
Importantly, Ewing sarcoma patients with higher SLFN11 expression showed better
tumor-free survival rate. The correlated expression between SLFN11 and FLI1
extends to leukemia, pediatric, colon, breast, and prostate cancers. In addition,
expression of other ETS members correlates with SLFN11 in NCI-60 and CCLE
datasets, and molecular experiments demonstrate that ETS1 acts as a positive
regulator for SLFN11 expression in breast cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results imply the emerging relevance of SLFN11 as an ETS
transcription factor response gene and for therapeutic response to topoisomerase 
I inhibitors and temozolomide-PARP inhibitor combinations in ETS-activated
cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4573368 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 25779942  [PubMed - in process]


96. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119800. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119800.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptome comparisons identify new cell markers for theca interna and
granulosa cells from small and large antral ovarian follicles.

Hatzirodos N(1), Hummitzsch K(1), Irving-Rodgers HF(2), Rodgers RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, School of Paediatrics and
Reproductive Health, Robinson Research Institute, University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, 5005, Australia. (2)School of Medical Science,
Griffith University, Gold Coast, 4222, Queensland, Australia.

In studies using isolated ovarian granulosa and thecal cells it is important to
assess the degree of cross contamination. Marker genes commonly used for
granulosa cells include FSHR, CYP19A1 and AMH while CYP17A1 and INSL3 are used
for thecal cells. To increase the number of marker genes available we compared
expression microarray data from isolated theca interna with that from granulosa
cells of bovine small (n = 10 for both theca and granulosa cells; 3-5 mm) and
large (n = 4 for both theca and granulosa cells, > 9 mm) antral follicles.
Validation was conducted by qRT-PCR analyses. Known markers such as CYP19A1, FSHR
and NR5A2 and another 11 genes (LOC404103, MGARP, GLDC, CHST8, CSN2, GPX3,
SLC35G1, CA8, CLGN, FAM78A, SLC16A3) were common to the lists of the 50 most up
regulated genes in granulosa cells from both follicle sizes. The expression in
theca interna was more consistent than in granulosa cells between the two
follicle sizes. Many genes up regulated in theca interna were common to both
sizes of follicles (MGP, DCN, ASPN, ALDH1A1, COL1A2, FN1, COL3A1, OGN, APOD,
COL5A2, IGF2, NID1, LHFP, ACTA2, DUSP12, ACTG2, SPARCL1, FILIP1L, EGFLAM,
ADAMDEC1, HPGD, COL12A1, FBLN5, RAMP2, COL15A1, PLK2, COL6A3, LOXL1, RARRES1,
FLI1, LAMA2). Many of these were stromal extracellular matrix genes. MGARP, GLDC,
CHST8, GPX3 were identified as new potential markers for granulosa cells, while
FBLN5, OGN, RAMP2 were significantly elevated in the theca interna.

PMCID: PMC4361622
PMID: 25775029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119279.
eCollection 2015.

Cyclosporin a disrupts notch signaling and vascular lumen maintenance.

Pandey R(1), Botros MA(2), Nacev BA(3), Albig AR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer and Cell Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of Biology, Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America. (3)Department of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, and Medical Scientist Training Program, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biology, Boise State University, Boise, Idaho, United States of 
America.

Cyclosporin A (CSA) suppresses immune function by blocking the cyclophilin A and 
calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathways. In addition to immunosuppression, CSA has
also been shown to have a wide range of effects in the cardiovascular system
including disruption of heart valve development, smooth muscle cell
proliferation, and angiogenesis inhibition. Circumstantial evidence has suggested
that CSA might control Notch signaling which is also a potent regulator of
cardiovascular function. Therefore, the goal of this project was to determine if 
CSA controls Notch and to dissect the molecular mechanism(s) by which CSA impacts
cardiovascular homeostasis. We found that CSA blocked JAG1, but not Dll4 mediated
Notch1 NICD cleavage in transfected 293T cells and decreased Notch signaling in
zebrafish embryos. CSA suppression of Notch was linked to cyclophilin A but not
calcineurin/NFAT inhibition since N-MeVal-4-CsA but not FK506 decreased Notch1
NICD cleavage. To examine the effect of CSA on vascular development and function,
double transgenic Fli1-GFP/Gata1-RFP zebrafish embryos were treated with CSA and 
monitored for vasculogenesis, angiogenesis, and overall cardiovascular function. 
Vascular patterning was not obviously impacted by CSA treatment and contrary to
the anti-angiogenic activity ascribed to CSA, angiogenic sprouting of ISV vessels
was normal in CSA treated embryos. Most strikingly, CSA treated embryos exhibited
a progressive decline in blood flow that was associated with eventual collapse of
vascular luminal structures. Vascular collapse in zebrafish embryos was partially
rescued by global Notch inhibition with DAPT suggesting that disruption of normal
Notch signaling by CSA may be linked to vascular collapse. However, multiple
signaling pathways likely cause the vascular collapse phenotype since both
cyclophilin A and calcineurin/NFAT were required for normal vascular function.
Collectively, these results show that CSA is a novel inhibitor of Notch signaling
and vascular function in zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC4361394
PMID: 25775018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):960-6. eCollection 2015.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors of the maxillary sinus: a case report of
multidisciplinary examination enabling prompt diagnosis.

Tajima S(1), Ohkubo A(2), Yoshida M(2), Koda K(3), Nameki I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Pathology, Fujieda Municipal General Hospital
Shizuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Fujieda Municipal General
Hospital Shizuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Pathology, Fujieda Municipal General
Hospital Shizuoka, Japan.

There have been approximately 10 reports in English literature of cases of
Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) arising in the maxillary sinus. In this
location, some tumors mimic EFT, and are more frequently encountered. Herein, we 
present an additional case of an EFT originating in the maxillary sinus. The
patient was a 15-year-old boy complaining of a non-tender swelling of the left
cheek. Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. Computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging revealed a mass centered in the maxillary sinus with
degeneration of the surrounding bones. Pathological examination along with flow
cytometry and G-banding enabled the prompt diagnosis of EFT with the EWS/FLI1
fusion gene. The patient is planned to undergo chemotherapy. An origin in the
head and neck and the presence of the typical EWS/FLI1, in conjunction with an
opportunity for immediate treatment, may predict a relatively better prognosis
for EFT in our case.

PMCID: PMC4348822
PMID: 25755803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 May;211(5):415-20. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.02.003. Epub
2015 Feb 17.

Penile pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma/epithelioid sarcoma-like
hemangioendothelioma with a novel pattern of SERPINE1-FOSB fusion detected by
RT-PCR--report of a case.

Ide YH(1), Tsukamoto Y(2), Ito T(3), Watanabe T(1), Nakagawa N(3), Haneda T(3),
Nagai M(3), Yamanishi K(3), Hirota S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan. (2)Department of Surgical Pathology, Hyogo
College of Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: tsuka-y@hyo-med.ac.jp. (3)Department of Dermatology, Hyogo
College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

We experienced a rare case of penile mesenchymal tumor in a 43-year-old Japanese 
man. At least three nodules were observed around the penis. The tumors were
composed of spindle- to oval-shaped atypical cells with and without prominent
nucleoli. These cells were like myogenic cells, but negative for myogenic
markers. They were positive for endothelial markers, such as ERG, Fli1 and CD31. 
They were also positive for nuclear and cytoplasmic FOSB which are not expressed 
in epithelioid hemangioendothelioma or epithelioid sarcoma. These pathological
and immunohistochemical findings strongly suggested pseudomyogenic
hemangioendothelioma/epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma (PHE/ES-HE).
Since a recent report directly proved that two cases of PHE/ES-HE have
SERPINE1-FOSB fusion gene by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), we examined whether the fusion gene is present or not in the present
case by RT-PCR using fresh frozen surgical material. Sequencing of the PCR
product revealed that this case has SERPINE1-FOSB fusion. The fusion pattern of
our case was different from those of two previously reported cases. In our case, 
86 nucleotides of SERPINE1 intron 1 were inserted between SERPINE1 exon 1 and the
middle portion of FOSB exon 1, and a putative translation start codon was
identified in SERPINE1 intron 1. Thus, this is the third case of PHE/ES-HE with
SERPINE1-FOSB fusion proved by RT-PCR.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25749627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 17;112(11):E1307-16. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1500536112. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 is a network hub that regulates alternative
splicing.

Selvanathan SP(1), Graham GT(1), Erkizan HV(1), Dirksen U(2), Natarajan TG(3),
Dakic A(4), Yu S(4), Liu X(4), Paulsen MT(5), Ljungman ME(5), Wu CH(3), Lawlor
ER(6), Üren A(1), Toretsky JA(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20057; (2)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital
Münster, Westfalian Wilhelms University Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany;
(3)Protein Information Resource, Georgetown University and University of
Delaware, Washington, DC 20057; (4)Department of Pathology, Center for Cell
Reprogramming, Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057; and. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology and Translational Oncology Program and. (6)Departments of
Pediatrics and Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, MI 48109. 
(7)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Georgetown University, Washington, DC
20057; jat42@georgetown.edu.

The synthesis and processing of mRNA, from transcription to translation
initiation, often requires splicing of intragenic material. The final mRNA
composition varies based on proteins that modulate splice site selection.
EWS-FLI1 is an Ewing sarcoma (ES) oncoprotein with an interactome that we
demonstrate to have multiple partners in spliceosomal complexes. We evaluate the 
effect of EWS-FLI1 on posttranscriptional gene regulation using both exon array
and RNA-seq. Genes that potentially regulate oncogenesis, including CLK1, CASP3, 
PPFIBP1, and TERT, validate as alternatively spliced by EWS-FLI1. In a CLIP-seq
experiment, we find that EWS-FLI1 RNA-binding motifs most frequently occur
adjacent to intron-exon boundaries. EWS-FLI1 also alters splicing by directly
binding to known splicing factors including DDX5, hnRNP K, and PRPF6. Reduction
of EWS-FLI1 produces an isoform of <U+03B3>-TERT that has increased telomerase activity 
compared with wild-type (WT) TERT. The small molecule YK-4-279 is an inhibitor of
EWS-FLI1 oncogenic function that disrupts specific protein interactions,
including helicases DDX5 and RNA helicase A (RHA) that alters RNA-splicing
ratios. As such, YK-4-279 validates the splicing mechanism of EWS-FLI1, showing
alternatively spliced gene patterns that significantly overlap with EWS-FLI1
reduction and WT human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC). Exon array analysis of 75
ES patient samples shows similar isoform expression patterns to cell line models 
expressing EWS-FLI1, supporting the clinical relevance of our findings. These
experiments establish systemic alternative splicing as an oncogenic process
modulated by EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 modulation of mRNA splicing may provide insight
into the contribution of splicing toward oncogenesis, and, reciprocally, EWS-FLI1
interactions with splicing proteins may inform the splicing code.

PMCID: PMC4371969
PMID: 25737553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 May;39(5):691-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000412.

Small cell osteosarcoma: clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular
analysis of 36 cases.

Righi A(1), Gambarotti M, Longo S, Benini S, Gamberi G, Cocchi S, Vanel D, Picci 
P, Bertoni F, Simoni A, Franchi A, Dei Tos AP.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Rizzoli Institute Department of Biomedical and
Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna Department of Pathology, Villa Erbosa
Hospital, Bologna §Section of Pathological Anatomy, Department of Surgery and
Translational Medicine, University of Florence, Florence <U+2225>Department of
Pathology, Treviso Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

Small round cell osteosarcoma is a very rare type of osteosarcoma, histologically
mimicking other small round cell malignancies of bone, most notably Ewing
sarcoma. To distinguish small cell osteosarcoma from other primary small cell
malignancies of bone, we evaluated the immunohistochemical (IHC) expression of
CD99 and SATB2, a marker of osteoblastic differentiation. Second, we analyzed
EWSR1 and FUS gene aberrations using fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques to assess
whether small cell osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma share the same genetic
alteration analysis. Thirty-six cases of primitive small cell osteosarcoma of
bone were included in this study. All the cases of small cell osteosarcoma showed
strong nuclear expression of SATB2 associated with negativity for CD99 antibody
or weak, cytoplasmic staining in few neoplastic cells. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was negative for EWS-FLI1 type 1-2,
EWS-ERG type 1, and CIC-DUX4 in the 10 available cases of small cell osteosarcoma
analyzed. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis was feasible with a
readable signal in 13 cases of small cell osteosarcoma, and none of these cases
showed any EWSR1 and FUS gene rearrangements. In conclusion, it appears extremely
useful to combine IHC analysis of SATB2 and CD99 with molecular analysis of Ewing
sarcoma-associated genetic aberrations, to differentiate small cell osteosarcoma 
from other small round cell malignancies of bone. The strong IHC expression of
SATB2 associated with CD99 immunonegativity and the absence of EWSR1 and FUS gene
rearrangements in small cell osteosarcoma argues against the existence of a
morphologic/genetic continuum with Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 25723116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Apr;35(4):865-76. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.304768. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Etv2 and fli1b function together as key regulators of vasculogenesis and
angiogenesis.

Craig MP(1), Grajevskaja V(1), Liao HK(1), Balciuniene J(1), Ekker SC(1), Park
JS(1), Essner JJ(1), Balciunas D(1), Sumanas S(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH (M.P.C.); Division of Developmental Biology
(M.P.C., J.-S.P.), Department of Pediatrics (S.S.), Department of Pediatric
Urology (J.-S.P.), Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH; Department 
of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA (V.G., J.B., D.B.); Department of
Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa State University, Ames (H.-K.L.,
J.J.E.); Department of Zoology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Vilnius University, 
Vilnius, Lithuania (V.G.); and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (S.C.E.). (2)From the Department of Molecular and
Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH (M.P.C.);
Division of Developmental Biology (M.P.C., J.-S.P.), Department of Pediatrics
(S.S.), Department of Pediatric Urology (J.-S.P.), Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, OH; Department of Biology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA
(V.G., J.B., D.B.); Department of Genetics, Development and Cell Biology, Iowa
State University, Ames (H.-K.L., J.J.E.); Department of Zoology, Faculty of
Natural Sciences, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania (V.G.); and Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (S.C.E.).
Saulius.Sumanas@cchmc.org.

OBJECTIVE: The E26 transformation-specific domain transcription factor
Etv2/Etsrp/ER71 is a master regulator of vascular endothelial differentiation
during vasculogenesis, although its later role in sprouting angiogenesis remains 
unknown. Here, we investigated in the zebrafish model a role for Etv2 and related
E26 transformation-specific factors, Fli1a and Fli1b in developmental
angiogenesis.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Zebrafish fli1a and fli1b mutants were obtained using
transposon-mediated gene trap approach. Individual fli1a and fli1b homozygous
mutant embryos display normal vascular patterning, yet the angiogenic recovery
observed in older etv2 mutant embryos does not occur in embryos lacking both etv2
and fli1b. Etv2 and fli1b double-deficient embryos fail to form any angiogenic
sprouts and show greatly increased apoptosis throughout the axial vasculature. In
contrast, fli1a mutation did not affect the recovery of etv2 mutant phenotype.
Overexpression analyses indicate that both etv2 and fli1b, but not fli1a, induce 
the expression of multiple vascular markers and of each other. Temporal
inhibition of Etv2 function using photoactivatable morpholinos indicates that the
function of Etv2 and Fli1b during angiogenesis is independent from the early
requirement of Etv2 during vasculogenesis. RNA-Seq analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation suggest that Etv2 and Fli1b share the same transcriptional
targets and bind to the same E26 transformation-specific sites.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data argue that there are 2 phases of early vascular development
with distinct requirements of E26 transformation-specific transcription factors. 
Etv2 alone is required for early vasculogenesis, whereas Etv2 and Fli1b function 
redundantly during late vasculogenesis and early embryonic angiogenesis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4427907
PMID: 25722433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):7151-65.

High neuropeptide Y release associates with Ewing sarcoma bone dissemination - in
vivo model of site-specific metastases.

Hong SH(1), Tilan JU(2,)(3), Galli S(4), Izycka-Swieszewska E(5), Polk T(3),
Horton M(3), Mahajan A(1,)(4), Christian D(3), Jenkins S(4), Acree R(3), Connors 
K(3), Ledo P(4), Lu C(6), Lee YC(1), Rodriguez O(1), Toretsky JA(1), Albanese
C(1,)(7), Kitlinska J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA.
(2)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Health Studies, Georgetown
University, Washington DC, USA. (3)Department of Human Science, School of Nursing
and Health Studies, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown University Medical
Center, Georgetown University, Washington DC, USA. (5)Department of Pathology and
Neuropathology, Medical University of GdaÅ<U+0084>sk, Poland. (6)McGovern Institute,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Georgetown University,
Washington DC, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) develops in bones or soft tissues of children and adolescents.
The presence of bone metastases is one of the most adverse prognostic factors,
yet the mechanisms governing their formation remain unclear. As a transcriptional
target of EWS-FLI1, the fusion protein driving ES transformation, neuropeptide Y 
(NPY) is highly expressed and released from ES tumors. Hypoxia up-regulates NPY
and activates its pro-metastatic functions. To test the impact of NPY on ES
metastatic pattern, ES cell lines, SK-ES1 and TC71, with high and low peptide
release, respectively, were used in an orthotopic xenograft model. ES cells were 
injected into gastrocnemius muscles of SCID/beige mice, the primary tumors
excised, and mice monitored for the presence of metastases. SK-ES1 xenografts
resulted in thoracic extra-osseous metastases (67%) and dissemination to bone
(50%) and brain (25%), while TC71 tumors metastasized to the lungs (70%). Bone
dissemination in SK-ES1 xenografts associated with increased NPY expression in
bone metastases and its accumulation in bone invasion areas. The genetic
silencing of NPY in SK-ES1 cells reduced bone degradation. Our study supports the
role for NPY in ES bone invasion and provides new models for identifying pathways
driving ES metastases to specific niches and testing anti-metastatic
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4466675
PMID: 25714031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Mar 11;43(5):2780-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv123. Epub 2015
Feb 20.

EWS-FLI1 employs an E2F switch to drive target gene expression.

Schwentner R(1), Papamarkou T(2), Kauer MO(1), Stathopoulos V(2), Yang F(3),
Bilke S(3), Meltzer PS(3), Girolami M(2), Kovar H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna
1090, Austria. (2)Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 
7AL, UK. (3)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. 
Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna 1090, Austria Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical
University, Vienna 1090, Austria heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Cell cycle progression is orchestrated by E2F factors. We previously reported
that in ETS-driven cancers of the bone and prostate, activating E2F3 cooperates
with ETS on target promoters. The mechanism of target co-regulation remained
unknown. Using RNAi and time-resolved chromatin-immunoprecipitation in Ewing
sarcoma we report replacement of E2F3/pRB by constitutively expressed repressive 
E2F4/p130 complexes on target genes upon EWS-FLI1 modulation. Using mathematical 
modeling we interrogated four alternative explanatory models for the observed
EWS-FLI1/E2F3 cooperation based on longitudinal E2F target and regulating
transcription factor expression analysis. Bayesian model selection revealed the
formation of a synergistic complex between EWS-FLI1 and E2F3 as the by far most
likely mechanism explaining the observed kinetics of E2F target induction.
Consequently we propose that aberrant cell cycle activation in Ewing sarcoma is
due to the de-repression of E2F targets as a consequence of transcriptional
induction and physical recruitment of E2F3 by EWS-FLI1 replacing E2F4 on their
target promoters.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4357724
PMID: 25712098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 May;67(5):1335-44. doi: 10.1002/art.39062.

Endothelin receptor blockade ameliorates vascular fragility in endothelial
cell-specific Fli-1-knockout mice by increasing Fli-1 DNA binding ability.

Akamata K(1), Asano Y, Yamashita T, Noda S, Taniguchi T, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y,
Toyama T, Trojanowska M, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: It is generally accepted that blockade of endothelin receptors has
potentially beneficial effects on vasculopathy associated with systemic sclerosis
(SSc). The aim of this study was to clarify the molecular mechanism underlying
these effects using endothelial cell-specific Fli-1-knockout (Fli-1 ECKO) mice,
an animal model of SSc vasculopathy.
METHODS: Levels of messenger RNA for target genes and the expression and
phosphorylation levels of target proteins were determined in human and murine
dermal microvascular endothelial cells by real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblotting, respectively. The
binding of Fli-1 to the target gene promoters was evaluated using chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Expression levels of Fli-1 and a-smooth muscle actin in
murine skin were evaluated using immunohistochemistry. Vascular structure and
permeability were evaluated in mice injected with fluorescein
isothiocyanate-dextran and Evans blue dye, respectively.
RESULTS: In human dermal microvascular endothelial cells, endothelin 1 induced
phosphorylation of Fli-1 at Thr(312) through the sequential activation of c-Abl
and protein kinase Cd, leading to a decrease in Fli-1 protein levels as well as a
decrease in binding of Fli-1 to the target gene promoters, whereas bosentan
treatment reversed those effects. In Fli-1 ECKO mice, 4 weeks of treatment with
bosentan increased endothelial Fli-1 expression, resulting in vascular
stabilization and the restoration of impaired leaky vessels.
CONCLUSION: The vascular fragility of Fli-1 ECKO mice was improved by bosentan
through the normalization of Fli-1 protein levels and activity in endothelial
cells, which may explain, in part, the mechanism underlying the beneficial
effects of endothelin receptor blockade on SSc vasculopathy.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4784268
PMID: 25707716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Rep. 2015 Feb 24;10(7):1082-95. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.042. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

Epigenome mapping reveals distinct modes of gene regulation and widespread
enhancer reprogramming by the oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1.

Tomazou EM(1), Sheffield NC(2), Schmidl C(2), Schuster M(2), Schönegger A(2),
Datlinger P(2), Kubicek S(2), Bock C(3), Kovar H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090
Vienna, Austria. (2)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian
Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria. (3)CeMM Research Center for Molecular 
Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Max
Planck Institute for Informatics, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany. Electronic address:
cbock@cemm.oeaw.ac.at. (4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Transcription factor fusion proteins can transform cells by inducing global
changes of the transcriptome, often creating a state of oncogene addiction. Here,
we investigate the role of epigenetic mechanisms in this process, focusing on
Ewing sarcoma cells that are dependent on the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. We
established reference epigenome maps comprising DNA methylation, seven histone
marks, open chromatin states, and RNA levels, and we analyzed the epigenome
dynamics upon downregulation of the driving oncogene. Reduced EWS-FLI1 expression
led to widespread epigenetic changes in promoters, enhancers, and
super-enhancers, and we identified histone H3K27 acetylation as the most strongly
affected mark. Clustering of epigenetic promoter signatures defined classes of
EWS-FLI1-regulated genes that responded differently to low-dose treatment with
histone deacetylase inhibitors. Furthermore, we observed strong and opposing
enrichment patterns for E2F and AP-1 among EWS-FLI1-correlated and anticorrelated
genes. Our data describe extensive genome-wide rewiring of epigenetic cell states
driven by an oncogenic fusion protein.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4542316
PMID: 25704812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cesk Patol. 2015;51(1):42-6.

[Small cell type (Ewing-like) clear cell sarcoma of soft parts: a case report].

[Article in Czech]

Kinkor Z, Meciarová I, Grossman P, Vanecek T, vec A, Kokavec M.

The authors present a unique case of small cell variant of clear cell sarcoma of 
soft parts in a 42-year old woman. The tumor originally arose in the right flank 
of the soft tissues and ultimately developed both a local recurrence and multiple
distant skin metastases two years and ten months thereafter. Nonspecific
morphology of small blue round cell tumor was preserved at all microscopically
verified sites and initially led to the spectrum of erroneous diagnoses such as
an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma as well as malignant
melanoma. The distinctive features of clear cell sarcoma such as fascicular
nested growth pattern, spindling, clear cell change and/or eosinophilic cytoplasm
were not disclosed even by extensive sampling. Immunohistochemically, the tumor
expressed only S100protein and HMB45; all other markers (CD99, FLI1,
cytokeratins, EMA) were completely negative. The molecular analysis carried out
in one of the cutaneous metastases revealed translocation t(12;22) (EWSR1-ATF1)
and ultimately led to the correct diagnosis of unusual Ewing-like clear cell
sarcoma. Discussed is the implementation of molecular tests in routine
diagnostics considering the existence of both histologically and biologically
different tumors with an identical pathogenic molecular background.

PMID: 25671361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biomaterials. 2015 Mar;45:93-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2014.12.007. Epub
2015 Jan 16.

Plasma hydrogenated cationic detonation nanodiamonds efficiently deliver to human
cells in culture functional siRNA targeting the Ewing sarcoma junction oncogene.

Bertrand JR(1), Pioche-Durieu C(2), Ayala J(3), Petit T(4), Girard HA(4), Malvy
CP(3), Le Cam E(2), Treussart F(5), Arnault JC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Vectorologie et Thérapeutiques Anticancéreuses, UMR 8203 CNRS, 
Université Paris Sud, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.
Electronic address: jean-remi.bertrand@gustaveroussy.fr. (2)Signalisation, Noyaux
et Innovations en Cancérologie, UMR 8126 CNRS, Université Paris Sud, Institut
Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (3)Laboratoire de Vectorologie et
Thérapeutiques Anticancéreuses, UMR 8203 CNRS, Université Paris Sud, Institut
Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (4)CEA, LIST, Diamond Sensors
Laboratory, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. (5)Laboratoire Aimé Cotton, CNRS,
Université Paris Sud and ENS Cachan, 91405 Orsay, France. Electronic address:
francois.treussart@ens-cachan.fr. (6)CEA, LIST, Diamond Sensors Laboratory,
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. Electronic address: jean-charles.arnault@cea.fr.

The expression of a defective gene can lead to major cell dysfunctions among
which cell proliferation and tumor formation. One promising therapeutic strategy 
consists in silencing the defective gene using small interfering RNA (siRNA). In 
previous publications we showed that diamond nanocrystals (ND) of primary size
35 nm, rendered cationic by polyethyleneimine-coating, can efficiently deliver
siRNA into cell, which further block the expression of EWS/FLI-1 oncogene in a
Ewing sarcoma disease model. However, a therapeutic application of such
nanodiamonds requires their elimination by the organism, particularly in urine,
which is impossible for 35 nm particles. Here, we report that hydrogenated
cationic nanodiamonds of primary size 7 nm (ND-H) have also a high affinity for
siRNA and are capable of delivering them in cells. With siRNA/ND-H complexes, we 
measured a high inhibition efficacy of EWS/FLI-1 gene expression in Ewing sarcoma
cell line. Electron microscopy investigations showed ND-H in endocytosis
compartments, and especially in macropinosomes from which they can escape before 
siRNA degradation occurred. In addition, the association of EWS/FLI-1 silencing
by the siRNA/ND-H complex with a vincristine treatment yielded a potentiation of 
the toxic effect of this chemotherapeutic drug. Therefore ND-H appears as a
promising delivery agent in anti-tumoral gene therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25662499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dev Dyn. 2015 Apr;244(4):577-90. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24258. Epub 2015 Mar 17.

Hedgehog signaling regulates dental papilla formation and tooth size during
zebrafish odontogenesis.

Yu JC(1), Fox ZD, Crimp JL, Littleford HE, Jowdry AL, Jackman WR.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Bowdoin College, Brunswick, Maine.

BACKGROUND: Intercellular communication by the hedgehog cell signaling pathway is
necessary for tooth development throughout the vertebrates, but it remains
unclear which specific developmental signals control cell behavior at different
stages of odontogenesis. To address this issue, we have manipulated hedgehog
activity during zebrafish tooth development and visualized the results using
confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: We first established that reporter lines for dlx2b, fli1, NF-<U+03BA>B, and
prdm1a are markers for specific subsets of tooth germ tissues. We then blocked
hedgehog signaling with cyclopamine and observed a reduction or elimination of
the cranial neural crest derived dental papilla, which normally contains the
cells that later give rise to dentin-producing odontoblasts. Upon further
investigation, we observed that the dental papilla begins to form and then
regresses in the absence of hedgehog signaling, through a mechanism unrelated to 
cell proliferation or apoptosis. We also found evidence of an isometric reduction
in tooth size that correlates with the time of earliest hedgehog inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that these results reveal a previously
uncharacterized function of hedgehog signaling during tooth morphogenesis,
regulating the number of cells in the dental papilla and thereby controlling
tooth size.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4380796
PMID: 25645398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1613-25. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988048.

Overexpression of HOX genes is prevalent in Ewing sarcoma and is associated with 
altered epigenetic regulation of developmental transcription programs.

Svoboda LK(1), Harris A, Bailey NJ, Schwentner R, Tomazou E, von Levetzow C,
Magnuson B, Ljungman M, Kovar H, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)a Translational Oncology Program and the Departments of Pediatric and
Communicable Diseases; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI USA.

The polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 are highly overexpressed by Ewing sarcoma
(ES), a tumor of stem cell origin that is driven by EWS-ETS fusion oncogenes,
most commonly EWS-FLI1. In the current study we analyzed expression of
transcription programs that are controlled by polycomb proteins during embryonic 
development to determine if they are abnormal in ES. Our results show that
polycomb target gene expression in ES deviates from normal tissues and stem cells
and that, as expected, most targets are relatively repressed. However, we also
discovered a paradoxical up regulation of numerous polycomb targets and these
were highly enriched for homeobox (HOX) genes. Comparison of HOX profiles between
malignant and non-malignant tissues revealed a distinctive HOX profile in ES,
which was characterized by overexpression of posterior HOXD genes. In addition,
ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 during stem cell differentiation led to aberrant
up regulation of posterior HOXD genes. Mechanistically, this up regulation was
associated with altered epigenetic regulation. Specifically, ES and EWS-FLI1+
stem cells displayed a relative loss of polycomb-dependent H3K27me3 and gain of
trithorax-dependent H3K4me3 at the promoters of posterior HOXD genes and also at 
the HOXD11.12 polycomb response element. In addition, a striking correlation was 
evident between HOXD13 and other genes whose regulation is coordinately regulated
during embryonic development by distal enhancer elements. Together, these studies
demonstrate that epigenetic regulation of polycomb target genes, in particular
HOXD genes, is altered in ES and that these changes are mediated downstream of
EWS-FLI1.

PMCID: PMC4622732
PMID: 25625846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 24;10(1):e0116627. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116627.
eCollection 2015.

Ewing sarcoma ewsa protein regulates chondrogenesis of Meckel's cartilage through
modulation of Sox9 in zebrafish.

Merkes C(1), Turkalo TK(1), Wilder N(1), Park H(1), Wenger LW(1), Lewin SJ(1),
Azuma M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biosciences, University of Kansas, 7031 Haworth, 1200 Sunnyside
Avenue, Lawrence, KS 66045, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0123487.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common skeletal (bone and cartilage) cancer in
adolescents, and it is characterized by the expression of the aberrant chimeric
fusion gene EWS/FLI1. Wild-type EWS has been proposed to play a role in mitosis, 
splicing and transcription. We have previously shown that EWS/FLI1 interacts with
EWS, and it inhibits EWS activity in a dominant manner. Ewing sarcoma is a cancer
that specifically develops in skeletal tissues, and although the above data
suggests the significance of EWS, its role in chondrogenesis/skeletogenesis is
not understood. To elucidate the function of EWS in skeletal development, we
generated and analyzed a maternal zygotic (MZ) ewsa/ewsa line because the ewsa/wt
and ewsa/ewsa zebrafish appeared to be normal and fertile. Compared with wt/wt,
the Meckel's cartilage of MZ ewsa/ewsa mutants had a higher number of
craniofacial prehypertrophic chondrocytes that failed to mature into hypertrophic
chondrocytes at 4 days post-fertilization (dpf). Ewsa interacted with Sox9, which
is the master transcription factor for chondrogenesis. Sox9 target genes were
either upregulated (ctgfa, ctgfb, col2a1a, and col2a1b) or downregulated (sox5,
nog1, nog2, and bmp4) in MZ ewsa/ewsa embryos compared with the wt/wt zebrafish
embryos. Among these Sox9 target genes, the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
experiment demonstrated that Ewsa directly binds to ctgfa and ctgfb loci.
Consistently, immunohistochemistry showed that the Ctgf protein is upregulated in
the Meckel's cartilage of MZ ewsa/ewsa mutants. Together, we propose that Ewsa
promotes the differentiation from prehypertrophic chondrocytes to hypertrophic
chondrocytes of Meckel's cartilage through inhibiting Sox9 binding site of the
ctgf gene promoter. Because Ewing sarcoma specifically develops in skeletal
tissue that is originating from chondrocytes, this new role of EWS may provide a 
potential molecular basis of its pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4305327
PMID: 25617839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Mar 15;21(6):1373-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1688.
Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Trabectedin efficacy in Ewing sarcoma is greatly increased by combination with
anti-IGF signaling agents.

Amaral AT(1), Garofalo C(2), Frapolli R(3), Manara MC(2), Mancarella C(2), Uboldi
S(3), Di Giandomenico S(3), Ordóñez JL(1), Sevillano V(1), Malaguarnera R(4),
Picci P(2), Hassan AB(5), De Alava E(1), D'Incalci M(3), Scotlandi K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocio/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Department of Pathology, Seville, Spain.
(2)Experimental Oncology Lab, CRS Development of Biomolecular Therapies, Rizzoli 
Institute, Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Oncology IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche
Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy. (4)Department of Health, University of 
Catanzaro, Catanzaro, Italy. (5)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (6)Experimental Oncology Lab, CRS Development 
of Biomolecular Therapies, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy.
katia.scotlandi@ior.it.

PURPOSE: Goal of this study was to identify mechanisms that limit efficacy of
trabectedin (ET-743, Yondelis) in Ewing sarcoma (EWS), so as to develop a
clinical applicable combination therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: By chromatin immunoprecipitation, we analyzed EWS-FLI1
binding to the promoters of several target genes, such as TGFßR2, CD99,
insulin-like growth factor receptor 1 (IGF1R), and IGF1, both in vitro and in
xenografts treated with trabectedin or doxorubicin. Combined therapy with
trabectedin and anti-IGF1R agents (AVE1642 HAb; OSI-906) was tested in vitro and 
in xenografts.
RESULTS: We confirm that both trabectedin and doxorubicin were able to strongly
reduce EWS-FLI1 (both type I and type II) binding to two representative target
genes (TGFßR2 and CD99), both in vitro and in xenografts. However, trabectedin,
but not doxorubicin, was also able to increase the occupancy of EWS-FLI1 to IGF1R
promoters, leading to IGF1R upregulation. Inhibition of IGF1R either by the
specific AVE1642 human antibody or by the dual IGF1R/insulin receptor inhibitor
OSI-906 (Linsitinib) greatly potentiate the efficacy of trabectedin in the 13 EWS
cell lines here considered as well as in TC-71 and 6647 xenografts. Combined
therapy induced synergistic cytotoxic effects. Trabectedin and OSI-906 deliver
complementary messages that likely converge on DNA-damage response and repair
pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that trabectedin may not only inhibit but also enhance the
binding of EWS-FLI1 to certain target genes, leading to upregulation of IGF1R. We
here provide the rationale for combining trabectedin to anti-IGF1R inhibitors.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25609059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Pharm Res. 2015 Jun;32(6):2003-14. doi: 10.1007/s11095-014-1593-y. Epub 2015 Jan 
22.

Exosome delivered anticancer drugs across the blood-brain barrier for brain
cancer therapy in Danio rerio.

Yang T(1), Martin P, Fogarty B, Brown A, Schurman K, Phipps R, Yin VP, Lockman P,
Bai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Husson
University, Bangor, Maine, 04401, USA.

PURPOSE: The blood-brain barrier (BBB) essentially restricts therapeutic drugs
from entering into the brain. This study tests the hypothesis that brain
endothelial cell derived exosomes can deliver anticancer drug across the BBB for 
the treatment of brain cancer in a zebrafish (Danio rerio) model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four types of exosomes were isolated from brain cell
culture media and characterized by particle size, morphology, total protein, and 
transmembrane protein markers. Transport mechanism, cell uptake, and cytotoxicity
of optimized exosome delivery system were tested. Brain distribution of exosome
delivered anticancer drugs was evaluated using transgenic zebrafish TG (fli1:
GFP) embryos and efficacies of optimized formations were examined in a
xenotransplanted zebrafish model of brain cancer model.
RESULTS: Four exosomes in 30-100 diameters showed different morphologies and
exosomes derived from brain endothelial cells expressed more CD63 tetraspanins
transmembrane proteins. Optimized exosomes increased the uptake of fluorescent
marker via receptor mediated endocytosis and cytotoxicity of anticancer drugs in 
cancer cells. Images of the zebrafish showed exosome delivered anticancer drugs
crossed the BBB and entered into the brain. In the brain cancer model, exosome
delivered anticancer drugs significantly decreased fluorescent intensity of
xenotransplanted cancer cells and tumor growth marker.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain endothelial cell derived exosomes could be potentially used as
a carrier for brain delivery of anticancer drug for the treatment of brain
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4520542
PMID: 25609010  [PubMed - in process]


114. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jan 22;15:16. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1017-3.

Ewing sarcoma of the liver with multilocular cystic mass formation: a case
report.

Ozaki Y(1), Miura Y(2), Koganemaru S(3), Suyama K(4), Inoshita N(5), Fujii T(6), 
Hashimoto M(7), Tamura T(8), Takeuchi K(9), Takano T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. 1755ozaki@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
yujmiura@mac.com. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2
Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. shigehiro_koganemaru@yahoo.co.jp.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. kou_susan@yahoo.co.jp. (5)Department of
Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. inonao3939@gmail.com. (6)Department 
of Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tkshfj@gmail.com. (7)Department
of Digestive Surgery, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
masaji.hashimoto@gmail.com. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tetsu-t@toranomon.gr.jp. (9)Department of
Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
ktakeuchi@toranomon.gr.jp. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon
Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
takano@toranomon.gr.jp.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a rare tumor that occurs commonly in the long bones 
of children or adolescents that can also arise in soft tissues including the
extremities, retroperitoneum, chest wall, and rarely in the liver as primary
sites. We report a case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and, to
our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma occurring in the
liver.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 27-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with sudden onset
right upper abdominal pain. Clinical examination revealed a multilocular cystic
mass consisting of thickened, irregular septa and nodal walls in the right
hepatic lobe. Ultrasound-guided aspiration biopsy of the liver mass showed
clusters of small atypical round cells and the clinical preoperative diagnosis
was mucinous cystadenoma of the liver. The patient underwent an extended right
hepatectomy and histopathological findings revealed sheet-like proliferation of
small- to medium-sized round cells. Tumor cells were positive for periodic
acid-Schiff reaction and immunoreactive for glycoprotein C99 and gene NKX2.2, as 
well as the neuroendocrine markers, CD56 and synaptophysin. EWS-FLI-1 fusion
transcript type 1 was detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. Pathological and molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and the patient received adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy with vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, alternating
with ifosfamide and etoposide. We found no evidence of recurrence 15 months after
completing chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: We present an extremely rare case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily 
in the liver. To our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma
occurring in the liver, and the first case with a multilocular cystic liver mass.
Imaging examinations of the other three reported cases showed solid tumors and a 
diffuse enlarged liver without mass lesion. Clinicians should consider the
possibility of Ewing sarcoma in young patients with a multilocular cystic mass
with thick and/or irregular cyst walls in the liver.

PMCID: PMC4307901
PMID: 25608963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 20;10(1):e0116895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116895.
eCollection 2015.

Variable expression of PIK3R3 and PTEN in Ewing Sarcoma impacts oncogenic
phenotypes.

Niemeyer BF(1), Parrish JK(1), Spoelstra NS(1), Joyal T(1), Richer JK(1),
Jedlicka P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0120830.

Ewing Sarcoma is an aggressive malignancy of bone and soft tissue affecting
children and young adults. Ewing Sarcoma is driven by EWS/Ets fusion
oncoproteins, which cause widespread alterations in gene expression in the cell. 
Dysregulation of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, particularly involving
IGF-1R, also plays an important role in Ewing Sarcoma pathogenesis. However, the 
basis of this dysregulation, including the relative contribution of
EWS/Ets-dependent and independent mechanisms, is not well understood. In the
present study, we identify variable expression of two modifiers of PI3K signaling
activity, PIK3R3 and PTEN, in Ewing Sarcoma, and examine the consequences of this
on PI3K pathway regulation and oncogenic phenotypes. Our findings indicate that
PIK3R3 plays a growth-promotional role in Ewing Sarcoma, but suggest that this
role is not strictly dependent on regulation of PI3K pathway activity. We further
show that expression of PTEN, a well-established, potent tumor suppressor, is
lost in a subset of Ewing Sarcomas, and that this loss strongly correlates with
high baseline PI3K pathway activity in cell lines. In support of functional
importance of PTEN loss in Ewing Sarcoma, we show that re-introduction of PTEN
into two different PTEN-negative Ewing Sarcoma cell lines results in
downregulation of PI3K pathway activity, and sensitization to the IGF-1R small
molecule inhibitor OSI-906. Our findings also suggest that PTEN levels may
contribute to sensitivity of Ewing Sarcoma cells to the microtubule inhibitor
vincristine, a relevant chemotherapeutic agent in this cancer. Our studies thus
identify PIK3R3 and PTEN as modifiers of oncogenic phenotypes in Ewing Sarcoma,
with potential clinical implications.

PMCID: PMC4300218
PMID: 25603314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Int J Stroke. 2015 Feb;10(2):E19-20. doi: 10.1111/ijs.12407.

Multiple cerebral hemorrhages associated with Friend leukemia integration 1
(FLI1) positive cardiac angiosarcoma and left atrial thrombi.

Lee WJ(1), Lim JS, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea.

PMID: 25598032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 16;5:7826. doi: 10.1038/srep07826.

Somatic chromosomal translocation between Ewsr1 and Fli1 loci leads to dilated
cardiomyopathy in a mouse model.

Tanaka M(1), Yamaguchi S(1), Yamazaki Y(1), Kinoshita H(2), Kuwahara K(2), Nakao 
K(2), Jay PY(3), Noda T(4), Nakamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (2)Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, 54
Kawaracho Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Departments of Pediatrics 
and Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S Euclid Avenue, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, U.S.A. (4)Division of Cell Biology, The Cancer Institute,
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-8-31 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, 
Japan.

A mouse model that recapitulates the human Ewing's sarcoma-specific chromosomal
translocation was generated utilizing the Cre/loxP-mediated recombination
technique. A cross between Ewsr1-loxP and Fli1-loxP mice and expression of
ubiquitous Cre recombinase induced a specific translocation between Ewsr1 and
Fli1 loci in systemic organs of both adult mice and embryos. As a result
Ewsr1-Fli1 fusion transcripts were expressed, suggesting a functional Ews-Fli1
protein might be synthesized in vivo. However, by two years of age, none of the
Ewsr1-loxP/Fli1-loxP/CAG-Cre (EFCC) mice developed any malignancies, including
Ewing-like small round cell sarcoma. Unexpectedly, all the EFCC mice suffered
from dilated cardiomyopathy and died of chronic cardiac failure. Genetic
recombination between Ewsr1 and Fli1 was confirmed in the myocardial tissue and
apoptotic cell death of cardiac myocytes was observed at significantly higher
frequency in EFCC mice. Moreover, expression of Ews-Fli1 in the cultured cardiac 
myocytes induced apoptosis. Collectively, these results indicated that ectopic
expression of the Ews-Fli1 oncogene stimulated apoptotic signals, and suggested
an important relationship between oncogenic signals and cellular context in the
cell-of-origin of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 25591392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):1069-80. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1328. Epub 2015
Jan 6.

RNA helicase A activity is inhibited by oncogenic transcription factor EWS-FLI1.

Erkizan HV(1), Schneider JA(2), Sajwan K(2), Graham GT(2), Griffin B(3),
Chasovskikh S(4), Youbi SE(2), Kallarakal A(2), Chruszcz M(5), Padmanabhan R(3), 
Casey JL(3), Üren A(2), Toretsky JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research Building E316, Washington, DC
20007, USA hve2@georgetown.edu. (2)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Georgetown University, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research
Building E316, Washington, DC 20007, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Georgetown University Medical Center, SW 309 Med-Dent, Washington, DC
20007, USA. (4)Department of Radiation Medicine, Georgetown University Medical
Center, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, New Research Building E220, Washington, DC 20007,
USA. (5)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of South Carolina,
631 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

RNA helicases impact RNA structure and metabolism from transcription through
translation, in part through protein interactions with transcription factors.
However, there is limited knowledge on the role of transcription factor influence
upon helicase activity. RNA helicase A (RHA) is a DExH-box RNA helicase that
plays multiple roles in cellular biology, some functions requiring its activity
as a helicase while others as a protein scaffold. The oncogenic transcription
factor EWS-FLI1 requires RHA to enable Ewing sarcoma (ES) oncogenesis and growth;
a small molecule, YK-4-279 disrupts this complex in cells. Our current study
investigates the effect of EWS-FLI1 upon RHA helicase activity. We found that
EWS-FLI1 reduces RHA helicase activity in a dose-dependent manner without
affecting intrinsic ATPase activity; however, the RHA kinetics indicated a
complex model. Using separated enantiomers, only (S)-YK-4-279 reverses the
EWS-FLI1 inhibition of RHA helicase activity. We report a novel RNA binding
property of EWS-FLI1 leading us to discover that YK-4-279 inhibition of RHA
binding to EWS-FLI1 altered the RNA binding profile of both proteins. We conclude
that EWS-FLI1 modulates RHA helicase activity causing changes in overall
transcriptome processing. These findings could lead to both enhanced
understanding of oncogenesis and provide targets for therapy.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333382
PMID: 25564528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Mar;30:225-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.12.034. Epub
2015 Jan 3.

Wound healing genes and susceptibility to cutaneous leishmaniasis in Brazil: role
of COL1A1.

Almeida L(1), Oliveira J(2), Guimarães LH(3), Carvalho EM(4), Blackwell JM(5),
Castellucci L(6).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Science and Technology in Tropical Diseases, Brazil and 
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. Electronic address:
lucasfedrigo@hotmail.com. (2)National Institute of Science and Technology in
Tropical Diseases, Brazil and Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
Electronic address: joycemouraoliveira@yahoo.com.br. (3)National Institute of
Science and Technology in Tropical Diseases, Brazil and Federal University of
Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. Electronic address: luizhenriquesg@yahoo.com.br.
(4)National Institute of Science and Technology in Tropical Diseases, Brazil and 
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. Electronic address: edgar@ufba.br.
(5)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western
Australia, Australia; Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Department of 
Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK.
Electronic address: jmb37@cam.ac.uk. (6)National Institute of Science and
Technology in Tropical Diseases, Brazil and Federal University of Bahia,
Salvador, Brazil. Electronic address: leacastel@hotmail.com.

Previous studies have demonstrated a role for wound healing genes in resolution
of cutaneous lesions caused by Leishmania spp. in both mice and humans, including
the gene FLI1 encoding Friend leukemia virus integration 1. Reduction of Fli1
expression in mice has been shown to result in up-regulation of collagen type I
alpha 1 (Col1a1) and alpha 2 (Col1a2) genes and, conversely, in down-regulation
of the matrix metalloproteinase 1 (Mmp1) gene, suggesting that Fli1 suppression
is involved in activation of the profibrotic gene program. Here we examined
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes as risk factors for
cutaneous (CL) and mucosal leishmaniasis (ML), and leishmaniasis per se, caused
by L. braziliensis in humans. SNPs were genotyped in 168 nuclear families (250
CL; 87 ML cases) and replicated in 157 families (402 CL; 39 ML cases).
Family-based association tests (FBAT) showed the strongest association between
SNPs rs1061237 (combined P=0.002) and rs2586488 (combined P=0.027) at COL1A1 and 
CL disease. This contributes to our further understanding of the role of wound
healing in the resolution of CL disease, providing potential for therapies
modulating COL1A1 via drugs acting on FLI1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315723
PMID: 25562121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3565-72. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2993-7. Epub 2014
Dec 28.

Overexpression of ETV4 is associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer:
involvement of uPA/uPAR and MMPs.

Qi M(1), Liu Z, Shen C, Wang L, Zeng J, Wang C, Li C, Fu W, Sun Y, Han B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shandong University Medical School, Jinan, 250012,
China.

ETS gene fusions involving ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 define a distinct
class of prostate cancer (PCa), and this might have a bearing on diagnosis,
prognosis, and rational therapeutic targeting. In the current study, we focused
on the clinicopathological significance of ETV4 in Chinese PCa patients and the
mechanisms whereby ETV4 overexpression mediates tumor invasion in the prostate.
Overall, ETV4 overexpression was identified in 30.4 % (45/148) of PCa cases by
immunohistochemistry. Accordingly, ETV4 was rearranged in only 1.6 % (2/128) of
PCa patients. Clinically, ETV4 overexpression was significantly correlated with
Gleason score (P = 0.045) and pathological tumor stage (P = 0.041). Multivariate 
Cox regression analysis indicated that ETV4 is an unfavorable independent
prognostic factor (P = 0.040). Functional studies further showed that small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of ETV4 significantly decreases proliferation
and invasion of PC-3 cell and partially reverses epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in vitro. Notably, ETV4 knockdown significantly downregulated
expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) and its receptor (uPAR) at
messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that ETV4 regulates uPA expression through direct binding to its
promoter region. Additionally, ETV4 knockdown was also observed to significantly 
inhibit expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9. In conclusion, 
for the first time, our study suggested that ETV4 is an independent poor
prognostic factor in Chinese PCa patients. Silencing of ETV4 suppresses invasion 
of PCa cells by inhibiting the expression of uPA/uPAR as well as MMPs. Further
studies will be needed to determine whether ETV4 could be regarded as a potential
target for the management and prevention of PCa.

PMID: 25544710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):160-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1413234112. 
Epub 2014 Dec 24.

ETS transcription factor ETV2 directly converts human fibroblasts into functional
endothelial cells.

Morita R(1), Suzuki M(2), Kasahara H(2), Shimizu N(2), Shichita T(3), Sekiya
T(2), Kimura A(2), Sasaki K(4), Yasukawa H(4), Yoshimura A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology
Program, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan;
rimpeim@a7.keio.jp yoshimura@a6.keio.jp. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan; (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology Program, Japan Science and
Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan; PRESTO (Precursory Research for
Embryonic Science and Technology), Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan; and.
(4)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Kurume
University School of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.

Transplantation of endothelial cells (ECs) is a promising therapeutic approach
for ischemic disorders. In addition, the generation of ECs has become
increasingly important for providing vascular plexus to regenerated organs, such 
as the liver. Although many attempts have been made to generate ECs from
pluripotent stem cells and nonvascular cells, the minimum number of transcription
factors that specialize in directly inducing vascular ECs remains undefined.
Here, by screening 18 transcription factors that are important for both
endothelial and hematopoietic development, we demonstrate that ets variant 2
(ETV2) alone directly converts primary human adult skin fibroblasts into
functional vascular endothelial cells (ETVECs). In coordination with endogenous
FOXC2 in fibroblasts, transduced ETV2 elicits expression of multiple key
endothelial development factors, including FLI1, ERG, and TAL1, and induces
expression of endothelial functional molecules, including EGFL7 and von
Willebrand factor. Consequently, ETVECs exhibits EC characteristics in vitro and 
forms mature functional vasculature in Matrigel plugs transplanted in NOD SCID
mice. Furthermore, ETVECs significantly improve blood flow recovery in a hind
limb ischemic model using BALB/c-nu mice. Our study indicates that the creation
of ETVECs provides further understanding of human EC development induced by ETV2.

PMCID: PMC4291653
PMID: 25540418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2015 Jul;54(7):1308-16. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keu479. 
Epub 2014 Dec 23.

Increased expression of chemerin in endothelial cells due to Fli1 deficiency may 
contribute to the development of digital ulcers in systemic sclerosis.

Akamata K(1), Asano Y(2), Taniguchi T(1), Yamashita T(1), Saigusa R(1), Nakamura 
K(1), Noda S(1), Aozasa N(1), Toyama T(1), Takahashi T(1), Ichimura Y(1), Sumida 
H(1), Tada Y(1), Sugaya M(1), Kadono T(1), Sato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: Chemerin is a member of adipocytokines with a chemoattractant effect 
on plasmacytoid dendritic cells and macrophages and pro-angiogenic properties. We
investigated the potential role of chemerin in the development of SSc.
METHODS: Chemerin expression was evaluated by immunostaining and/or real-time
quantitative RT-PCR in human and murine skin. The mechanisms regulating chemerin 
expression in dermal fibroblasts and endothelial cells were examined using the
gene silencing technique and chromatin immunoprecipitation. Serum chemerin levels
were determined by ELISA in 64 SSc patients and 19 healthy subjects.
RESULTS: In SSc lesional skin, chemerin was up-regulated in small blood vessels, 
while it was down-regulated in fibroblasts surrounded with thickened collagen
bundles. The decreased expression of chemerin was significantly reversed by
TGF-ß1 antisense oligonucleotide in cultured SSc dermal fibroblasts and chemerin 
expression was markedly decreased in dermal fibroblasts of bleomycin-treated
mice. Gene silencing of transcription factor Fli1, which binds to the chemerin
promoter, induced chemerin expression in human dermal microvascular endothelial
cells and Fli1(+/-) mice exhibited elevated chemerin expression in dermal blood
vessels. Serum chemerin levels inversely correlated with estimated glomerular
filtration rate in SSc patients with renal dysfunction. In SSc patients with
normal renal function, patients with digital ulcers had higher serum chemerin
levels than those without.
CONCLUSION: Chemerin is down-regulated in SSc dermal fibroblasts by autocrine
TGF-ß, while it is up-regulated in SSc dermal blood vessels through endothelial
Fli1 deficiency. Increased chemerin expression in dermal blood vessels may be
associated with the development of digital ulcers in SSc.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25539827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Ann Pathol. 2015 Jan;35(1):86-97. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2014.11.001. Epub 2014
Dec 18.

[Ewing/PNET sarcoma family of tumors: towards a new paradigm?].

[Article in French]

Renard C(1), Ranchère-Vince D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biopathologie, centre Léon-Bérard, 28, rue Laennec, 69373 Lyon 
cedex 8, France. Electronic address: caroline.renard@lyon.unicancer.fr.
(2)Département de biopathologie, centre Léon-Bérard, 28, rue Laennec, 69373 Lyon 
cedex 8, France.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors are mainly aggressive sarcomas of bone and also
arising in soft tissues, which share common features: morphological features of
basophilic round cell tumors, immunohistochemical features by expression of
membrane CD99 protein, and genetic features with a translocation involving EWS
and FLI1 in approximately 90% of cases. The discovery of this translocation has
made it possible to unify in a single entity several lesions such as PNET,
neuropitheliomas, Askin tumors, Ewing sarcomas Since then, the extensive use of 
molecular/genetic methods has helped to identify an increasing number of
molecular anomalies in unclassified round cell sarcomas, these sarcomas often
harboring an atypical morphology and a less frequent CD99 positivity. Besides the
rearrangements between the FET family of genes (EWS or FUS) and the wide ETS
family of genes (FLI1, ERG, FEV, ETV), new partner genes are gradually
identified: cases with EWS-non ETS partners are extremely rare, but there are
more important groups which are CIC-DUX4 and BCOR-CCNB3 translocation-positive
sarcomas. These findings raise the problem of the nosological borders of the
Ewing/PNET entity and its links with new "Ewing-like" groups of tumors, and raise
the therapeutic problems. The forward-looking identification of new round cell
sarcomas should enable studies of wider series to try to answer these questions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25534668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Apr;24(4):256-7. doi: 10.1111/exd.12619. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Fli1 deficiency and beyond: a unique pathway linking peripheral vasculopathy and 
dermal fibrosis in systemic sclerosis.

Manetti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Anatomy and Histology, Department of Experimental and Clinical
Medicine, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

Comment on
    Exp Dermatol. 2015 Feb;24(2):127-32.

PMID: 25529866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):595-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.016. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

ChIP-ping away at EWS/ETS transcription networks.

Denny CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
cdenny@ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):668-81.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Riggi and colleagues use a genomic approach to
define two distinct molecular mechanisms through which the chimeric EWS/FLI1
oncoprotein regulates target genes in Ewing sarcoma, expanding a framework upon
which to model the target gene network and test strategies for antagonizing
growth of this tumor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25517742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 12;5:5797. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6797.

Simultaneous downregulation of KLF5 and Fli1 is a key feature underlying systemic
sclerosis.

Noda S(1), Asano Y(1), Nishimura S(2), Taniguchi T(1), Fujiu K(3), Manabe I(4),
Nakamura K(1), Yamashita T(1), Saigusa R(1), Akamata K(1), Takahashi T(1),
Ichimura Y(1), Toyama T(1), Tsuruta D(5), Trojanowska M(6), Nagai R(7), Sato
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, the University of Tokyo Graduate School of
Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (2)1] Department of
Cardiovascular Medicine, the University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan [2] Translational Systems Biology
and Medicine Initiative, the University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8655, Japan [3] Research Division of Cell and Molecular Medicine, Center for 
Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke-shi,
Tochigi 329-0498, Japan. (3)1] Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the
University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8655, Japan [2] Translational Systems Biology and Medicine Initiative, the
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (4)Department
of Cardiovascular Medicine, the University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (5)Department of Dermatology,
Osaka City University Graduate School of Medicine, 1-4-3, Asahi-cho, Abeno-ku,
Osaka 545-8585, Japan. (6)Arthritis Center, Rheumatology, Boston University
School of Medicine, 72 East Concord St, E-5, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.
(7)1] Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, the University of Tokyo Graduate
School of Medicine, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan [2] Research
Division of Cell and Molecular Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi
Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke-shi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is manifested by fibrosis, vasculopathy and immune
dysregulation. So far, a unifying hypothesis underpinning these pathological
events remains unknown. Given that SSc is a multifactorial disease caused by both
genetic and environmental factors, we focus on the two transcription factors,
which modulate the fibrotic reaction and are epigenetically suppressed in SSc
dermal fibroblasts, Friend leukaemia integration 1 (Fli1) and Krüppel-like factor
5 (KLF5). In addition to the Fli1 silencing-dependent collagen induction, the
simultaneous knockdown of Fli1 and KLF5 synergistically enhances expression of
connective tissue growth factor. Notably, mice with double heterozygous
deficiency of Klf5 and Fli1 mimicking the epigenetic phenotype of SSc skin
spontaneously recapitulate all the three features of SSc, including fibrosis and 
vasculopathy of the skin and lung, B-cell activation and autoantibody production.
These studies implicate the epigenetic downregulation of Fli1 and KLF5 as a
central event triggering the pathogenic triad of SSc.

PMCID: PMC4268882
PMID: 25504335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(15):2391-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.29337.

Ewing sarcoma EWS protein regulates midzone formation by recruiting Aurora B
kinase to the midzone.

Park H(1), Turkalo TK, Nelson K, Folmsbee SS, Robb C, Roper B, Azuma M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Biosciences; University of Kansas; Lawrence, KS USA.

Ewing sarcoma is a malignant bone cancer that primarily occurs in children and
adolescents. Eighty-five percent of Ewing sarcoma is characterized by the
presence of the aberrant chimeric EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. Previously, we
demonstrated that an interaction between EWS/FLI1 and wild-type EWS led to the
inhibition of EWS activity and mitotic dysfunction. Although defective mitosis is
considered to be a critical step in cancer initiation, it is unknown how
interference with EWS contributes to Ewing sarcoma formation. Here, we
demonstrate that EWS/FLI1- and EWS-knockdown cells display a high incidence of
defects in the midzone, a midline structure located between segregating
chromatids during anaphase. Defects in the midzone can lead to the failure of
cytokinesis and can result in the induction of aneuploidy. The similarity among
the phenotypes of EWS/FLI1- and EWS siRNA-transfected HeLa cells points to the
inhibition of EWS as the key mechanism for the induction of midzone defects.
Supporting this observation, the ectopic expression of EWS rescues the high
incidence of midzone defects observed in Ewing sarcoma A673 cells. We discovered 
that EWS interacts with Aurora B kinase, and that EWS is also required for
recruiting Aurora B to the midzone. A domain analysis revealed that the R565 in
the RGG3 domain of EWS is essential for both Aurora B interaction and the
recruitment of Aurora B to the midzone. Here, we propose that the impairment of
EWS-dependent midzone formation via the recruitment of Aurora B is a potential
mechanism of Ewing sarcoma development.

PMCID: PMC4128884
PMID: 25483190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. FEBS Open Bio. 2014 Oct 16;4:987-95. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2014.10.007. eCollection 
2014.

Anticancer drug mithramycin interacts with core histones: An additional mode of
action of the DNA groove binder.

Banerjee A(1), Sanyal S(1), Kulkarni KK(2), Jana K(3), Roy S(4), Das C(1),
Dasgupta D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biophysics & Structural Genomics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, 
Block-AF, Sector-1, Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700064, West Bengal, India. (2)Bionivid
Technology Pvt Ltd, Kasturi Nagar, Bangalore 560043, India. (3)Division of
Molecular Medicine, Centre for Translational Animal Research, Bose Institute,
P-1/12 C.I.T. Scheme VIIM, Kolkata 700054, West Bengal, India. (4)Structural
Biology and Bioinformatics, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, 4, Raja S.C.
Mullick Road, Kolkata 700032, West Bengal, India.

Mithramycin (MTR) is a clinically approved DNA-binding antitumor antibiotic
currently in Phase 2 clinical trials at National Institutes of Health for
treatment of osteosarcoma. In view of the resurgence in the studies of this
generic antibiotic as a human medicine, we have examined the binding properties
of MTR with the integral component of chromatin - histone proteins - as a part of
our broad objective to classify DNA-binding molecules in terms of their ability
to bind chromosomal DNA alone (single binding mode) or both histones and
chromosomal DNA (dual binding mode). The present report shows that besides DNA,
MTR also binds to core histones present in chromatin and thus possesses the
property of dual binding in the chromatin context. In contrast to the MTR-DNA
interaction, association of MTR with histones does not require obligatory
presence of bivalent metal ion like Mg(2+). As a consequence of its ability to
interact with core histones, MTR inhibits histone H3 acetylation at lysine 18, an
important signature of active chromatin, in vitro and ex vivo. Reanalysis of
microarray data of Ewing sarcoma cell lines shows that upon MTR treatment there
is a significant down regulation of genes, possibly implicating a repression of
H3K18Ac-enriched genes apart from DNA-binding transcription factors. Association 
of MTR with core histones and its ability to alter post-translational
modification of histone H3 clearly indicates an additional mode of action of this
anticancer drug that could be implicated in novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4247356
PMID: 25473595  [PubMed]


129. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015 Dec;22 Suppl 3:1419-27. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-4277-2. Epub
2014 Dec 4.

Clinical Relevance of Plasma DNA Methylation in Colorectal Cancer Patients
Identified by Using a Genome-Wide High-Resolution Array.

Lin PC(1), Lin JK(2,)(3), Lin CH(4), Lin HH(2,)(3), Yang SH(2,)(3), Jiang
JK(2,)(3), Chen WS(2,)(3), Chou CC(5), Tsai SF(6,)(7), Chang SC(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Yang-Ming Branch, Taipei City Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Faculty of Medicine, School 
of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Division of
Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan,
Taiwan. (5)Department of Life Sciences and Genome Research Center and Institute
of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Division of
Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan,
Taiwan. petsai@nhri.org.tw. (7)Department of Life Sciences and Genome Research
Center and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan. petsai@nhri.org.tw. (8)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Department
of Surgery, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
changsc@vghtpe.gov.tw. (9)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. changsc@vghtpe.gov.tw.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a potential tumor marker for several cancers,
including colorectal cancer (CRC), because of its heritable and stable
characteristics.
METHODS: Using a high-resolution, genome-wide approach, we epigenotyped
>450,000 CpG sites in tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues from 23 microsatellite
instability (MSI)/microsatellite stability (MSS) CRC cases. Using matrix-assisted
laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry, the methylation
status of five frequently hypermethylated genes were confirmed in 75 independent 
CRC series and 353 CRC patients with available plasma.
RESULTS: Compared with non-tumor tissues, 13 MSI tumors had 34,836 (7 %) aberrant
methylation sites, 87 % of which were hypermethylated. In contrast, only 9,806
(2 %) differentially methylated sites were identified in ten MSS cases (62 %
hypermethylated). In both MSI and MSS, 228 promoter-associated CpG islands were
hypermethylated, with AGBL4, ZNF625, MDFI, TWIST1, and FLI1 being most frequently
hypermethylated. In an independent set of 35 MSI and 40 MSS cases, the
methylation status of these five genes significantly differed between tumor and
adjacent non-tumor tissues. Of 353 CRC patients, 230 (65.2 %), 232 (65.7 %), and 
247 (70.0 %) had AGBL4, FLI1, and TWIST1 promoter hypermethylation in circulating
cell-free DNA, respectively. In patients without metastasis, the sensitivity of
any two or three hypermethylation markers was 52.8-57.8 and 27.9-38.9 %,
respectively. The sensitivity of any two or three markers was significantly high 
in patients with stage IV disease (73.0 and 55.6 %, respectively). The prognostic
value of these epimarkers was inconclusive.
CONCLUSION: DNA methylation patterns differed in CRC subtypes. The identified
hypermethylation markers in CRC patients may have good sensitivity in different
CRC stages.

PMID: 25472652  [PubMed - in process]


130. Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):668-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2014.10.004. Epub
2014 Oct 30.

EWS-FLI1 utilizes divergent chromatin remodeling mechanisms to directly activate 
or repress enhancer elements in Ewing sarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Knoechel B(2), Gillespie SM(3), Rheinbay E(1), Boulay G(1), Suvà
ML(1), Rossetti NE(4), Boonseng WE(4), Oksuz O(4), Cook EB(4), Formey A(5), Patel
A(6), Gymrek M(7), Thapar V(8), Deshpande V(9), Ting DT(8), Hornicek FJ(10),
Nielsen GP(9), Stamenkovic I(5), Aryee MJ(1), Bernstein BE(11), Rivera MN(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Center 
for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA; Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and
Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (5)Institute of
Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Faculty of Biology and
Medicine, University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland. (6)Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA; Department of Neurosurgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(7)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, MIT,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad
Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (8)Cancer Center,
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129,
USA. (9)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (10)Center for Sarcoma and Connective
Tissue Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (11)Department of Pathology and Center for Cancer
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address: 
bernstein.bradley@mgh.harvard.edu. (12)Department of Pathology and Center for
Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA. Electronic address: mnrivera@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2014 Nov 10;26(5):595-6.

The aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1 drives Ewing sarcoma, but its
molecular function is not completely understood. We find that EWS-FLI1 reprograms
gene regulatory circuits in Ewing sarcoma by directly inducing or repressing
enhancers. At GGAA repeat elements, which lack evolutionary conservation and
regulatory potential in other cell types, EWS-FLI1 multimers induce chromatin
opening and create de novo enhancers that physically interact with target
promoters. Conversely, EWS-FLI1 inactivates conserved enhancers containing
canonical ETS motifs by displacing wild-type ETS transcription factors. These
divergent chromatin-remodeling patterns repress tumor suppressors and mesenchymal
lineage regulators while activating oncogenes and potential therapeutic targets, 
such as the kinase VRK1. Our findings demonstrate how EWS-FLI1 establishes an
oncogenic regulatory program governing both tumor survival and differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4492343
PMID: 25453903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Exp Hematol. 2015 Feb;43(2):125-36. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2014.10.005. Epub 2014 
Oct 22.

Cellular characterization of thrombocytes in Xenopus laevis with specific
monoclonal antibodies.

Tanizaki Y(1), Ishida-Iwata T(2), Obuchi-Shimoji M(2), Kato T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Graduate School of Advanced
Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan; Research Fellow of the 
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Biology, Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)Integrative Bioscience and Biomedical Engineering, Graduate School of
Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan; Department of 
Biology, Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan. Electronic address: tkato@waseda.jp.

Platelets are produced from megakaryocytes (MKs) in the bone marrow. In contrast,
most nonmammalian vertebrates have nucleated and spindle-shaped thrombocytes
instead of platelets in their circulatory systems, and the presence of MKs as
thrombocyte progenitors has not been verified. In developing a new animal model
in adult African clawed frog (Xenopus laevis), we needed to distinguish nucleated
thrombocytes and their progenitors from other blood cells, because the cellular
morphology of activated thrombocytes resembles lymphocytes and other cells. We
initially generated two monoclonal antibodies, T5 and T12, to X. laevis
thrombocytes. Whereas T5 recognized both thrombocytes and leukocytes, T12
specifically reacted to spindle-shaped thrombocytes. The T12(+) thrombocytes
displayed much higher DNA ploidy than nucleated erythrocytes, and they expressed 
CD41 and Fli-1. In the presence of CaCl2, adenosine diphosphate, thrombin, or
various collagens, T12(+) thrombocytes exhibited aggregation. These thrombocytes 
were located predominantly in the hepatic sinusoids and the splenic red pulp,
suggesting that both organs are the sites of thrombopoiesis. Notably, circulating
thrombocytes exhibited lower DNA ploidy than hepatic thrombocytes.
Intraperitoneal administration of T12 produced immune thrombocytopenia in frogs, 
which reached a nadir 4 days postinjection, followed by recovery, suggesting that
humoral regulation maintained the number of circulating thrombocytes. Although
differences between MKs and thrombocytes in X. laevis remain to be defined, our
results provide further insight into MK development and thrombopoiesis in
vertebrates.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25448492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Med Chem. 2014 Dec 26;57(24):10290-303. doi: 10.1021/jm501372p. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationship studies of small molecule
disruptors of EWS-FLI1 interactions in Ewing's sarcoma.

Tosso PN(1), Kong Y, Scher L, Cummins R, Schneider J, Rahim S, Holman KT,
Toretsky J, Wang K, Üren A, Brown ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Discovery, Georgetown University Medical Center , New Research
Building EP07, 3970 Reservoir Road, NW, Washington, D.C. 20057, United States.

EWS-FLI1 is an oncogenic fusion protein implicated in the development of Ewing's 
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT). Using our previously reported lead compound 2
(YK-4-279), we designed and synthesized a focused library of analogues. The
functional inhibition of the analogues was measured by an EWS-FLI1/NR0B1 reporter
luciferase assay and a paired cell screening approach measuring effects on growth
inhibition for human cells containing EWS-FLI1 (TC32 and TC71) and control PANC1 
cell lines devoid of the oncoprotein. Our data revealed that substitution of
electron donating groups at the para-position on the phenyl ring was the most
favorable for inhibition of EWS-FLI1 by analogs of 2. Compound 9u (with a
dimethylamino substitution) was the most active inhibitor with GI50 = 0.26 ± 0.1 
µM. Further, a correlation of growth inhibition (EWS-FLI1 expressing TC32 cells) 
and the luciferase reporter activity was established (R(2) = 0.84). Finally, we
designed and synthesized a biotinylated analogue and determined the binding
affinity for recombinant EWS-FLI1 (Kd = 4.8 ± 2.6 µM).

PMCID: PMC4281097
PMID: 25432018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Feb;24(2):127-32. doi: 10.1111/exd.12602.

A possible contribution of endothelial CCN1 downregulation due to Fli1 deficiency
to the development of digital ulcers in systemic sclerosis.

Saigusa R(1), Asano Y, Taniguchi T, Yamashita T, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y, Toyama 
T, Tamaki Z, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Kadono T, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Exp Dermatol. 2015 Apr;24(4):256-7.

CCN1 is a pleiotropic molecule involved in angiogenesis and postnatal
vasculogenesis, both of which are impaired in systemic sclerosis (SSc). To
elucidate the potential role of CCN1 in the development of SSc, we investigated
CCN1 expression in the lesional skin of SSc patients and SSc animal models and
the clinical correlation of serum CCN1 levels. CCN1 expression was markedly
decreased in dermal small blood vessels of SSc patients compared with those of
healthy controls, while comparable between normal and SSc dermal fibroblasts.
Transcription factor Fli1, whose deficiency due to epigenetic suppression is
implicated in the pathogenesis of SSc, occupied the CCN1 promoter and gene
silencing of Fli1 resulted in the reduction of CCN1 expression in human dermal
microvascular endothelial cells. Consistently, CCN1 expression was suppressed
uniformly and remarkably in dermal blood vessels of Fli1(+/-) mice and partially 
in those of endothelial cell-specific Fli1 knockout mice. Furthermore, serum CCN1
levels were significantly decreased in SSc patients with previous and current
history of digital ulcers as compared to those without. Collectively, these
results suggest that endothelial CCN1 downregulation at least partially due to
Fli1 deficiency may contribute to the development of digital ulcers in SSc
patients. This study further supports the idea that epigenetic downregulation of 
Fli1 is a potential predisposing factor in the pathogenesis of SSc.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25421497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jul;37(5):411-3. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000289.

Primary Hepatic Ewing Sarcoma With EWS-FLI1 RNA Transcript in a Child.

Pochon C(1), Martelli H, Mussini C, Pariente D, Heymann MF, Corradini N.

Author information: 
(1)*Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology Department, Nantes University Hospital
<U+2225>Physiopathology of Bone Resorption and Therapy of Primitive Bone Tumors
Laboratory, Nantes University UMR 957 ¶Pathology Department, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire, Nantes Departments of Pediatric Surgery Pediatric Pathology
§Pediatric Radiology, Bicêtre Hospital Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

PMID: 25411865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Clin Invest. 2014 Dec;124(12):5275-90. doi: 10.1172/JCI72124. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Long noncoding RNA EWSAT1-mediated gene repression facilitates Ewing sarcoma
oncogenesis.

Marques Howarth M, Simpson D, Ngok SP, Nieves B, Chen R, Siprashvili Z, Vaka D,
Breese MR, Crompton BD, Alexe G, Hawkins DS, Jacobson D, Brunner AL, West R, Mora
J, Stegmaier K, Khavari P, Sweet-Cordero EA.

Chromosomal translocation that results in fusion of the genes encoding
RNA-binding protein EWS and transcription factor FLI1 (EWS-FLI1) is pathognomonic
for Ewing sarcoma. EWS-FLI1 alters gene expression through mechanisms that are
not completely understood. We performed RNA sequencing (RNAseq) analysis on
primary pediatric human mesenchymal progenitor cells (pMPCs) expressing EWS-FLI1 
in order to identify gene targets of this oncoprotein. We determined that long
noncoding RNA-277 (Ewing sarcoma-associated transcript 1 [EWSAT1]) is upregulated
by EWS-FLI1 in pMPCs. Inhibition of EWSAT1 expression diminished the ability of
Ewing sarcoma cell lines to proliferate and form colonies in soft agar, whereas
EWSAT1 inhibition had no effect on other cell types tested. Expression of
EWS-FLI1 and EWSAT1 repressed gene expression, and a substantial fraction of
targets that were repressed by EWS-FLI1 were also repressed by EWSAT1. Analysis
of RNAseq data from primary human Ewing sarcoma further supported a role for
EWSAT1 in mediating gene repression. We identified heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (HNRNPK) as an RNA-binding protein that interacts with EWSAT1
and found a marked overlap in HNRNPK-repressed genes and those repressed by
EWS-FLI1 and EWSAT1, suggesting that HNRNPK participates in EWSAT1-mediated gene 
repression. Together, our data reveal that EWSAT1 is a downstream target of
EWS-FLI1 that facilitates the development of Ewing sarcoma via the repression of 
target genes.

PMCID: PMC4348951
PMID: 25401475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Methods Enzymol. 2014;546:251-71. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-801185-0.00012-X.

Creating cancer translocations in human cells using Cas9 DSBs and nCas9 paired
nicks.

Renouf B(1), Piganeau M(1), Ghezraoui H(1), Jasin M(2), Brunet E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Paris, France. 
(2)Developmental Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, USA. Electronic address: ebrunet@mnhn.fr. (3)Museum National d'Histoire
Naturelle, INSERM U1154, CNRS 7196, Paris, France. Electronic address:
m-jasin@ski.mskcc.org.

Recurrent chromosomal translocations are found in numerous tumor types, often
leading to the formation and expression of fusion genes with oncogenic potential.
Creating chromosomal translocations at the relevant endogenous loci, rather than 
ectopically expressing the fusion genes, opens new possibilities for better
characterizing molecular mechanisms driving tumor formation. In this chapter, we 
describe methods to create cancer translocations in human cells. DSBs or paired
nicks generated by either wild-type Cas9 or the Cas9 nickase, respectively, are
used to induce translocations at the relevant loci. Using different PCR-based
methods, we also explain how to quantify translocation frequency and to analyze
breakpoint junctions in the cells of interest. In addition, PCR detection of
translocations is used as a very sensitive method to detect off-target effects,
which has general utility.

PMCID: PMC4398311
PMID: 25398344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cancer. 2015 Mar 1;121(5):697-707. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29090. Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Systemic levels of neuropeptide Y and dipeptidyl peptidase activity in patients
with Ewing sarcoma--associations with tumor phenotype and survival.

Tilan JU(1), Krailo M, Barkauskas DA, Galli S, Mtaweh H, Long J, Wang H, Hawkins 
K, Lu C, Jeha D, Izycka-Swieszewska E, Lawlor ER, Toretsky JA, Kitlinska JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, School of Nursing and Health Studies, Georgetown
University, Washington, District of Columbia; Department of Human Science, School
of Nursing and Health Studies, Georgetown University, Washington, District of
Columbia.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (ES) is driven by fusion of the Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint region 1 gene (EWSR1) with an E26 transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factor (EWS-ETS), most often the Friend leukemia integration 1
transcription factor (FLI1). Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is an EWS-FLI1 transcriptional 
target; it is highly expressed in ES and exerts opposing effects, ranging from ES
cell death to angiogenesis and cancer stem cell propagation. The functions of NPY
are regulated by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV), a hypoxia-inducible enzyme that
cleaves the peptide and activates its growth-promoting actions. The objective of 
this study was to determine the clinically relevant functions of NPY by
identifying the associations between patients' ES phenotype and their NPY
concentrations and DPP activity.
METHODS: NPY concentrations and DPP activity were measured in serum samples from 
223 patients with localized ES and 9 patients with metastatic ES provided by the 
Children's Oncology Group.
RESULTS: Serum NPY levels were elevated in ES patients compared with the levels
in a healthy control group and an osteosarcoma patient population, and the
elevated levels were independent of EWS-ETS translocation type. Significantly
higher NPY concentrations were detected in patients with ES who had tumors of
pelvic and bone origin. A similar trend was observed in patients with metastatic 
ES. There was no effect of NPY on survival in patients with localized ES. DPP
activity in sera from patients with ES did not differ significantly from that in 
healthy controls and patients with osteosarcoma. However, high DPP levels were
associated with improved survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic NPY levels are elevated in patients with ES, and these high
levels are associated with unfavorable disease features. DPPIV in serum samples
from patients with ES is derived from nontumor sources, and its high activity is 
correlated with improved survival.

© 2014 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC4339539
PMID: 25387699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Feb;67(2):517-26. doi: 10.1002/art.38948.

Fibrosis, vascular activation, and immune abnormalities resembling systemic
sclerosis in bleomycin-treated Fli-1-haploinsufficient mice.

Taniguchi T(1), Asano Y, Akamata K, Noda S, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y, Toyama T,
Trojanowska M, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Fli-1, a potential predisposing factor for systemic sclerosis (SSc),
is constitutively down-regulated in the lesional skin of patients with SSc by an 
epigenetic mechanism. To investigate the impact of Fli-1 deficiency on the
induction of an SSc phenotype in various cell types, we generated
bleomycin-induced skin fibrosis in Fli-1(+/-) mice and investigated the molecular
mechanisms underlying its phenotypic alterations.
METHODS: Messenger RNA (mRNA) levels and protein expression of target molecules
were examined by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
immunostaining. Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) bioassay was used to evaluate
the activation of latent TGFß. The binding of Fli-1 to the target gene promoters 
was assessed with chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Bleomycin induced more severe dermal fibrosis in Fli-1(+/-) mice than in
wild-type mice. Fli-1 haploinsufficiency activated dermal fibroblasts via the
up-regulation of avß3 and avß5 integrins and activation of latent TGFß. Dermal
fibrosis in Fli-1(+/-) mice was also attributable to endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, which is directly induced by Fli-1 deficiency and amplified by
bleomycin. Th2/Th17-skewed inflammation and increased infiltration of mast cells 
and macrophages were seen, partly due to the altered expression of cell adhesion 
molecules in endothelial cells as well as the induction of the skin chemokines.
Fli-1(+/-) mouse macrophages preferentially differentiated into an M2 phenotype
upon stimulation with interleukin-4 (IL-4) or IL-13.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide strong evidence for the fundamental role of
Fli-1 deficiency in inducing SSc-like phenotypic alterations in dermal
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages in a manner consistent with human
disease.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4342755
PMID: 25385187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Neoplasia. 2014 Oct 23;16(10):801-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.08.007. eCollection
2014.

FLI1 expression is correlated with breast cancer cellular growth, migration, and 
invasion and altered gene expression.

Scheiber MN(1), Watson PM(2), Rumboldt T(3), Stanley C(4), Wilson RC(5), Findlay 
VJ(6), Anderson PE(4), Watson DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The James E. Clyburn Research
Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 68 President Street, Charleston, SC
29425. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, The James E.
Clyburn Research Center, Medical University of South Carolina, 68 President
Street, Charleston, SC 29425. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Medical University of South Carolina, Children's Hospital, 171 Ashley Avenue,
Charleston, SC 29425. (4)Department of Computer Science, College of Charleston,
Charleston, SC 29424. (5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, The James E. Clyburn Research Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, 68 President Street, Charleston, SC 29425.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South
Carolina, Walton Research Building, 39 Sabin Street, Charleston, SC 29425.

ETS factors have been shown to be dysregulated in breast cancer. ETS factors
control the expression of genes involved in many biological processes, such as
cellular proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. FLI1 is an ETS protein
aberrantly expressed in retrovirus-induced hematological tumors, but limited
attention has been directed towards elucidating the role of FLI1 in
epithelial-derived cancers. Using data mining, we show that loss of FLI1
expression is associated with shorter survival and more aggressive phenotypes of 
breast cancer. Gain and loss of function cellular studies indicate the inhibitory
effect of FLI1 expression on cellular growth, migration, and invasion. Using Fli1
mutant mice and both a transgenic murine breast cancer model and an orthotopic
injection of syngeneic tumor cells indicates that reduced Fli1 contributes to
accelerated tumor growth. Global expression analysis and RNA-Seq data from an
invasive human breast cancer cell line with over expression of either FLI1 and
another ETS gene, PDEF, shows changes in several cellular pathways associated
with cancer, such as the cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and PI3K-Akt
signaling pathways. This study demonstrates a novel role for FLI1 in epithelial
cells. In addition, these results reveal that FLI1 down-regulation in breast
cancer may promote tumor progression.

PMCID: PMC4212256
PMID: 25379017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Genome Res. 2014 Dec;24(12):1932-44. doi: 10.1101/gr.164178.113. Epub 2014 Oct
15.

Divergent functions of hematopoietic transcription factors in lineage priming and
differentiation during erythro-megakaryopoiesis.

Pimkin M(1), Kossenkov AV(2), Mishra T(3), Morrissey CS(3), Wu W(3), Keller
CA(3), Blobel GA(4), Lee D(5), Beer MA(5), Hardison RC(3), Weiss MJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; Pediatric Residency Program, Department of Pediatrics,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, USA; (2)Center for Systems and
Computational Biology, The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia 19019, Pennsylvania,
USA; (3)Center for Comparative Genomics and Bioinformatics, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA; Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,
Pennsylvania 16802, USA; (4)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;
(5)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Biomedical
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
21205, USA. (6)Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; weissmi@email.chop.edu rch8@psu.edu.

Combinatorial actions of relatively few transcription factors control
hematopoietic differentiation. To investigate this process in
erythro-megakaryopoiesis, we correlated the genome-wide chromatin occupancy
signatures of four master hematopoietic transcription factors (GATA1, GATA2,
TAL1, and FLI1) and three diagnostic histone modification marks with the gene
expression changes that occur during development of primary cultured
megakaryocytes (MEG) and primary erythroblasts (ERY) from murine fetal liver
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. We identified a robust, genome-wide
mechanism of MEG-specific lineage priming by a previously described
stem/progenitor cell-expressed transcription factor heptad (GATA2, LYL1, TAL1,
FLI1, ERG, RUNX1, LMO2) binding to MEG-associated cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
in multipotential progenitors. This is followed by genome-wide GATA factor
switching that mediates further induction of MEG-specific genes following lineage
commitment. Interaction between GATA and ETS factors appears to be a key
determinant of these processes. In contrast, ERY-specific lineage priming is
biased toward GATA2-independent mechanisms. In addition to its role in MEG
lineage priming, GATA2 plays an extensive role in late megakaryopoiesis as a
transcriptional repressor at loci defined by a specific DNA signature. Our
findings reveal important new insights into how ERY and MEG lineages arise from a
common bipotential progenitor via overlapping and divergent functions of shared
hematopoietic transcription factors.

© 2014 Pimkin et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4248311
PMID: 25319996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 20;112(2):403-12. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.545. Epub 2014 Oct 
14.

B-RAF mutation and accumulated gene methylation in aberrant crypt foci (ACF),
sessile serrated adenoma/polyp (SSA/P) and cancer in SSA/P.

Inoue A(1), Okamoto K(1), Fujino Y(1), Nakagawa T(1), Muguruma N(1), Sannomiya
K(1), Mitsui Y(1), Takaoka T(1), Kitamura S(1), Miyamoto H(1), Okahisa T(1),
Fujimori T(2), Imoto I(3), Takayama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Oncology, Institute of Health Biosciences, 
The University of Tokushima Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.
(2)Department of Surgical and Molecular Pathology, Dokkyo University School of
Medicine, 880 Kitakobayashi, Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. (3)Department of
Human Genetics, Institute of Health Biosciences, the University of Tokushima
Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Sessile serrated adenomas/polyps (SSA/Ps) are a putative precursor of
colon cancer with microsatellite instability (MSI). However, the developmental
mechanism of SSA/P remains unknown. We performed genetic analysis and genome-wide
DNA methylation analysis in aberrant crypt foci (ACF), SSA/P, and cancer in SSA/P
specimens to show a close association between ACF and the SSA/P-cancer sequence. 
We also evaluated the prevalence and number of ACF in SSA/P patients.
METHODS: ACF in the right-side colon were observed in 36 patients with SSA/Ps
alone, 2 with cancers in SSA/P, and 20 normal subjects and biopsied under
magnifying endoscopy. B-RAF mutation and MSI were analysed by PCR-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) and PCR-SSCP, respectively, in 15 ACF, 20
SSA/P, and 2 cancer specimens. DNA methylation array analysis of seven ACF, seven
SSA/P, and two cancer in SSA/P specimens was performed using the microarray-based
integrated analysis of methylation by isochizomers (MIAMI) method.
RESULTS: B-RAF mutations were frequently detected in ACF, SSA/P, and cancer in
SSA/P tissues. The number of methylated genes increased significantly in the
order of ACF<SSA/P<cancer. The most commonly methylated genes in SSA/P were
PQLC1, HDHD3, RASL10B, FLI1, GJA3, and SLC26A2. Some of these genes were
methylated in ACF, whereas all genes were methylated in cancers.
Immunohistochemistry revealed their silenced expression. Microsatellite
instability and MLH1 methylation were observed only in cancer. The prevalence and
number of ACF were significantly higher in SSA/P patients than in normal
subjects. A significant correlation was seen between the numbers of SSA/P and ACF
in SSA/P patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that ACF are precursor lesions of the
SSA/P-cancer sequence in patients with SSA/P, where ACF arise by B-RAF mutation
and methylation of some of the six identified genes and develop into SSA/Ps
through accumulated methylation of these genes.

PMCID: PMC4453443
PMID: 25314065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Nov;31(11):1567-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0357-2.
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

No malignancy detected in surplus ovarian tissue from a former Ewing sarcoma
patient who experienced relapse four years after being grafted with frozen/thawed
ovarian tissue.

Yding Andersen C(1), Ernst E, Bærentzen S, Birkebæk NH, Clausen N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, The Juliane Marie Centre for Women,
Children and Reproduction, Section 5712, University Hospital of Copenhagen,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, Rigshospitalet, DK-2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark, yding@rh.dk.

PMCID: PMC4389949
PMID: 25304113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Hematol Oncol. 2014 Oct 10;7:76. doi: 10.1186/s13045-014-0076-2.

Recurrent LRP1-SNRNP25 and KCNMB4-CCND3 fusion genes promote tumor cell motility 
in human osteosarcoma.

Yang J(1,)(2), Annala M(3,)(4), Ji P(5), Wang G(6,)(7), Zheng H(8,)(9), Codgell
D(10), Du X(11), Fang Z(12), Sun B(13,)(14), Nykter M(15), Chen K(16,)(17), Zhang
W(18).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone and Soft Tissue Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Tianjin, 30060, PR China. yangjilong@tjmuch.com.
(2)National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, PR China. yangjilong@tjmuch.com.
(3)Department of Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere,
33101, Finland. matti.annala@tut.fi. (4)Institute of Biomedical Technology,
University of Tampere, Tampere, 33520, Finland. matti.annala@tut.fi.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. pji@mdanderson.org. (6)Department of Bone and Soft
Tissue Tumor, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Tianjin,
30060, PR China. wgwhrb@163.com. (7)National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, 
Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, PR
China. wgwhrb@163.com. (8)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Tianjin, 30060, PR China.
zhengh64@aliyun.com. (9)National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, PR China.
zhengh64@aliyun.com. (10)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. dcogdell@mdanderson.org. (11)Department
of Diagnostics, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 30060, PR China.
xiaolingdu2003@163.com. (12)Department of Bone and Soft Tissue Tumors, Beijing
University Cancer Hospital, Beijing, 100020, PR China. fzhiwei66@163.com.
(13)Department of Pathology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Tianjin, 30060, PR China. sunbaocun@tjmuch.com. (14)National Clinical 
Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and
Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, PR China. sunbaocun@tjmuch.com. (15)Department of
Signal Processing, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, 33101, Finland.
matti.nykter@tut.fi. (16)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Tianjin, 30060, PR China.
chenkexin1963@yahoo.com. (17)National Clinical Research Center of Cancer, Tianjin
Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin, 300060, PR China.
chenkexin1963@yahoo.com. (18)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. wzhang@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: The identification of fusion genes such as SYT-SSX1/SSX2, PAX3-FOXO1,
TPM3/TPM4-ALK and EWS-FLI1 in human sarcomas has provided important insight into 
the diagnosis and targeted therapy of sarcomas. No recurrent fusion has been
reported in human osteosarcoma.
METHODS: Transcriptome sequencing was used to characterize the gene fusions and
mutations in 11 human osteosarcomas.
RESULTS: Nine of 11 samples were found to harbor genetic inactivating alterations
in the TP53 pathway. Two recurrent fusion genes associated with the 12q locus,
LRP1-SNRNP25 and KCNMB4-CCND3, were identified and validated by RT-PCR, Sanger
sequencing and fluorescence in situ hybridization, and were found to be
osteosarcoma specific in a validation cohort of 240 other sarcomas. Expression of
LRP1-SNRNP25 fusion gene promoted SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cell migration and
invasion. Expression of KCNMB4-CCND3 fusion gene promoted SAOS-2 cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study represents the first whole transcriptome analysis of
untreated human osteosarcoma. Our discovery of two osteosarcoma specific fusion
genes associated with osteosarcoma cellular motility highlights the heterogeneity
of osteosarcoma and provides opportunities for new treatment modalities.

PMCID: PMC4197299
PMID: 25300797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cancer Res. 2014 Nov 15;74(22):6578-88. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1736. Epub 
2014 Oct 3.

Suppression of deacetylase SIRT1 mediates tumor-suppressive NOTCH response and
offers a novel treatment option in metastatic Ewing sarcoma.

Ban J(1), Aryee DN(2), Fourtouna A(1), van der Ent W(3), Kauer M(1), Niedan S(1),
Machado I(4), Rodriguez-Galindo C(5), Tirado OM(6), Schwentner R(1), Picci P(7), 
Flanagan AM(8), Berg V(1), Strauss SJ(8), Scotlandi K(7), Lawlor ER(9),
Snaar-Jagalska E(3), Llombart-Bosch A(4), Kovar H(10).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. (2)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, 
Vienna, Austria. Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria. (3)Institute of Biology and Department of Pathology, Leiden University, 
Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology, University Medical School,
València, Spain. (5)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Laboratori d'Oncología Molecular, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica de
Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. (7)Laboratory
of Experimental Oncology, Rizzoli Institute, Bologna, Italy. (8)UCL Cancer
Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom. (9)Translational
Oncology Program, Departments of Pediatrics and Pathology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan. (10)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria. Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

The developmental receptor NOTCH plays an important role in various human cancers
as a consequence of oncogenic mutations. Here we describe a novel mechanism of
NOTCH-induced tumor suppression involving modulation of the deacetylase SIRT1,
providing a rationale for the use of SIRT1 inhibitors to treat cancers where this
mechanism is inactivated because of SIRT1 overexpression. In Ewing sarcoma cells,
NOTCH signaling is abrogated by the driver oncogene EWS-FLI1. Restoration of
NOTCH signaling caused growth arrest due to activation of the NOTCH effector
HEY1, directly suppressing SIRT1 and thereby activating p53. This mechanism of
tumor suppression was validated in Ewing sarcoma cells, B-cell tumors, and human 
keratinocytes where NOTCH dysregulation has been implicated pathogenically.
Notably, the SIRT1/2 inhibitor Tenovin-6 killed Ewing sarcoma cells in vitro and 
prohibited tumor growth and spread in an established xenograft model in
zebrafish. Using immunohistochemistry to analyze primary tissue specimens, we
found that high SIRT1 expression was associated with Ewing sarcoma metastasis and
poor prognosis. Our findings suggest a mechanistic rationale for the use of SIRT1
inhibitors being developed to treat metastatic disease in patients with Ewing
sarcoma.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25281719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 1;42(21). doi: 10.1093/nar/gku869. Epub 2014 Sep 26.

NLS-tagging: an alternative strategy to tag nuclear proteins.

Giraud G(1), Stadhouders R(1), Conidi A(1), Dekkers DH(2), Huylebroeck D(3),
Demmers JA(2), Soler E(4), Grosveld FG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Faculty building, PO Box
2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Proteomics Center, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Faculty
building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands Laboratory of Molecular
Biology (Celgen), Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven,
Herestraat 49, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus
Medical Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Laboratory of Hematopoiesis and Leukemic Stem Cells (LSHL), CEA/INSERM U967,
Fontenay-aux-Roses, France Center for Biomedical Genetics and Medical Epigenetics
Consortium, Erasmus Medical Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus Medical
Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands Center 
for Biomedical Genetics and Medical Epigenetics Consortium, Erasmus Medical
Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands Center 
for Biomedical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Faculty building, PO Box 2040,
3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands f.grosveld@erasmusmc.nl.

The characterization of transcription factor complexes and their binding sites in
the genome by affinity purification has yielded tremendous new insights into how 
genes are regulated. The affinity purification requires either the use of
antibodies raised against the factor of interest itself or by high-affinity
binding of a C- or N-terminally added tag sequence to the factor. Unfortunately, 
fusing extra amino acids to the termini of a factor can interfere with its
biological function or the tag may be inaccessible inside the protein. Here, we
describe an effective solution to that problem by integrating the 'tag' close to 
the nuclear localization sequence domain of the factor. We demonstrate the
effectiveness of this approach with the transcription factors Fli-1 and Irf2bp2, 
which cannot be tagged at their extremities without loss of function. This
resulted in the identification of novel proteins partners and a new hypothesis on
the contribution of Fli-1 to hematopoiesis.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4245968
PMID: 25260593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Histochem Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;143(2):153-69. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1269-z. Epub
2014 Sep 9.

Vasculogenic and hematopoietic cellular progenitors are scattered within the
prenatal mouse heart.

Jankowska-Steifer E(1), Madej M, Niderla-Bielinska J, Ruminski S, Flaht-Zabost A,
Czarnowska E, Gula G, Radomska-Lesniewska DM, Ratajska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, 
Poland, ewa.jankowska-steifer@wum.edu.pl.

Vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis are co-localized in the embryonic body, but
precise phenotypes of the cells contributing to these processes are not defined. 
The aim of this study was to characterize phenotypic profiles and location of
putative vasculogenic and hematopoietic cellular progenitors in the embryonic
mouse heart. Confocal microscopy, as well as ultrastructural and
stereomicroscopic analyses, was performed on immunohistochemical
whole-mount-stained or sectioned hearts at stages 11.5-14 dpc. A FASC analysis
was conducted to quantify putative vasculogenic and hematopoietic cells. We found
subepicardial blood islands in the form of foci of accumulation of cells
belonging to erythroblastic and megakaryocytic lineages at various stages of
maturation, exhibiting phenotypes: GATA2(+)/CD41(+), GATA2(-)/CD41(+),
GATA2(+)/CD71(-), GATA2(-)/CD71(+), Fli1(+)/CD71(+), Fli1(-)/CD71(+), with a
majority of cells expressing the Ter119 antigen, but none of them expressing
Flk1. The subepicardium and the outflow tract endothelium were recognized to be
the areas where progenitor cells were scattered or adjoining the endothelial
cells. These progenitor cells were characterized as possessing the following
antigens: CD45(+)/Fli1(+), CD41(+)/Flk1(+), Flk1(+)/Fli1(+). A FACS analysis
demonstrated that the CD41/Flk1 double-positive population of cells constituted
2.68% of total cell population isolated from 12.5 dpc hearts. Vessels and tubules
were positive for CD31, Flk1, Fli1, Tie2, including blood islands endothelia. The
endocardial wall endothelia were found to function as an anchoring apparatus for 
megakaryocytes releasing platelets into the cardiac cavities. Phenotypic
characteristics of vasculogenic (Flk1(+)/Fli1(+)) and hematopoietic
(GATA2(+)/CD71(+), CD41(+)/GATA2(+)) progenitors, as well as the putative
hemogenic endothelium (Flk1(+)/CD41(+)) in embryonic mouse hearts, have been
presented. Cardiac blood islands, the subepicardium and endothelium of the
outflow tract cushions have been defined as areas where these progenitor cells
can be found.

PMCID: PMC4298664
PMID: 25201347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Lab. 2014;60(8):1383-92.

Application of immunohistochemistry in the diagnosis of small round blue-cell
tumors of soft tissue.

Li Q, Cui W, Abulajiang G, Ma Y, Liu X, Zhang W, Li X.

BACKGROUND: Small round blue-cell tumors (SRBCTs) of soft tissue, which mainly
include rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), synovial sarcoma (SS), and Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (EWS/ pPNETs), are
malignancies with overlapping morphological and immunohistochemical
characteristics. Immunohistochemistry is one of the most prevalent and convenient
methods for pathological diagnosis; however, differentiation between SRBCT
subtypes in the absence of valid diagnostic markers is still very challenging.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate diagnostic
immunohistochemistry for subtyping soft tissue SRBCTs.
METHODS: Seventeen RMS, 25 SS, and 14 EWS/pPNETs were investigated. Reverse
transcription RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry was performed to determine a
diagnosis. Also, the expression of CD99, FLI1, PAX5, myogenin, and Keratin/EMA
was assessed between subtypes. The sensitivity and specificity test was performed
to evaluate their diagnostic significance.
RESULTS: The sensitivity and specificity of the target markers were evaluated as 
follows. FLI1 and CD99 expression displayed strong associations in EWS/pPNETs,
with OR (95% CI) and p values of 3.82 (1.23 - 11.94), p = 0.021 and 123.50 (12.63
- infinity), p < 0.001, respectively. Keratin/EMA expression did not support the 
diagnosis of EWS/pPNETs [OR (95% CI) = 0.06 (0.01 - 0.53), p = 0.011]. Myogenin
expression displayed strong association with RMS, with high sensitivity and
specificity of 94.1% and 100%, respectively. Membrane expression of CD99 did not 
support the diagnosis of RMS [OR (95% CI) = 0.09 (0.01 - 0.75), p = 0.026].
Keratin/EMA expression strongly indicated SS [OR (95% CI) = 345.00 (29.44 -
infinity), p = 0.00011. A ROC curve value of 0.94 indicated that keratin/EMA
expression might be a promising biomarker for SS, while separate expression of
FLI1 and CD99 did not support the diagnosis of SS. Similarly, myogenin expression
in RMS might be a promising biomarker for RMS with a ROC curve value of 0.97.
CONCLUSIONS: Diagnosis of SRBCTs should be based on a comprehensive analysis
involving morphology and immunoreactivity to a panel of markers.

PMID: 25185426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Phytomedicine. 2014 Sep 25;21(11):1256-63. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2014.06.010.
Epub 2014 Jul 25.

Pro-angiogenic effects of Carthami Flos whole extract in human microvascular
endothelial cells in vitro and in zebrafish in vivo.

Zhou X(1), Siu WS(1), Fung CH(1), Cheng L(2), Wong CW(2), Zhang C(2), Liu CL(2), 
Kwok HF(2), Lau CP(2), Wat E(2), Lau CB(1), Leung PC(3), Ko CH(4), Hung LK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; State Key Laboratory of
Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; Shenzhen 
Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong
Province, China. (2)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region; State Key
Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region. (3)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region;
State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China; Department of Orthopaedics and
Traumatology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region. (4)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources
in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong
Kong Special Administrative Region; Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong Province, China. Electronic address:
gohey@cuhk.edu.hk. (5)Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special
Administrative Region. Electronic address: leungkimhung@cuhk.edu.hk.

AIM: Carthami Flos (CF) is a Chinese herb traditionally used for cardiovascular
disease and bone injury in China with pharmacological effects on improving blood 
circulation. The aim of this study was to investigate the angiogenic potential of
CF whole extract (extracted by boiling with water, followed by ethanol) and the
underlying mechanisms in human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) in vitro 
and in transgenic TG(fli1:EGFP)(y1)/+(AB) zebrafish with transgenic endothelial
cells expressing EGFP (Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein) in vivo.
METHODS: Effects of CF whole extract on cell proliferation, migration and tube
formation in HMEC-1 cells in vitro were detected by MTT assay, wound healing
assay and tube formation assay. Its angiogenic effect in zebrafish was
investigated by monitoring the sprout number in the sub-intestinal vessel (SIV), 
and the underlying mechanisms were tested by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: CF whole extract increased cell proliferation, migration and tube
formation in vitro in HMEC-1 cells. Its angiogenic effect was also confirmed in
vivo in zebrafish by increasing the sprout number in the SIV. As determined by
quantitative real-time PCR, CF whole extract up-regulated the expression of
angiogenesis-related genes in zebrafish, including angiogenic and its associated 
growth factors and receptors (e.g. IGF1, CTGF, NRP2, and VEGFR3), transcription
factor (e.g. HIF1A), matrix degradation and endothelial cell migration-related
factors (e.g. MMP2, MMP9, TIMP2, PLG and PLAU), cell adhesion molecules (e.g.
ITGAV, ITGB3, beta-catenin and PECAM1), tubule formation factors (e.g. ANGPT1,
TIE-2, PDGFR-B, CDH5, S1PR1, FGF2, Shh, and TGFRB1), and blood vessel
maturation/formation factor (e.g. Ephrin B2).
CONCLUSIONS: CF whole extract increased angiogenesis in HMEC-1 cells in vitro and
in zebrafish in vivo with multiple mechanisms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25172787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Nov;18(11):1315-28. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.947963. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Blocking the road, stopping the engine or killing the driver? Advances in
targeting EWS/FLI-1 fusion in Ewing sarcoma as novel therapy.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children´s Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, and
Medical University Vienna, Department of Pediatrics , Zimmermannplatz 10, A1090
Vienna , Austria +43 1 40470 4092 ; +43 1 40470 64092 ; heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

INTRODUCTION: Ewing sarcoma (ES) represents the paradigm of an aberrant
E-twenty-six (ETS) oncogene-driven cancer. It is characterized by specific
rearrangements of one of five alternative ETS family member genes with EWSR1.
There is experimental evidence that the resulting fusion proteins act as aberrant
transcription factors driving ES pathogenesis. The transcriptional gene
regulatory network driven by EWS-ETS proteins provides the oncogenic engine to
the tumor. Therefore, EWS-ETS and their downstream machinery are considered ideal
tumor-specific therapeutic targets.
AREAS COVERED: This review critically discusses the literature on the development
of EWS-ETS-directed ES targeting strategies considering current knowledge of
EWS-ETS biology and cellular context. It focuses on determinants of EWS-FLI1
function with an emphasis on interactions with chromatin structure. We speculate 
about the relevance of poorly investigated aspects in ES research such as
chromatin remodeling and DNA damage repair for the development of targeted
therapies.
EXPERT OPINION: This review questions the specificity of signature-based
screening approaches to the identification of EWS-FLI1-targeted compounds. It
challenges the view that targeting the downstream gene regulatory network carries
potential for therapeutic breakthroughs because of resistance-inducing network
rewiring. Instead, we propose to combine targeting of the fusion protein with
epigenetic therapy as a future treatment strategy in ES.

PMID: 25162919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014 Dec;66(12):3436-44. doi: 10.1002/art.38818.

A critical role of the transcription factor fli-1 in murine lupus development by 
regulation of interleukin-6 expression.

Sato S(1), Lennard Richard M, Brandon D, Jones Buie JN, Oates JC, Gilkeson GS,
Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston.

OBJECTIVE: The Fli-1 transcription factor is implicated in the pathogenesis of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), both in humans and in animal models.
Dysregulation of interleukin-6 (IL-6) is also associated with SLE. The purpose of
this study was to investigate whether Fli-1 directly regulates the expression of 
IL-6.
METHODS: Sera were collected from wild-type and Fli-1-heterozygous (Fli-1(+/-) ) 
MRL/lpr mice, and the concentration of IL-6 was measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Expression of IL-6 in the kidney was measured by
real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. T cells were isolated from
wild-type and Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice and stimulated with CD3/CD28 beads, and the
concentration of IL-6 in the supernatants was measured by ELISA. MS1 endothelial 
cells were transfected with Fli-1 and control small interfering RNA, and the
production of IL-6 was compared after lipopolysaccharide stimulation. A chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay was performed to determine whether Fli-1 binds
to the IL-6 promoter region. Transient transfections with the NIH3T3 cell line
were performed to examine whether Fli-1 regulates the expression of IL-6.
RESULTS: Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice had significantly decreased IL-6 levels in sera 
and reduced expression of IL-6 in kidneys as compared to their wild-type
littermates. T cells isolated from Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice produced less IL-6
than did those from wild-type mice. Inhibiting the expression of Fli-1 in
endothelial cells resulted in reduced production of IL-6. The ChIP assay revealed
direct binding of Fli-1 to 3 regions within the IL-6 promoter. Fli-1 activated
transcription from the IL-6 promoter in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: The direct regulation of IL-6 expression by Fli-1 represents one
possible mechanism for the protective effect of decreased Fli-1 expression in
lupus.

Copyright © 2014 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4245454
PMID: 25155007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Immunol. 2015 Feb;63(2):566-73. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.07.013. Epub 2014 
Aug 6.

Fli-1 controls transcription from the MCP-1 gene promoter, which may provide a
novel mechanism for chemokine and cytokine activation.

Lennard Richard ML(1), Nowling TK(2), Brandon D(1), Watson DK(3), Zhang XK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (2)Department of
Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA; Medical Research Service, Ralph H. Johnson
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA; Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of
Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC
29425, USA; Medical Research Service, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Charleston, SC 29403, USA. Electronic address: zhangjo@musc.edu.

Regulation of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines is a primary role of the
innate immune response. MCP-1 is a chemokine that recruits immune cells to sites 
of inflammation. Expression of MCP-1 is reduced in primary kidney endothelial
cells from mice with a heterozygous knockout of the Fli-1 transcription factor.
Fli-1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, which are
evolutionarily conserved across several organisms including Drosophilla, Xenopus,
mouse and human. Ets family members bind DNA through a consensus sequence GGAA/T,
or Ets binding site (EBS). Fli-1 binds to EBSs within the endogenous MCP-1
promoter by ChIP assay. In this study, transient transfection assays indicate
that the Fli-1 gene actively promotes transcription from the MCP-1 gene promoter 
in a dose-dependent manner. Mutation of the DNA binding domain of Fli-1
demonstrated that Fli-1 activates transcription of MCP-1 both directly, by
binding to the promoter, and indirectly, likely through interactions with other
transcription factors. Another Ets transcription factor, Ets-1, was also tested, 
but failed to promote transcription. While Ets-1 failed to drive transcription
independently, a weak synergistic activation of the MCP-1 promoter was observed
between Ets-1 and Fli-1. In addition, Fli-1 and the NF<U+03BA>B family member p65 were
found to interact synergistically to activate transcription from the MCP-1
promoter, while Sp1 and p50 inhibit this interaction. Deletion studies identified
that EBSs in the distal and proximal MCP-1 promoter are critical for Fli-1
activation from the MCP-1 promoter. Together, these results demonstrate that
Fli-1 is a novel regulator of the proinflammatory chemokine MCP-1, that interacts
with other transcription factors to form a complex transcriptional mechanism for 
the activation of MCP-1 and mediation of the inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254164
PMID: 25108845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 15;193(6):2661-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302779. Epub 2014
Aug 6.

The Fli-1 transcription factor regulates the expression of CCL5/RANTES.

Lennard Richard ML(1), Sato S(1), Suzuki E(1), Williams S(2), Nowling TK(3),
Zhang XK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and. (2)Medical Research
Service, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403. 
(3)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and Medical Research Service,
Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403.
(4)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425; and Medical Research Service,
Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29403
zhangjo@musc.edu.

The friend leukemia insertion site 1 (Fli-1) transcription factor, an Ets family 
member, is implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus in
human patients and murine models of lupus. Lupus-prone mice with reduced Fli-1
expression have significantly less nephritis, prolonged survival, and decreased
infiltrating inflammatory cells into the kidney. Inflammatory chemokines,
including CCL5, are critical for attracting inflammatory cells. In this study,
decreased CCL5 mRNA expression was observed in kidneys of lupus-prone NZM2410
mice with reduced Fli-1 expression. CCL5 protein expression was significantly
decreased in endothelial cells transfected with Fli-1-specific small interfering 
RNA compared with controls. Fli-1 binds to endogenous Ets binding sites in the
distal region of the CCL5 promoter. Transient transfection assays demonstrate
that Fli-1 drives transcription from the CCL5 promoter in a dose-dependent
manner. Both Ets1, another Ets family member, and Fli-1 drive transcription from 
the CCL5 promoter, although Fli-1 transactivation was significantly stronger.
Ets1 acts as a dominant-negative transcription factor for Fli-1, indicating that 
they may have at least one DNA binding site in common. Systematic deletion of DNA
binding sites demonstrates the importance of the sites located within a 225-bp
region of the promoter. Mutation of the Fli-1 DNA binding domain significantly
reduces transactivation of the CCL5 promoter by Fli-1. We identified a novel
regulator of transcription for CCL5. These results suggest that Fli-1 is a novel 
and critical regulator of proinflammatory chemokines and affects the pathogenesis
of disease through the regulation of factors that recruit inflammatory cells to
sites of inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4157095
PMID: 25098295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e104378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104378. eCollection
2014.

Clinical and biochemical function of polymorphic NR0B1 GGAA-microsatellites in
Ewing sarcoma: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Monument MJ(1), Johnson KM(2), McIlvaine E(3), Abegglen L(2), Watkins WS(4),
Jorde LB(4), Womer RB(5), Beeler N(6), Monovich L(6), Lawlor ER(7), Bridge JA(8),
Schiffman JD(9), Krailo MD(3), Randall RL(1), Lessnick SL(10).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Services, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Center for Children's Cancer Research,
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America. (2)Center for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.
(4)Department of Human Genetics and Eccles Institute of Human Genetics,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America. (5)Division
of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)Children's Oncology
Group Biopathology Center, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America. (7)Departments of Pediatrics 
and Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America. (8)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of
America. (9)Center for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United
States of America. (10)Sarcoma Services, Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Center for
Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah, United States of America; Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: The genetics involved in Ewing sarcoma susceptibility and prognosis
are poorly understood. EWS/FLI and related EWS/ETS chimeras upregulate numerous
gene targets via promoter-based GGAA-microsatellite response elements. These
microsatellites are highly polymorphic in humans, and preliminary evidence
suggests EWS/FLI-mediated gene expression is highly dependent on the number of
GGAA motifs within the microsatellite.
OBJECTIVES: Here we sought to examine the polymorphic spectrum of a
GGAA-microsatellite within the NR0B1 promoter (a critical EWS/FLI target) in
primary Ewing sarcoma tumors, and characterize how this polymorphism influences
gene expression and clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: A complex, bimodal pattern of EWS/FLI-mediated gene expression was
observed across a wide range of GGAA motifs, with maximal expression observed in 
constructs containing 20-26 GGAA motifs. Relative to white European and African
controls, the NR0B1 GGAA-microsatellite in tumor cells demonstrated a strong bias
for haplotypes containing 21-25 GGAA motifs suggesting a relationship between
microsatellite function and disease susceptibility. This selection bias was not a
product of microsatellite instability in tumor samples, nor was there a
correlation between NR0B1 GGAA-microsatellite polymorphisms and survival
outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that GGAA-microsatellite polymorphisms observed
in human populations modulate EWS/FLI-mediated gene expression and may influence 
disease susceptibility in Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4122435
PMID: 25093581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Dec;12(12):1740-54. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0159. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

Phosphoproteomic profiling reveals IL6-mediated paracrine signaling within the
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Anderson JL(1), Titz B(2), Akiyama R(3), Komisopoulou E(2), Park A(3), Tap WD(4),
Graeber TG(5), Denny CT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California. Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics,
Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California. (2)Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(3)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. (4)Sarcoma Medical Oncology Service, Division of Solid Tumors,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Department of 
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York. (5)Crump Institute
for Molecular Imaging, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California. Department of Molecular and Medical
Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California. California NanoSystems Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. UCLA Metabolomics Center,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. (6)Molecular
Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California. Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne
Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California. Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California. California NanoSystems
Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
cdenny@ucla.edu.

Members of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) contain tumor-associated
translocations that give rise to oncogenic transcription factors, most commonly
EWS/FLI1. EWS/FLI1 plays a dominant role in tumor progression by modulating the
expression of hundreds of target genes. Here, the impact of EWS/FLI1 inhibition, 
by RNAi-mediated knockdown, on cellular signaling was investigated using mass
spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics to quantify global changes in
phosphorylation. This unbiased approach identified hundreds of unique
phosphopeptides enriched in processes such as regulation of cell cycle and
cytoskeleton organization. In particular, phosphotyrosine profiling revealed a
large upregulation of STAT3 phosphorylation upon EWS/FLI1 knockdown. However,
single-cell analysis demonstrated that this was not a cell-autonomous effect of
EWS/FLI1 deficiency, but rather a signaling effect occurring in cells in which
knockdown does not occur. Conditioned media from knockdown cells were sufficient 
to induce STAT3 phosphorylation in control cells, verifying the presence of a
soluble factor that can activate STAT3. Cytokine analysis and ligand/receptor
inhibition experiments determined that this activation occurred, in part, through
an IL6-dependent mechanism. Taken together, the data support a model in which
EWS/FLI1 deficiency results in the secretion of soluble factors, such as IL6,
which activate STAT signaling in bystander cells that maintain EWS/FLI1
expression. Furthermore, these soluble factors were shown to protect against
apoptosis.IMPLICATIONS: EWS/FLI1 inhibition results in a novel adaptive response 
and suggests that targeting the IL6/STAT3 signaling pathway may increase the
efficacy of ESFT therapies.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25092916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 4;9(8):e104190. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104190. eCollection
2014.

High-content screening in zebrafish embryos identifies butafenacil as a potent
inducer of anemia.

Leet JK(1), Lindberg CD(1), Bassett LA(1), Isales GM(1), Yozzo KL(1), Raftery
TD(1), Volz DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Arnold School of Public Health,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, United States of America.

Using transgenic zebrafish (fli1:egfp) that stably express enhanced green
fluorescent protein (eGFP) within vascular endothelial cells, we recently
developed and optimized a 384-well high-content screening (HCS) assay that
enables us to screen and identify chemicals affecting cardiovascular development 
and function at non-teratogenic concentrations. Within this assay, automated
image acquisition procedures and custom image analysis protocols are used to
quantify body length, heart rate, circulation, pericardial area, and
intersegmental vessel area within individual live embryos exposed from 5 to 72
hours post-fertilization. After ranking developmental toxicity data generated
from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) zebrafish teratogenesis
assay, we screened 26 of the most acutely toxic chemicals within EPA's ToxCast
Phase-I library in concentration-response format (0.05-50 µM) using this HCS
assay. Based on this screen, we identified butafenacil as a potent inducer of
anemia, as exposure from 0.39 to 3.125 µM butafenacil completely abolished
arterial circulation in the absence of effects on all other endpoints evaluated. 
Butafenacil is an herbicide that inhibits protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPO)--an
enzyme necessary for heme production in vertebrates. Using o-dianisidine
staining, we then revealed that severe butafenacil-induced anemia in zebrafish
was due to a complete loss of hemoglobin following exposure during early
development. Therefore, six additional PPO inhibitors within the ToxCast Phase-I 
library were screened to determine whether anemia represents a common adverse
outcome for these herbicides. Embryonic exposure to only one of these PPO
inhibitors--flumioxazin--resulted in a similar phenotype as butafenacil, albeit
not as severe as butafenacil. Overall, this study highlights the potential
utility of this assay for (1) screening chemicals for cardiovascular toxicity and
(2) prioritizing chemicals for future hypothesis-driven and mechanism-focused
investigations within zebrafish and mammalian models.

PMCID: PMC4121296
PMID: 25090246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e103686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103686. eCollection
2014.

Redundant role of protein kinase C delta and epsilon during mouse embryonic
development.

Carracedo S(1), Sacher F(2), Brandes G(3), Braun U(4), Leitges M(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. (2)Max
Planck Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Zellbiologie im Zentrum Anatomie Gebäude I4, Raum, Germany. (4)The
Biotechnology Centre of Oslo, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; Max Planck
Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany.

Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon are mediators of important cellular events,
such as cell proliferation, migration or apoptosis. The formation of blood
vessels, i.e., vasculo- and angiogenesis, is a process where these isoforms have 
also been shown to participate. However, mice deficient in either Protein Kinase 
C delta or epsilon are viable and therefore their individual contribution to the 
formation of the vasculature appeared so far dispensable. In this study, we show 
that double null mutation of Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon causes embryonic 
lethality at approximately E9.5. At this stage, whole mount staining of the
endothelial marker CD31 in double null embryos revealed defective blood vessel
formation. Moreover, culture of double deficient mouse allantois showed impaired 
endothelial cell organization, and analyses of double deficient embryo sections
showed dilated vessels, decreased endothelial-specific adherent junctions, and
decreased contact of endothelial cells with mural cells. Protein kinase C delta
and epsilon also appeared essential for vascular smooth muscle cell
differentiation, since a-smooth muscle actin, a classical marker for vascular
smooth muscle cells, was almost undetectable in double deficient embryonic aorta 
at E9.5. Subsequent qPCR analyses showed decreased VE-cadherin, Vegfr2, Cd31,
Cdh2, Ets1, and Fli-1, among other angiogenesis related transcripts in double
deficient embryos. Taken together, these data suggest for the first time an in
vivo redundant role between members of the novel Protein Kinase C subfamily that 
allows for mutual compensation during mouse embryonic development, with
vasculogenesis/angiogenesis as an obvious common function of these two Protein
Kinase Cs. Protein Kinase C delta and epsilon might therefore be useful targets
for inhibiting vasculo- and/or angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4118884
PMID: 25084151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Head Neck Pathol. 2015 Jun;9(2):280-5. doi: 10.1007/s12105-014-0558-0. Epub 2014 
Aug 1.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarcoma mimicking basal cell adenocarcinoma of the
parotid gland: a case report and review of the literature.

Lezcano C(1), Clarke MR, Zhang L, Antonescu CR, Seethala RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 200 Lothrop 
St, Scaife Hall A615, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA, lezcanolopezm@upmc.edu.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing sarcoma (AES) is a rare variant of the Ewing family of
tumors that resembles classic adamantinoma of bone. AES shows epithelial
differentiation and a more complex immunohistochemical expression profile with
keratin and basal marker immunoreactivity and can resemble a variety of
carcinomas. We report an unusual case of an AES of the parotid gland that
mimicked a basal cell adenocarcinoma. Like basal cell adenocarcinoma, this AES
showed a nested basaloid proliferation with peripheral palisading in tumor nests 
with 'basaloid' epithelial differentiation as highlighted by cytokeratin AE1/3
and p40 positivity. However, unlike most basal cell adenocarcinomas, this tumor
demonstrated high grade morphology, showed no true ductal or myoepithelial
component, and also showed a tendency towards neuroectodermal phenotype with
focal rosette formation, CD99 and weak synaptophysin immunoreactivity. EWSR1 and 
FLI1 fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed the presence of a translocation
supporting the diagnosis of AES. This is the first case of AES presenting as a
primary parotid mass highlighting the potential to be mistaken for primary
salivary gland carcinomas, which in addition to basal cell adenocarcinoma include
other basaloid tumors such as adenoid cystic carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4424212
PMID: 25081914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Dermatopathol. 2014 Sep;36(9):718-22. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0000000000000066.

Immunolabeling for p16, WT1, and Fli-1 in the assignment of growth phase for
cutaneous melanomas.

Strickler AG(1), Schaefer JT, Slingluff CL Jr, Wick MR.

Author information: 
(1)*School of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA; and
Departments of Pathology; and Surgery, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA. Dr Strickler is now with the Department of Dermatology at the St.
Lukes-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY.

Distinction between radial growth phase (RGP) and vertical growth phase (VGP) in 
cutaneous melanomas is prognostically significant. Despite established
morphological criteria, molecular markers to separate RGP and VGP have not been
well established. The goal of this study was to investigate associations of p16, 
WT1, and Fli-1 with RGP-to-VGP progression, by immunohistochemistry. The p16 is a
tumor suppressor, whereas WT1 and Fli-1 are transcriptional activators. The
authors hypothesized that entry into VGP would be associated with decreased p16
and increased WT1 and Fli-1. Paraffin sections from 18 RGP and 15 VGP melanomas
were immunostained with well-characterized antibodies to p16, WT1, and Fli-1.
Melanoma growth phases were determined using precodified morphological
attributes. In RGP melanomas, p16 was expressed in 15 of 18 (83%), WT1 in 17 of
17 (100%), and Fli-1 at least focally in 6 of 18 (33%). The deep dermal component
of VGP melanomas stained positively for Fli-1 in 9 of 14 (64%), strongly for WT1 
in 10 of 14 (71%), and strongly for p16 in only 2 of 15 (13%). Observed patterns 
of WT1 immunopositivity did not support the authors' hypothesis; it is not likely
to be a good indicator of VGP. On the other hand, Fli-1 staining trended toward
more positive deep tumor compartment staining and p16 to weaker staining in the
deep compartment. At present, application of histological criteria remains the
best method for assignment of growth phase in melanomas; however, p16 and
possibly Fli-1 immunostains may serve as useful adjuncts in morphologically
indeterminate cases.

PMID: 25062258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Sep 15;25(18):2695-709. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-01-0007. Epub
2014 Jul 23.

Molecular dissection of the mechanism by which EWS/FLI expression compromises
actin cytoskeletal integrity and cell adhesion in Ewing sarcoma.

Chaturvedi A(1), Hoffman LM(2), Jensen CC(3), Lin YC(1), Grossmann AH(4), Randall
RL(5), Lessnick SL(6), Welm AL(1), Beckerle MC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112.
(2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112
Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. (3)Huntsman 
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. (4)Department of 
Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. (5)Center for Children's
Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT
84132 Department of Orthopaedics, Sarcoma Services, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. (6)Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Department of Oncological Sciences, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Center for Children's Cancer
Research, Huntsman Cancer Institute, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132. (7)Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Department of
Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 Department of 
Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 mary.beckerle@hci.utah.edu.

Ewing sarcoma is the second-most-common bone cancer in children. Driven by an
oncogenic chromosomal translocation that results in the expression of an aberrant
transcription factor, EWS/FLI, the disease is typically aggressive and
micrometastatic upon presentation. Silencing of EWS/FLI in patient-derived tumor 
cells results in the altered expression of hundreds to thousands of genes and is 
accompanied by dramatic morphological changes in cytoarchitecture and adhesion.
Genes encoding focal adhesion, extracellular matrix, and actin regulatory
proteins are dominant targets of EWS/FLI-mediated transcriptional repression.
Reexpression of genes encoding just two of these proteins, zyxin and a5 integrin,
is sufficient to restore cell adhesion and actin cytoskeletal integrity
comparable to what is observed when the EWS/FLI oncogene expression is
compromised. Using an orthotopic xenograft model, we show that EWS/FLI-induced
repression of a5 integrin and zyxin expression promotes tumor progression by
supporting anchorage-independent cell growth. This selective advantage is paired 
with a tradeoff in which metastatic lung colonization is compromised.

© 2014 Chaturvedi, Hoffman, et al. This article is distributed by The American
Society for Cell Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after
publication it is available to the public under an
AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0 Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4161506
PMID: 25057021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Virchows Arch. 2014 Nov;465(5):599-605. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1627-1. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

The combination of CD99 and NKX2.2, a transcriptional target of EWSR1-FLI1, is
highly specific for the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma.

Shibuya R(1), Matsuyama A, Nakamoto M, Shiba E, Kasai T, Hisaoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu,
807-8555, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a high-grade malignant neoplasm primarily affecting
children and young adults. The diagnosis of ES is often difficult because of its 
broad differential diagnosis comprising a diverse group of small round cell
tumors (SRCTs). Although the identification of tumor type-specific fusion genes
by molecular testing is the gold standard for the diagnosis of ES, such
approaches are not always available in a routine pathology practice. Thus, a
reliable immunohistochemical marker is required. A recent study using a limited
number of tumor samples has shown that NKX2.2, a putative transcriptional target 
of EWSR1-FLI1, is a useful marker for the diagnosis of ES. In the present study, 
the immunohistochemical expression of NKX2.2 was evaluated on 46 genetically
confirmed ES and 85 non-ES SRCTs, together with comparative assessment of CD99
and other molecular targets of EWSR1-FLI1, including NR0B1, E2F3, and EZH2.
NKX2.2 was expressed in 37 (80 %) of the ES samples with a mostly diffuse and
strong staining pattern, and 14 (16 %) of the non-ES SRCTs, including olfactory
neuroblastomas, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, 
small cell carcinomas, and Merkel cell carcinoma, also expressed this marker. The
sensitivity and specificity of the NKX2.2 expression in this cohort were 80 and
84 %, respectively. The specificity when combined with CD99 was 98 %, with
exceptional expression of both markers in only two non-ES SRCTs, including one
case each of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma and small cell carcinoma. NR0B1, E2F3,
and EZH2 were less sensitive for specific markers for ES when applied singly or
in any combination. In conclusion, the study reinforces that NKX2.2 is a useful
immunohistochemical marker for ES, and that the combination of CD99 and NKX2.2 is
a powerful diagnostic tool that can differentiate ES from other SRCTs.

PMID: 25031013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Zebrafish. 2014 Oct;11(5):434-46. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2014.1001. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Zebrafish embryo model of Bartonella henselae infection.

Lima A(1), Cha BJ, Amin J, Smith LK, Anderson B.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida Morsani
College of Medicine , Tampa, Florida.

Bartonella henselae (Bh) is an emerging zoonotic pathogen that has been
associated with a variety of human diseases, including bacillary angiomatosis
that is characterized by vasoproliferative tumor-like lesions on the skin of some
immunosuppressed individuals. The study of Bh pathogenesis has been limited to in
vitro cell culture systems due to the lack of an animal model. Therefore, we
wanted to investigate whether the zebrafish embryo could be used to model human
infection with Bh. Our data showed that Tg(fli1:egfp)(y1) zebrafish embryos
supported a sustained Bh infection for 7 days with >10-fold bacterial replication
when inoculated in the yolk sac. We showed that Bh recruited phagocytes to the
site of infection in the Tg(mpx:GFP)uwm1 embryos. Infected embryos showed
evidence of a Bh-induced angiogenic phenotype and an increase in the expression
of genes encoding pro-inflammatory factors and pro-angiogenic markers. However,
infection of zebrafish embryos with a deletion mutant in the major adhesin (BadA)
resulted in little or no bacterial replication and a diminished host response,
providing the first evidence that BadA is critical for in vivo infection. Thus,
the zebrafish embryo provides the first practical model of Bh infection that will
facilitate efforts to identify virulence factors and define molecular mechanisms 
of Bh pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4172388
PMID: 25026365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Alcohol. 2014 Sep;48(6):595-602. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2014.06.003. Epub 2014
Jun 8.

Developmental age strengthens barriers to ethanol accumulation in zebrafish.

Lovely CB(1), Nobles RD(2), Eberhart JK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78713, USA;
Waggoner Center for Alcohol & Addiction Research, University of Texas at Austin, 
Austin, TX 78713, USA. Electronic address: benlovely@austin.utexas.edu.
(2)Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Molecular Biosciences, University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78713, USA; Waggoner Center for Alcohol & Addiction Research, 
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78713, USA.

Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD) describes a wide range of phenotypic
defects affecting facial and neurological development associated with ethanol
teratogenicity. It affects approximately 1 in 100 children born in the United
States each year. Genetic predisposition along with timing and dosage of ethanol 
exposure are critical in understanding the prevalence and variability of FASD.
The zebrafish attributes of external fertilization, genetic tractability, and
high fecundity make it a powerful tool for FASD studies. However, a lack of
consensus of ethanol treatment paradigms has limited the interpretation of these 
various studies. Here we address this concern by examining ethanol tissue
concentrations across timing and genetic background. We utilize headspace gas
chromatography to determine ethanol concentration in the AB, fli1:EGFP, and Tu
backgrounds. In addition, we treated these embryos with ethanol over two
different developmental time windows, 6-24 h post fertilization (hpf) and 24-48
hpf. Our analysis demonstrates that embryos rapidly equilibrate to a sub-media
level of ethanol. Embryos then maintain this level of ethanol for the duration of
exposure. The ethanol tissue concentration level is independent of genetic
background, but is timing-dependent. Embryos exposed from 6 to 24 hpf were
2.7-4.2-fold lower than media levels, while embryos were 5.7-6.2-fold lower at 48
hpf. This suggests that embryos strengthen one or more barriers to ethanol as
they develop. In addition, both the embryo and, to a lesser extent, the chorion, 
surrounding the embryo are barriers to ethanol. Overall, this work will help
tighten ethanol treatment regimens and strengthen zebrafish as a model of FASD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4163099
PMID: 25012627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Med Oncol. 2014 Aug;31(8):109. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0109-2. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood cells: new insights into Ewing
sarcoma biology and clinical applications.

Przybyl J(1), Kozak K, Kosela H, Falkowski S, Switaj T, Lugowska I,
Szumera-Cieckiewicz A, Ptaszynski K, Grygalewicz B, Chechlinska M,
Pienkowska-Grela B, Debiec-Rychter M, Siedlecki JA, Rutkowski P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, 5 W.K. Roentgen Street, 02-781,
Warsaw, Poland, joanna.przybyl@coi.pl.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a group of highly aggressive small round cell tumors of
bone or soft tissue with high metastatic potential and low cure rate. ES tumors
are associated with a rapid osteolysis and necrosis. The currently accepted
clinical prognostic parameters do not accurately predict survival of high-risk
patients. Moreover, neither the subtype of EWS-FLI1/ERG in the tumor, nor the
detection of fusion transcripts in the peripheral blood (PB) samples, has
prognostic value in ES patients. We evaluated the prevalence of circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) in 34 adult ES patients. Since CTCs were confirmed in only small
subset of patients, we further explored the expression profiles of PB leukocytes 
using a panel of genes associated with immune system status and increased tumor
invasiveness. Moreover, we analyzed the alterations of the routine blood tests in
the examined cohort of patients and correlated our findings with the clinical
outcome. A uniform decrease in ZAP70 expression in PB cells among all ES
patients, as compared to healthy individuals, was observed. Monocytosis and the
abnormal expression of CDH2 and CDT2 genes in the PB cells significantly
correlated with poor prognosis in ES patients. Our study supports the previously 
proposed hypothesis of systemic nature of ES. Based on the PB cell expression
profiles, we propose a mechanism by which immune system may be involved in
intensification of osteoclastogenesis and disease progression in ES patients.
Moreover, we demonstrate the prognostic value of molecular PB testing at the time
of routine histopathological diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC4119582
PMID: 25008066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3783-91. doi: 10.1021/pr500387m. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Proteomic Analysis of the EWS-Fli-1 Interactome Reveals the Role of the Lysosome 
in EWS-Fli-1 Turnover.

Elzi DJ(1), Song M(1), Hakala K(1), Weintraub ST(1), Shiio Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry,
The University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900,
United States.

Ewing sarcoma is a cancer of bone and soft tissue in children that is
characterized by a chromosomal translocation involving EWS and an Ets family
transcription factor, most commonly Fli-1. EWS-Fli-1 fusion accounts for 85% of
cases. The growth and survival of Ewing sarcoma cells are critically dependent on
EWS-Fli-1. A large body of evidence has established that EWS-Fli-1 functions as a
DNA-binding transcription factor that regulates the expression of a number of
genes important for cell proliferation and transformation. However, little is
known about the biochemical properties of the EWS-Fli-1 protein. We undertook a
series of proteomic analyses to dissect the EWS-Fli-1 interactome. Employing a
proximity-dependent biotinylation technique, BioID, we identified
cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CIMPR) as a protein located in
the vicinity of EWS-Fli-1 within a cell. CIMPR is a cargo that mediates the
delivery of lysosomal hydrolases from the trans-Golgi network to the endosome,
which are subsequently transferred to the lysosomes. Further molecular cell
biological analyses uncovered a role for lysosomes in the turnover of the
EWS-Fli-1 protein. We demonstrate that an mTORC1 active-site inhibitor, torin 1, 
which stimulates the TFEB-lysosome pathway, can induce the degradation of
EWS-Fli-1, suggesting a potential therapeutic approach to target EWS-Fli-1 for
degradation.

PMCID: PMC4123944
PMID: 24999758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Virchows Arch. 2014 Aug;465(2):233-9. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1613-7. Epub 2014
Jul 4.

Malignant round cell tumor of bone with EWSR1-NFATC2 gene fusion.

Sadri N(1), Barroeta J, Pack SD, Abdullaev Z, Chatterjee B, Puthiyaveettil R,
Brooks JS, Barr FG, Zhang PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA, sadrin@mskcc.org.

Gene rearrangements involving the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene 
are seen in a broad range of sarcomas and some nonmesenchymal neoplasms. Ewing
sarcoma is molecularly defined by a fusion of the EWSR1 gene (or rarely the
related FUS gene) to a member of the E26 transformation-specific (ETS) family of 
transcription factors, frequently the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion. More recently, EWSR1
gene fusion to non-ETS family members, including the nuclear factor of activated 
T cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 2 (NFATC2) gene, has been reported in
a histological variant of Ewing sarcoma. Here, we report a malignant round cell
tumor of bone with an EWSR1-NFATC2 fusion gene. This report builds upon the
unusual morphological and clinical presentation of bone neoplasms containing an
EWSR1-NFATC2 fusion gene.

PMID: 24993903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Diagn Pathol. 2014 Jul 1;9:131. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-9-131.

Epithelioid Hemangioendothelioma: clinicopathologic, immunhistochemical, and
molecular genetic analysis of 39 cases.

Flucke U(1), Vogels RJ, de Saint Aubain Somerhausen N, Creytens DH, Riedl RG, van
Gorp JM, Milne AN, Huysentruyt CJ, Verdijk MA, van Asseldonk MM, Suurmeijer AJ,
Bras J, Palmedo G, Groenen PJ, Mentzel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, P,O, Box 9101,
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. uta.flucke@radboudumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a malignant, often indolent
vascular tumor which occurs at various anatomic sites. Based on a reciprocal
translocation t (1;3)(p36;q25), a consistent WWTR1-CAMTA1 fusion gene has been
found. An alternate YAP1-TFE3 fusion has been detected in a small and distinct
subset of cases.
METHODS: Thirty-nine tumors, from 24 females and 15 males with an age range 9-85 
years, were located in soft tissue (head and neck [8], trunk [5], upper
extremities [3], lower extremities [2], mediastinal [1], and paratesticular [1]),
lymph node (1), breast (1), skin (2), bone (6), lung (7), and liver (2). The
cases were investigated using a panel of immunohistochemical markers. The
aforementioned fusion-genes were examined using RT-PCR and/or FISH in order to
validate their diagnostic value.
RESULTS: Follow-up available for 17 patients ranged from 3 months to 7 years
(median interval 1.5 years). Eleven patients were alive without disease, 2
patients were alive with disease after 1.5 and 2 years, respectively. Four
patients died of disease after 4 months (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1), 5 months (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2), and 1.5 years 
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1).The size, known for 30 lesions, was >3 cm in 9 of them. Histologically,
all lesions had classical features, at least focally. Four tumors counted >3
mitoses/50 HPF. Immunohistochemically, all cases tested stained positive for ERG 
(21), FLI1 (5) and CD31 (39). CD34 and D2-40 positivity was seen in 81% and 71%
of the examined cases, respectively. 11/35 cases expressed pan-keratin and 6/20
cases CK8.18. TFE3 showed a nuclear reaction in 21/24 cases, irrespective of TFE3
rearrangement.Molecular genetically, 35/35 cases revealed one of the fusion genes
by FISH and/or RT-PCR with WWTR1-CAMTA1 in 33 cases and YAP1-TFE3 in 2 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate the high diagnostic value of FISH and
RT-PCR in detecting the fusion genes of EHE. The immunohistochemical utility of
TFE3 appears questionable in this study.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/4010279141259481.

PMCID: PMC4100035
PMID: 24986479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Pathol. 2014 Aug;233(4):415-24. doi: 10.1002/path.4378. Epub 2014 Jun 27.

Ewing sarcoma inhibition by disruption of EWSR1-FLI1 transcriptional activity and
reactivation of p53.

van der Ent W(1), Jochemsen AG, Teunisse AF, Krens SF, Szuhai K, Spaink HP,
Hogendoorn PC, Snaar-Jagalska BE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, The Netherlands; Department of
Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

Translocations involving ETS-transcription factors, most commonly leading to the 
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion protein, are the hallmark of Ewing sarcoma. Despite knowledge
of this driving molecular event, an effective therapeutic strategy is lacking. To
test potential treatment regimes, we established a novel Ewing sarcoma zebrafish 
engraftment model allowing time-effective, dynamic quantification of Ewing
sarcoma progression and tumour burden in vivo, applicable for screening of single
and combined compounds. In Ewing sarcoma the tumour-suppressor gene TP53 is
commonly found to be wild-type, thus providing an attractive target for
treatment. Here, we study TP53 wild-type (EW7, CADO-ES1 and TC32) and
TP53-deleted (SK-N-MC) Ewing sarcoma cell lines to investigate the potentiating
effect of p53 reactivation by Nutlin-3 on treatment with YK-4-279 to block
transcriptional activity of EWSR1-FLI1 protein. Blocking EWSR1-FLI1
transcriptional activity reduced Ewing sarcoma tumour cell burden irrespective of
TP53 status. We show that simultaneous YK-4-279 treatment with Nutlin-3 to
stabilize p53 resulted in an additive inhibition of TP53 wild-type Ewing sarcoma 
cell burden, whilst not affecting TP53-deleted Ewing sarcoma cells. Improved
inhibition of proliferation and migration by combinatorial treatment was
confirmed in vivo by zebrafish engraftments. Mechanistically, both compounds
together additively induced apoptosis of tumour cells in vivo by engaging
distinct pathways. We propose reactivation of the p53 pathway in combination with
complementary targeted therapy by EWSR1-FLI1 transcriptional activity disruption 
as a valuable strategy against p53 wild-type Ewing sarcoma.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24974828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;20(17):4584-97. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0072.
Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Reversible LSD1 inhibition interferes with global EWS/ETS transcriptional
activity and impedes Ewing sarcoma tumor growth.

Sankar S(1), Theisen ER(2), Bearss J(3), Mulvihill T(4), Hoffman LM(5), Sorna
V(3), Beckerle MC(6), Sharma S(7), Lessnick SL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah. (2)Center for Investigational Therapeutics at Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Department of
Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. (3)Center for Investigational Therapeutics at
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(4)University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah. (5)Department of 
Biology, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah.
(6)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah. Department of Biology, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. (7)Center for Investigational
Therapeutics at Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah. Division of Medical Oncology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City, Utah. (8)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah. Center for Children's Cancer Research at
Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, Utah. Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah.
stephen.lessnick@hci.utah.edu.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma is a pediatric bone tumor that absolutely relies on the
transcriptional activity of the EWS/ETS family of fusion oncoproteins. While the 
most common fusion, EWS/FLI, utilizes lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) to
repress critical tumor suppressors, small-molecule blockade of LSD1 has not yet
been thoroughly explored as a therapeutic approach for Ewing sarcoma. We
therefore evaluated the translational potential of potent and specific LSD1
inhibition with HCI2509 on the transcriptional program of both EWS/FLI and
EWS/ERG as well as the downstream oncogenic phenotypes driven by EWS/ETS fusions 
in both in vitro and in vivo models of Ewing sarcoma.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: RNA-seq was used to compare the transcriptional profiles of 
EWS/FLI, EWS/ERG, and treatment with HCI2509 in both EWS/FLI- and
EWS/ERG-containing cell lines. We then evaluated morphologic phenotypes of
treated cells with immunofluorescence. The induction of apoptosis was evaluated
using caspase-3/7 activation and TUNEL staining. Colony forming assays were used 
to test oncogenic transformation and xenograft studies with patient-derived cell 
lines were used to evaluate the effects of HCI2509 on tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: HCI2509 caused a dramatic reversal of both the up- and downregulated
transcriptional profiles of EWS/FLI and EWS/ERG accompanied by the induction of
apoptosis and disruption of morphologic and oncogenic phenotypes modulated by
EWS/FLI. Importantly, HCI2509 displayed single-agent efficacy in multiple
xenograft models.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support epigenetic modulation with HCI2509 as a
therapeutic strategy for Ewing sarcoma, and highlight a critical dual role for
LSD1 in the oncogenic transcriptional activity of EWS/ETS proteins.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4155010
PMID: 24963049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mod Pathol. 2015 Jan;28(1):57-68. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2014.83. Epub 2014 Jun
20.

CIC-DUX sarcomas demonstrate frequent MYC amplification and ETS-family
transcription factor expression.

Smith SC(1), Buehler D(2), Choi EY(3), McHugh JB(3), Rubin BP(4), Billings SD(4),
Balzer B(5), Thomas DG(3), Lucas DR(3), Goldblum JR(4), Patel RM(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor,
MI, USA [2] Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Wisconsin Hospital, Madison, WI, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (4)Department of
Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA. (6)1] Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA [2] Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan Health
System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Recent molecular advances have identified a novel, clinically aggressive subgroup
of undifferentiated round cell sarcomas defined molecularly by oncogenic fusion
of the gene, CIC, and either DUX4 or its paralog, DUX4L, herein termed CIC-DUX
sarcomas. Morphologically, CIC-DUX sarcomas are round cell sarcomas with
high-grade nuclear features, including vesicular chromatin and nucleoli, patchy
clear cell foci, myxoid change, and necrosis. Here, we studied a cohort of 10
cases, including 6 newly identified cases, 2 with paired metastases. Given our
prior observation of trisomy 8 in these tumors, we assayed for amplification and 
expression of MYC (c-Myc) and representative downstream targets. Trisomy 8 was
detected in 5/7 testable cases, with further amplification of MYC locus in 6/7
testable cases and immunohistochemical expression of MYC in 10/10. The canonical 
MYC transcriptional target, p21, but not MTDH, was differentially expressed
compared with Ewing sarcomas. Given prior observation of induction of ETS-family 
transcription factors by the fusion oncoprotein, we assayed and identified highly
prevalent positivity for ERG (9/10) and FLI1 (8/8). These findings are cautionary
regarding use of these immunostains in prospective case workup, whereas the
prevalent MYC amplification may represent a therapeutically targetable oncogenic 
pathway in CIC-DUX sarcomas.

PMID: 24947144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Sep;44(9):2617-24. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444442. Epub 2014 Jul 
24.

Fli-1 regulates the DN2 to DN3 thymocyte transition and promotes <U+03B3>d T-cell
commitment by enhancing TCR signal strength.

Smeets MF(1), Wiest DL, Izon DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology and Leukaemia Unit, St. Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, Victoria,
Australia.

Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1) is a member of the Ets transcription factor
family and is expressed during T-cell development; however, the role Fli-1 plays 
in early T-cell differentiation has not been elucidated. In this report, we
demonstrate that in mouse, Fli-1 overexpression retards the CD4(-) CD8(-)
double-negative (DN) to CD4(+) CD8(+) double-positive (DP) transition by
deregulating normal DN thymocyte development. Specifically, Fli-1 expression
moderates the DN2 and DN3 developmental transitions. We further show that Fli-1
overexpression partially mimics strong TCR signals in developing DN thymocytes
and thereby enhances <U+03B3>d T-cell development. Conversely, Fli-1 knockdown by small 
hairpin RNA reverses the lineage bias from <U+03B3>d T cells and directs DN cells to the
aß lineage by attenuating TCR signaling. Therefore, Fli-1 plays a critical role
in both the DN2 to DN3 transition and aß/<U+03B3>d lineage commitment.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24935715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Oncogene. 2015 Apr 16;34(16):2022-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.162. Epub 2014 Jun 9.

The ets transcription factor Fli-1 in development, cancer and disease.

Li Y(1), Luo H(2), Liu T(2), Zacksenhaus E(3), Ben-David Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, China. (2)Division of Biology, the Key Laboratory of Chemistry for
Natural Products of Guizhou Province and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guiyang,
China. (3)1] Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada [2] Division of Advanced Diagnostics, Toronto General Research
Institute-University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)1] Division of 
Biology, the Key Laboratory of Chemistry for Natural Products of Guizhou Province
and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guiyang, China [2] Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Friend leukemia virus-induced erythroleukemia-1 (Fli-1), an E26 transformation
specific (ETS) transcription factor, was isolated a quarter century ago through a
retrovirus mutagenesis screen. Fli-1 has since been recognized to play critical
roles in normal development and homeostasis. For example, it transcriptionally
regulates genes that drive normal hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis. Indeed, Fli-1
is one of 10 key regulators of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell maintenance and
differentiation. Aberrant expression of Fli-1 also underlies a number of virally 
induced leukemias, including Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia and various
types of human cancers, and it is the target of chromosomal translocations in
childhood Ewing's sarcoma. Abnormal expression of Fli-1 is important in the
etiology of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic
sclerosis. These studies establish Fli-1 as a strong candidate for drug
development. Despite difficulties in targeting transcription factors, recent
studies identified small-molecule inhibitors for Fli-1. Here we review past and
ongoing research on Fli-1 with emphasis on its mechanistic function in autoimmune
disease and malignant transformation. The significance of identifying Fli-1
inhibitors and their clinical applications for treatment of disease and cancer
with deregulated Fli-1 expression are discussed.

PMID: 24909161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Histopathology. 2014 Jun;64(7):1014-26. doi: 10.1111/his.12350. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Ewing sarcoma of the small bowel: a study of seven cases, including one with the 
uncommonly reported EWSR1-FEV translocation.

Milione M(1), Gasparini P, Sozzi G, Mazzaferro V, Ferrari A, Casali PG, Perrone
F, Tamborini E, Pellegrinelli A, Gherardi G, Arrigoni G, Collini P, Testi A, De
Paoli E, Aiello A, Pilotti S, Pelosi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

AIMS: Primary Ewing sarcoma of the ileum has rarely been documented. Little is
known about its pathogenesis and clinical implications, and it would be helpful
to identify novel molecular markers. EWSR1-FEV translocation is exceedingly rare 
in Ewing sarcoma, as FEV expression is restricted to prostate, brain and
serotonin neuroendocrine cells (NE) and related tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Paraffin sections or snap-frozen material were used in this 
investigation. Tumours were investigated by means of immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR
(EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-ERG and EWSR1-FEV transcripts), FISH analysis (EWSR1
break-apart and specific EWSR1-FEV translocation) and spectral karyotyping (SKY).
Ten ileal neuroendocrine tumours (INET) made up the control group for EWSR1-FEV
translocation. Among 445 Ewing sarcomas cases spanning a period of 20 years,
seven (1.6%) arose in the ileum. All tumours were immunoreactive for
synaptophysin, CD99, FLI1 and vimentin. FISH identified EWSR1 rearrangement in
all cases, with EWSR1-FLI1 transcripts being detected in all but one tumour
showing the uncommon EWSR1-FEV rearrangement, with SKY, RT-PCR and FISH
confirmation. The mean survival of EWSR1-FLI1 patients was 14 months, whereas the
EWSR1-FEV patient was alive after 15 years despite several recurrences controlled
by surgery alone. No INET showed EWSR1 translocation.
CONCLUSIONS: Most primary Ewing sarcomas of the ileum show the common EWSR1-FLI1 
translocation, but EWSR1-FEV could be specific for tumours arising in the ileum
and showing better prognosis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24898918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 3;5:3964. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4964.

Engineering human tumour-associated chromosomal translocations with the
RNA-guided CRISPR-Cas9 system.

Torres R(1), Martin MC(2), Garcia A(1), Cigudosa JC(2), Ramirez JC(1),
Rodriguez-Perales S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Vector Facility, Fundacion Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Molecular Cytogenetics Group, Spanish National Cancer Centre-CNIO, Melchor
Fernandez Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Cancer-related human chromosomal translocations are generated through the
illegitimate joining of two non-homologous chromosomes affected by double-strand 
breaks (DSB). Effective methodologies to reproduce precise reciprocal
tumour-associated chromosomal translocations are required to gain insight into
the initiation of leukaemia and sarcomas. Here we present a strategy for
generating cancer-related human chromosomal translocations in vitro based on the 
ability of the RNA-guided CRISPR-Cas9 system to induce DSBs at defined positions.
Using this approach we generate human cell lines and primary cells bearing
chromosomal translocations resembling those described in acute myeloid leukaemia 
and Ewing's sarcoma at high frequencies. FISH and molecular analysis at the mRNA 
and protein levels of the fusion genes involved in these engineered cells reveal 
the reliability and accuracy of the CRISPR-Cas9 approach, providing a powerful
tool for cancer studies.

PMID: 24888982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):419-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB0314-145R. Epub 2014
May 27.

The Cebpa +37-kb enhancer directs transgene expression to myeloid progenitors and
to long-term hematopoietic stem cells.

Guo H(1), Ma O(1), Friedman AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA afriedm2@jhmi.edu.

C/EBPa is expressed preferentially in myeloid compared with lymphoid or erythroid
cells and directs myeloid lineage specification. C/EBPa is also expressed at
lower levels in HSCs and in several nonhematopoietic tissues. The Cebpa gene has 
a conserved, 450-bp segment at +37 kb that harbors enhancer-specific epigenetic
marks and is activate in a myeloid cell line. Herein, we characterize transgenic 
C57BL/6 mice, in which the Cebpa enhancer and 845-bp promoter regulate a hCD4
reporter. FACS analysis, in vitro colony assays, and in vivo competitive and
secondary transplantation revealed that myeloid but not MEPs or lymphoid
progenitors and also functional LT-HSCs are found almost exclusively in the
Cebpa-hCD4(+) compared with hCD4(-) marrow population. hCD4(+) CMP yielded
predominantly myeloid, whereas hCD4(-) CMP generated mainly Meg/E colonies.
Providing insight into control of CMP maturation, Cebpa and Pu.1 RNAs were
preferentially expressed in hCD4(+) CMP, Scl, Gata2, Gata1, Klf1, Ets1, and Fli1 
predominated in hCD4(-) CMP, and Runx1, Myb, HoxA9, and Erg levels were similar
in both. Cebpa-hCD4 transgene expression was lacking in multiple nonhematopoietic
tissues. In summary, the +37-kb Cebpa enhancer and promoter are sufficient for
marrow myeloid progenitor and LT-HSC-specific expression.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138201
PMID: 24868087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2014 Jun;109(3):279-88. Epub 2014 May 27.

Host genetic factors in American cutaneous leishmaniasis: a critical appraisal of
studies conducted in an endemic area of Brazil.

Castellucci LC(1), Almeida LF(1), Jamieson SE(2), Fakiola M(2), Carvalho EM(1),
Blackwell JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Doenças Tropicais, Universidade 
Federal da Bahia, Salvador, BA, Brasil. (2)Telethon Kids Institute, The
University of Western Australi, Perth, Australia.

American cutaneous leishmaniasis (ACL) is a vector-transmitted infectious disease
with an estimated 1.5 million new cases per year. In Brazil, ACL represents a
significant public health problem, with approximately 30,000 new reported cases
annually, representing an incidence of 18.5 cases per 100,000 inhabitants. Corte 
de Pedra is in a region endemic for ACL in the state of Bahia (BA), northeastern 
Brazil, with 500-1,300 patients treated annually. Over the last decade,
population and family-based candidate gene studies were conducted in Corte de
Pedra, founded on previous knowledge from studies on mice and humans.
Notwithstanding limitations related to sample size and power, these studies
contribute important genetic biomarkers that identify novel pathways of disease
pathogenesis and possible new therapeutic targets. The present paper is a
narrative review about ACL immunogenetics in BA, highlighting in particular the
interacting roles of the wound healing gene FLI1 with interleukin-6 and genes
SMAD2 and SMAD3 of the transforming growth factor beta signalling pathway. This
research highlights the need for well-powered genetic and functional studies on
Leishmania braziliensis infection as essential to define and validate the role of
host genes in determining resistance/susceptibility regarding this disease.

PMCID: PMC4131779
PMID: 24863979  [PubMed - in process]


176. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Aug;21(2):336-41. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.05.013.
Epub 2014 May 24.

EWS/FLI-l peptide-pulsed dendritic cells induces the antitumor immunity in a
murine Ewing's sarcoma cell model.

Peng W(1), Huang X(1), Yang D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, 309th Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100091, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Chongqing 400014, China;
Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing 400014, China; Chongqing
International Science and Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and
Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014,
China. Electronic address: zhuerdyang@163.com.

An increasing number of T-cell epitopes derived from various tumor-associated
antigens have been reported, and they proved to play significant roles for tumor 
rejection both in vivo and in vitro. Over 85% of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors
(ESFTs) express tumor-specific chimeric protein EWS/FLI-1, making it an
attractive target for therapeutic cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses. Here, we
identified a novel peptide epitope derived from the EWS/FLI-1 protein and
demonstrated that effectors induced by the peptide could specifically secrete
IFN-<U+03B3> and lyse the tumor cell line of EWS/FLI-1-positive and HLA-matched cells.
In addition, mice treated with dendritic cells pulsed with the EWS/FLI-1 epitope 
were able to reject a lethal tumor inoculation of the Ewing's sarcoma A673 cells.
Therefore, these data provide evidence for the use of the EWS/FLI-l peptide
epitope in T cell-based immunotherapeutic concepts against Ewing's sarcoma cell
in vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24861249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2014 Aug;24(4):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2014.04.002. Epub 
2014 Apr 16.

Investigation of IGF2, Hedgehog and fusion gene expression profiles in pediatric 
sarcomas.

de Souza RR(1), Oliveira ID(2), del Giúdice Paniago M(3), Yaoita FH(4), Caran
EM(5), Macedo CR(6), Petrilli AS(7), Abib Sde C(8), de Seixas Alves MT(9), de
Toledo SR(10).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: rramos.souza@hotmail.com. (2)Pediatric Oncology Institute
(GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Federal University
of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
indhiradias@graacc.org.br. (3)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department
of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: mariopaniago@graacc.org.br. (4)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC),
Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil;
Department of Structural and Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: fernando.yaoita@gmail.com.
(5)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
elianacaran@graacc.org.br. (6)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department
of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic
address: carladonatomacedo@uol.com.br. (7)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), 
Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: sergiopetrilli@graacc.org.br. (8)Pediatric Oncology Institute
(GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brazil; Division of Pediatric Surgery, Federal University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: simoneabib@uol.com.br. (9)Pediatric
Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Pathology, Federal University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. Electronic address: mtseixas@patologia.epm.br.
(10)Pediatric Oncology Institute (GRAACC), Department of Pediatrics, Federal
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil; Department of Structural and
Functional Biology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
Electronic address: silviatoledo@graacc.org.br.

The childhood sarcomas are malignant tumors with high mortality rates. They are
divided into two genetic categories: a category without distinct pattern
karyotypic changes and the other category showing unique translocations that
originate gene rearrangements. This category includes rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS),
Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and synovial sarcoma (SS). Diverse studies have related
development genes, such as; IGF2, IHH, PTCH1 and GLI1 and
sarcomatogenesis.OBJECTIVE: To characterize the RMS, ES and SS rearrangements, we
quantify the expression of IGF2 IHH, PTCH1 and GLI1 genes and correlate molecular
data with clinical parameters of patients.
DESIGN: We analyzed 29 RMS, 10 SS and 60 ES tumor samples by RT-PCR (polymerase
chain reaction-reverse transcription) and qPCR (quantitative PCR).
RESULTS: Among the samples of ARMS, 50% had rearrangements of PAX3/7-FOXO1, 60%
of ES samples were EWS-FLI1 positive and 90% of SS samples were positive for
SS18-SSX1/2. In relation to the control reference samples (QPCR Human Reference
Total RNA-Stratagene, Human Skeletal Muscle Total RNA-Ambion, Universal RNA Human
Normal Tissues-Ambion), RMS samples showed a high IGF2 gene expression
(p<0.0001). Moreover, ES samples showed a low IGF2 gene expression (p<0.0001) and
high IHH (p<0.0001), PTCH1 (p=0.0173) and GLI1 (p=0.0113) gene expressions.
CONCLUSIONS: The molecular characterization of IGF and Hedgehog pathway in these 
pediatric sarcomas may collaborate to enable a better understanding of the
biological behavior of these neoplasms.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24846856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Pathol. 2014 Aug;45(8):1618-24. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.03.016. Epub 2014
Apr 13.

Aberrant expression of neuroendocrine markers in angiosarcoma: a potential
diagnostic pitfall.

Tessier Cloutier B(1), Costa FD(2), Tazelaar HD(3), Folpe AL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital AC Camargo, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil. 
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
Electronic address: Folpe.Andrew@Mayo.edu.

Angiosarcomas (AS) are uncommon endothelial malignancies, usually arising from
sun-damaged skin in older adults. Although most AS are readily diagnosed by light
microscopy alone, immunohistochemistry (IHC) for endothelial markers such as
CD31, CD34, FLI1, and ERG plays a valuable adjunctive role. However, IHC studies 
of AS must be interpreted with caution, as aberrant expression of markers such as
cytokeratins, CD30, and CD117 may be seen. We report 3 cases of AS showing
aberrant expression of the neuroendocrine markers synaptophysin and/or
chromogranin A, previously unreported phenomena. Cases presented as metastatic
lesions in the lung of a 48-year-old woman and as primary tumors of the kidney
and neck in a 29-year-old and a 51-year-old woman, respectively. All cases
expressed synaptophysin and/or chromogranin A, and various
neuroendocrine/endocrine neoplasms were strongly considered as diagnoses by the
initial evaluating pathologists. Additional morphological study and confirmatory 
IHC for CD31, FLI1, and ERG established the diagnosis of AS in all cases.
Coexpression of synaptophysin and chromogranin A in 1 case suggests that at least
some AS show true neuroendocrine differentiation. Awareness of this potential
diagnostic pitfall is important for correct diagnosis and treatment of this rare 
subset of AS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24846674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Curr Opin Oncol. 2014 Jul;26(4):428-33. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000091.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitors in Ewing sarcoma.

Vormoor B(1), Curtin NJ.

Author information: 
(1)aNewcastle Cancer Centre at the Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Newcastle University bGreat North Children's Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: In 2012, two publications revealed a particular sensitivity of
Ewing sarcoma cells to the inhibition of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). This
review updates the reader on PARP function, the development of PARP inhibitors
(PARPi) and the evidence for targeting PARP in Ewing sarcoma. It concludes with a
description of ongoing/emerging PARPi clinical trials in patients with Ewing
sarcoma.
RECENT FINDINGS: PARP has a major role in DNA repair, and is a transcription
regulator. The oncoprotein in Ewing sarcoma, EWS-FLI1, is proposed to interact
with PARP-1, driving PARP-1 expression, which further promotes transcriptional
activation by EWS-FLI1. Thus, there are two rationales for PARPi in the treatment
of Ewing sarcoma: to disrupt the interaction between EWS-FLI1 and PARP, and for
chemo-potentiation or radio-potentiation. The first clinical trial with a single 
agent PARPi failed to show significant responses, but preclinical evidence for
combinations of PARPi with chemotherapy or radiotherapy is very promising.
SUMMARY: Despite initial excitement for the potential of PARPi as single agent
therapy in Ewing sarcoma, the emerging preclinical data now strongly support
testing PARPi in combination with chemo/radiotherapy clinically.

PMCID: PMC4059819
PMID: 24840521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS One. 2014 May 14;9(5):e97280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097280. eCollection
2014.

Genetic signature of histiocytic sarcoma revealed by a sleeping beauty transposon
genetic screen in mice.

Been RA(1), Linden MA(2), Hager CJ(3), DeCoursin KJ(3), Abrahante JE(4), Landman 
SR(5), Steinbach M(5), Sarver AL(3), Largaespada DA(6), Starr TK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United
States of America; College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Minnesota, St.
Paul, Minnesota, United States of America; Department of Comparative and
Molecular Biosciences, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota, United
States of America. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America. (3)Masonic Cancer
Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America. (4)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, United States of America; Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America.
(5)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America. (6)Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America;
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America. (7)Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of America;
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women's Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, United States of America; Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States of
America.

Histiocytic sarcoma is a rare, aggressive neoplasm that responds poorly to
therapy. Histiocytic sarcoma is thought to arise from macrophage precursor cells 
via genetic changes that are largely undefined. To improve our understanding of
the etiology of histiocytic sarcoma we conducted a forward genetic screen in mice
using the Sleeping Beauty transposon as a mutagen to identify genetic drivers of 
histiocytic sarcoma. Sleeping Beauty mutagenesis was targeted to myeloid lineage 
cells using the Lysozyme2 promoter. Mice with activated Sleeping Beauty
mutagenesis had significantly shortened lifespan and the majority of these mice
developed tumors resembling human histiocytic sarcoma. Analysis of transposon
insertions identified 27 common insertion sites containing 28 candidate cancer
genes. Several of these genes are known drivers of hematological neoplasms, like 
Raf1, Fli1, and Mitf, while others are well-known cancer genes, including Nf1,
Myc, Jak2, and Pten. Importantly, several new potential drivers of histiocytic
sarcoma were identified and could serve as targets for therapy for histiocytic
sarcoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4020815
PMID: 24827933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cell Rep. 2014 May 22;7(4):1211-26. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.077. Epub 2014 
May 10.

Regulation of FAS exon definition and apoptosis by the Ewing sarcoma protein.

Paronetto MP(1), Bernardis I(2), Volpe E(3), Bechara E(4), Sebestyén E(2), Eyras 
E(5), Valcárcel J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; University of Rome "Foro Italico," Piazza Lauro de Bosis 6, 00135 Rome,
Italy; Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology and of
Neuroimmunology, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00143 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mariapaola.paronetto@uniroma4.it. (2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor
Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (3)Laboratories of Cellular and Molecular
Neurobiology and of Neuroimmunology, Fondazione Santa Lucia, 00143 Rome, Italy.
(4)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona,
Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Pg Lluis Companys 23,
08010 Barcelona, Spain. (6)Centre for Genomic Regulation, carrer Doctor Aiguader 
88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra, carrer Doctor Aiguader 88, 
08003 Barcelona, Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Pg
Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
juan.valcarcel@crg.eu.

The Ewing sarcoma protein EWS is an RNA and DNA binding protein implicated in
transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, and DNA damage response. Using CLIP-seq, we
identified EWS RNA binding sites in exonic regions near 5' splice sites. A
prominent target was exon 6 of the FAS/CD95 receptor, which is alternatively
spliced to generate isoforms with opposing activities in programmed cell death.
Depletion and overexpression experiments showed that EWS promotes exon 6
inclusion and consequently the synthesis of the proapoptotic FAS/CD95 isoform,
whereas an EWS-FLI1 fusion protein characteristic of Ewing sarcomas shows
decreased activity. Biochemical analyses revealed that EWS binding promotes the
recruitment of U1snRNP and U2AF65 to the splice sites flanking exon 6 and
therefore exon definition. Consistent with a role for EWS in the regulation of
programmed cell death, cells depleted of EWS show decreased sensitivity to
FAS-induced apoptosis, and elevated EWS expression enhances apoptosis in
EWS-haploinsufficient Ewing sarcoma cells.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24813895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Dec;229(12):2049-56. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24663.

RUNX3 facilitates growth of Ewing sarcoma cells.

Bledsoe KL(1), McGee-Lawrence ME, Camilleri ET, Wang X, Riester SM, van Wijnen
AJ, Oliveira AM, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric small round cell tumor that
predominantly occurs in bone. Approximately 85% of Ewing sarcomas harbor the
EWS/FLI fusion protein, which arises from a chromosomal translocation,
t(11:22)(q24:q12). EWS/FLI interacts with numerous lineage-essential
transcription factors to maintain mesenchymal progenitors in an undifferentiated 
state. We previously showed that EWS/FLI binds the osteogenic transcription
factor RUNX2 and prevents osteoblast differentiation. In this study, we
investigated the role of another Runt-domain protein, RUNX3, in Ewing sarcoma.
RUNX3 participates in mesenchymal-derived bone formation and is a context
dependent tumor suppressor and oncogene. RUNX3 was detected in all Ewing sarcoma 
cells examined, whereas RUNX2 was detected in only 73% of specimens. Like RUNX2, 
RUNX3 binds to EWS/FLI via its Runt domain. EWS/FLI prevented RUNX3 from
activating the transcription of a RUNX-responsive reporter, p6OSE2. Stable
suppression of RUNX3 expression in the Ewing sarcoma cell line A673 delayed
colony growth in anchorage independent soft agar assays and reversed expression
of EWS/FLI-responsive genes. These results demonstrate an important role for
RUNX3 in Ewing sarcoma.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4149590
PMID: 24812032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2014 Jul-Aug;17(4):302-7. doi: 10.2350/14-03-1454-CR.1. Epub 
2014 Apr 15.

Primary subcutaneous spindle cell Ewing sarcoma with strong S100 expression and
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion: a case report.

Arnold MA(1), Ballester LY, Pack SD, Abdullaev Z, Merchant M, Tsokos MG.

Author information: 
(1)1<U+2009> Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Ohio State University 
College of Medicine and Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is described classically as a small, round cell tumor of bone and
soft tissue in children and young adults. Ewing sarcoma most often is
characterized by a fusion of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) and
the Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1) genes, forming an EWSR1-FLI1
fusion transcript. We report an exceptional case of primary subcutaneous Ewing
sarcoma in a 16-year-old female composed entirely of spindle cells with focal
fascicular growth and exhibiting strong, diffuse immunohistochemical reactivity
for S100, unlike classic Ewing sarcoma. However, reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis confirmed the presence of a rare variant of the 
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcript, featuring fusion of EWSR1 exon 10 to FLI1 exon 6.
To our knowledge, the combined histologic, molecular, and clinical features have 
not been reported previously in Ewing sarcoma, and raise a broad differential
diagnosis emphasizing the importance of molecular techniques in the diagnosis of 
this tumor.

PMID: 24735198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Circ Res. 2014 May 23;114(11):1690-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.1134303145. Epub
2014 Apr 11.

Fli1 acts downstream of Etv2 to govern cell survival and vascular homeostasis via
positive autoregulation.

Abedin MJ(1), Nguyen A(1), Jiang N(1), Perry CE(1), Shelton JM(1), Watson DK(1), 
Ferdous A(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology) (M.J.A., A.N., N.J.,
C.E.P., J.M.S., A.F.), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas;
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical 
University of South Carolina, Charleston (D.K.W.); and Division of Hematology,
Oncology, and Transplantation, Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis (M.J.A.). (2)From the Department of Internal Medicine (Cardiology)
(M.J.A., A.N., N.J., C.E.P., J.M.S., A.F.), University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings
Cancer Center, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston (D.K.W.); and
Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis (M.J.A.).
anwarul.ferdous@utsouthwestern.edu.

RATIONALE: Cardiovascular health depends on proper development and integrity of
blood vessels. Ets variant 2 (Etv2), a member of the E26 transforming-specific
family of transcription factors, is essential to initiate a transcriptional
program leading to vascular morphogenesis in early mouse embryos. However,
endothelial expression of the Etv2 gene ceases at midgestation; therefore,
vascular development past this stage must continue independent of Etv2.
OBJECTIVE: To identify molecular mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation
of vascular morphogenesis and homeostasis in the absence of Etv2.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using loss- and gain-of-function strategies and a series of 
molecular techniques, we identify Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli1), another
E26 transforming-specific family transcription factor, as a downstream target of 
Etv2. We demonstrate that Etv2 binds to conserved Ets-binding sites within the
promoter region of the Fli1 gene and governs Fli1 expression. Importantly, in the
absence of Etv2 at midgestation, binding of Etv2 at Ets-binding sites in the Fli1
promoter is replaced by Fli1 protein itself, sustaining expression of Fli1 as
well as selective Etv2-regulated endothelial genes to promote endothelial cell
survival and vascular integrity. Consistent with this, we report that Fli1 binds 
to the conserved Ets-binding sites within promoter and enhancer regions of other 
Etv2-regulated endothelial genes, including Tie2, to control their expression at 
and beyond midgestation.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a novel positive feed-forward regulatory loop in 
which Etv2 activates expression of genes involved in vasculogenesis, including
Fli1. Once the program is activated in early embryos, Fli1 then takes over to
sustain the process in the absence of Etv2.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4080722
PMID: 24727028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Jul;53(7):622-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22172. Epub
2014 Apr 10.

Distinct transcriptional signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 fusion-positive 
round cell tumors compared to EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas: further evidence
toward distinct pathologic entities.

Specht K(1), Sung YS, Zhang L, Richter GH, Fletcher CD, Antonescu CR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Round cell sarcomas harboring CIC-DUX4 fusions have recently been described as
highly aggressive soft tissue tumors of children and young adults. Due to partial
morphologic and immunohistochemical overlap with Ewing sarcoma (ES),
CIC-DUX4-positive tumors have generally been classified as ES-like and managed
similarly; however, a systematic comparison at the molecular and
immunohistochemical levels between these two groups has not yet been conducted.
Based on an initial observation that CIC-DUX4-positive tumors show nuclear
immunoreactivity for WT1 and ETS transcription factors, FLI1 and ERG, we
performed a detailed immunohistochemical and molecular analysis including these
markers, to further investigate the relationship between CIC-DUX4 tumors and ES. 
The study group included 21 CIC-DUX4-positive sarcomas and 20 EWSR1-rearranged
ES. Immunohistochemically, CIC-DUX4 sarcomas showed membranous CD99 positivity in
18 (86%) cases, but only 5 (24%) with a diffuse pattern, while WT1 and FLI1 were 
strongly positive in all cases. ERG was positive in 18% of cases. All ES
expressed CD99 and FLI1, while ERG positivity was only seen in EWSR1-ERG fusion
positive ES. WT1 was negative in all ES. Expression profiling validated by q-PCR 
revealed a distinct gene signature associated with CIC-DUX4 fusion, with
upregulation of ETS transcription factors (ETV4, ETV1, and ETV5) and WT1, among
top overexpressed genes compared to ES, other sarcomas and normal tissue. In
conclusion, the distinct gene signature and immunoprofile of CIC-DUX4 sarcomas
suggest a distinct pathogenesis from ES. The consistent WT1 expression may
provide a useful clue in the diagnosis in the context of round cell sarcomas
negative for EWSR1 rearrangement. © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108073
PMID: 24723486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Apr 3;16(2):R86. doi: 10.1186/ar4529.

Bosentan reverses the pro-fibrotic phenotype of systemic sclerosis dermal
fibroblasts via increasing DNA binding ability of transcription factor Fli1.

Akamata K, Asano Y, Aozasa N, Noda S, Taniguchi T, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y,
Toyama T, Sato S.

INTRODUCTION: Although the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis (SSc) still remains
unknown, recent studies have demonstrated that endothelins are deeply involved in
the developmental process of fibrosis and vasculopathy associated with SSc, and a
dual endothelin receptor antagonist, bosentan, has a potential to serve as a
disease modifying drug for this disorder. Importantly, endothelin-1 (ET-1) exerts
a pro-fibrotic effect on normal dermal fibroblasts and bosentan reverses the
pro-fibrotic phenotype of SSc dermal fibroblasts. The purpose of this study was
to clarify the details of molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of ET-1 and
bosentan on dermal fibroblasts, which have not been well studied.
METHODS: The mRNA levels of target genes and the expression and phosphorylation
levels of target proteins were determined by reverse transcription real-time PCR 
and immunoblotting, respectively. Promoter assays were performed using a
sequential deletion of human a2 (I) collagen (COL1A2) promoter. DNA affinity
precipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation were employed to evaluate the DNA
binding ability of Fli1. Fli1 protein levels in murine skin were evaluated by
immunostaining.
RESULTS: In normal fibroblasts, ET-1 activated c-Abl and protein kinase C (PKC)-d
and induced Fli1 phosphorylation at threonine 312, leading to the decreased DNA
binding of Fli1, a potent repressor of the COL1A2 gene, and the increase in type 
I collagen expression. On the other hand, bosentan reduced the expression of
c-Abl and PKC-d, the nuclear localization of PKC-d, and Fli1 phosphorylation,
resulting in the increased DNA binding of Fli1 and the suppression of type I
collagen expression in SSc fibroblasts. In bleomycin-treated mice, bosentan
prevented dermal fibrosis and increased Fli1 expression in lesional dermal
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: ET-1 exerts a potent pro-fibrotic effect on normal fibroblasts by
activating "c-Abl - PKC-d - Fli1" pathway. Bosentan reverses the pro-fibrotic
phenotype of SSc fibroblasts and prevents the development of dermal fibrosis in
bleomycin-treated mice by blocking this signaling pathway. Although the efficacy 
of bosentan for dermal and pulmonary fibrosis is limited in SSc, the present
observation definitely provides us with a useful clue to further explore the
potential of the upcoming new dual endothelin receptor antagonists as disease
modifying drugs for SSc.

PMCID: PMC4060196
PMID: 24708674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(4):633-41.

The GANT61, a GLI inhibitor, induces caspase-independent apoptosis of SK-N-LO
cells.

Matsumoto T(1), Tabata K, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Nihon University.

GANT61 is a small-molecule inhibitor of glioma-associated oncogene 1 (GLI1)- and 
GLI2-mediated transcription at the nuclear level that exerts its effect by
preventing DNA binding. It has been demonstrated to induce cell death against
Ewing's sarcoma family tumor (ESFT) cell lines in a dose-dependent manner. The
most sensitive cell line was SK-N-LO, which expresses the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene.
SK-N-LO cells treated with GANT61 showed cellular and nuclear morphological
changes, including cell shrinkage, chromatin condensation and nuclear
fragmentation, in a concentration-dependent manner, as visualized by Hoechst
33342 staining. Furthermore, annexin V-propidium iodide (PI) double-staining
revealed a significant increase in the number of late apoptotic cells. GANT61
induced a significant decrease in the proportion of cells in the S phase.
Significant decrease of the protein levels of GLI2, survivin, cyclin A and
claspin, and significant increase of p21 expression was also observed in the
cells treated with GANT61. Moreover, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) cleavage
was observed, but no cleavage of caspase-3 or -7, or any change in the
expressions of Bcl-2 or p53 were observed. These findings suggest that GANT61
induces cell death of SK-N-LO cells in a caspase-independent manner, by
inhibiting DNA replication in the S phase.

PMID: 24694609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jun 5;732:76-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.03.030. Epub
2014 Mar 29.

Protective effects of puerarin against Aß40-induced vascular dysfunction in
zebrafish and human endothelial cells.

Lu XL(1), Liu JX(2), Wu Q(1), Long SM(1), Zheng MY(1), Yao XL(1), Ren H(3), Wang 
YG(4), Su WW(4), Fai Cheung RT(5), Zeng JS(1), Su H(6), Pei Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline
of Neurology, Guangdong Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Major
Neurological Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (3)State
Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of Chinese
Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau 999078, China. (4)Key Laboratory of 
Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Plant 
Resources, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275,
China. (5)Department of Medicine, The Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, SAR, China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese
Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macau
999078, China. Electronic address: Huanxingsu@umac.mo. (7)Department of
Neurology, National Key Clinical Department and Key Discipline of Neurology,
Guangdong Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Major Neurological
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou
510080, China. Electronic address: peizhong@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Aß40-induced vascular dysfunction has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer<U+05F3>s disease (AD). In the present study, we investigated the possible
protective effects of puerarin against Aß40-induced vascular damage and
impairment to angiogenesis in transgenic TG (fli1:EGFP) zebrafish and human
endothelial cells. Aß40 peptides at 5µM caused an obvious reduction of vessel
branches in the subintestinal vein basket, induced NADPH oxidase-derived reactive
oxygen species and impaired vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-dependent
angiogenesis. Pretreatment with puerarin attenuated Aß40-induced vessel reduction
and impairment to angiogenesis in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, Aß40
decreased VEGF-dependent phosphorylation of Akt and eNOS, whereas puerarin
treatment attenuated these detrimental effects. Furthermore, the restoration of
Aß40-induced-angiogenesis impairment by puerarin was abolished by either the PI3 
kinase inhibitor LY294002 (10µM) or eNOS inhibitor L-NAME. The present study
suggests that puerarin exerts its protective action probably through reduction of
NADPH oxidase-derived reactive oxygen species overproduction and activation of
the PI3K/Akt/eNOS pathways.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24690262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 May;150:189-200. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.03.010. Epub
2014 Mar 19.

Transgenic fluorescent zebrafish Tg(fli1:EGFP)y¹ for the identification of
vasotoxicity within the zFET.

Delov V(1), Muth-Köhne E(2), Schäfers C(2), Fenske M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME),
Forckenbeckstr. 6, 52074 Aachen, Germany; Institute for Molecular Biotechnology
(Biology VII), RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074 Aachen, Germany.
Electronic address: vera.delov@rwth-aachen.de. (2)Fraunhofer Institute for
Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME), Auf dem Aberg 1, 57392
Schmallenberg, Germany. (3)Fraunhofer Institute for Molecular Biology and Applied
Ecology (IME), Forckenbeckstr. 6, 52074 Aachen, Germany; Fraunhofer Institute for
Molecular Biology and Applied Ecology (IME), Auf dem Aberg 1, 57392
Schmallenberg, Germany. Electronic address: martina.fenske@ime.fraunhofer.de.

The fish embryo toxicity test (FET) is currently one of the most advocated animal
alternative tests in ecotoxicology. To date, the application of the FET with
zebrafish (zFET) has focused on acute toxicity assessment, where only lethal
morphological effects are accounted for. An application of the zFET beyond acute 
toxicity, however, necessitates the establishment of more refined and
quantifiable toxicological endpoints. A valuable tool in this context is the use 
of gene expression-dependent fluorescent markers that can even be measured in
vivo. We investigated the application of embryos of Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1) for the
identification of vasotoxic substances within the zFET. Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1) fish
express enhanced GFP in the entire vasculature under the control of the fli1
promoter, and thus enable the visualization of vascular defects in live zebrafish
embryos. We assessed the fli1 driven EGFP-expression in the intersegmental blood 
vessels (ISVs) qualitatively and quantitatively, and found an exposure
concentration related increase in vascular damage for chemicals like triclosan,
cartap and genistein. The fluorescence endpoint ISV-length allowed an earlier and
more sensitive detection of vasotoxins than the bright field assessment method.
In combination with the standard bright field morphological effect assessment, an
increase in significance and value of the zFET for a mechanism-specific toxicity 
evaluation was achieved. This study highlights the benefits of using transgenic
zebrafish as convenient tools for identifying toxicity in vivo and to increase
sensitivity and specificity of the zFET.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24685623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Blood Cancer J. 2014 Mar 28;4:e198. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2014.18.

Novel function of the chromosome 7 open reading frame 41 gene to promote leukemic
megakaryocyte differentiation by modulating TPA-induced signaling.

Sun X(1), Lu B(1), Hu B(2), Xiao W(2), Li W(1), Huang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (2)Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) activates multiple signaling pathways,
alters gene expression and causes leukemic cell differentiation. How TPA-induced 
genes contribute to leukemic cell differentiation remains elusive. We noticed
that chromosome 7 open reading frame 41 (C7ORF41) was a TPA-responsive gene and
its upregulation concurred with human megakaryocyte differentiation. In K562
cells, ectopic expression of C7ORF41 significantly increased CD61 expression,
enhanced ERK and JNK signaling, and upregulated RUNX1 and FLI1, whereas C7ORF41
knockdown caused an opposite phenotype. These observations suggest that C7ORF41
may promote megakaryocyte differentiation partially through modulating ERK and
JNK signaling that leads to upregulation of RUNX1 and FLI1. In supporting this,
C7ORF41 overexpression rescued megakaryocyte differentiation blocked by ERK
inhibition while JNK inhibition abrogated the upregulation of FLI1 by C7ORF41.
Furthermore, we found that Y34F mutant C7ORF41 inhibited megakaryocyte
differentiation. nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells
(NF-<U+03BA>B) was the major activator of C7ORF41 that in turn repressed NF-<U+03BA>B activity 
by inhibiting its phosphorylation at serine 536, while MAPK/ERK was the potent
repressor of C7ORF41. Finally, we showed that C7ORF41 knockdown in mouse fetal
liver cells impaired megakaryocyte differentiation. Taken together, we have
identified the function of a novel gene C7ORF41 that forms interplaying
regulatory network in TPA-induced signaling and promotes leukemic and normal
megakaryocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3972703
PMID: 24681962  [PubMed]


191. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e93488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093488. eCollection
2014.

Fusion FISH imaging: single-molecule detection of gene fusion transcripts in
situ.

Markey FB(1), Ruezinsky W(1), Tyagi S(2), Batish M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, New Jersey Medical School, 
Rutgers University, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America. (2)Public
Health Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers University, Newark,
New Jersey, United States of America.

Double-stranded DNA breaks occur on a regular basis in the human genome as a
consequence of genotoxic stress and errors during replication. Usually these
breaks are rapidly and faithfully repaired, but occasionally different
chromosomes, or different regions of the same chromosome, are fused to each
other. Some of these aberrant chromosomal translocations yield functional
recombinant genes, which have been implicated as the cause of a number of
lymphomas, leukemias, sarcomas, and solid tumors. Reliable methods are needed for
the in situ detection of the transcripts encoded by these recombinant genes. We
have developed just such a method, utilizing single-molecule fluorescence in situ
hybridization (sm-FISH), in which approximately 50 short fluorescent probes bind 
to adjacent sites on the same mRNA molecule, rendering each target mRNA molecule 
visible as a diffraction-limited spot in a fluorescence microscope. Utilizing
this method, gene fusion transcripts are detected with two differently colored
probe sets, each specific for one of the two recombinant segments of a target
mRNA; enabling the fusion transcripts to be seen in the microscope as distinct
spots that fluoresce in both colors. We demonstrate this method by detecting the 
BCR-ABL fusion transcripts that occur in chronic myeloid leukemia cells, and by
detecting the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts that occur in Ewing's sarcoma cells. 
This technology should pave the way for accurate in situ typing of many cancers
that are associated with, or caused by, fusion transcripts.

PMCID: PMC3968151
PMID: 24675777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biologics. 2014 Mar 17;8:91-105. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S26555. eCollection 2014.

Targeted therapy for sarcomas.

Forscher C(1), Mita M(2), Figlin R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Program, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Experimental Therapeutics Program,
Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Academic Development Program, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Institute, and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Sarcomas are tumors of mesenchymal origin that make up approximately 1% of human 
cancers. They may arise as primary tumors in either bone or soft tissue, with
approximately 11,280 soft tissue tumors and 2,650 bone tumors diagnosed each year
in the United States. There are at least 50 different subtypes of soft tissue
sarcoma, with new ones described with ever-increasing frequency. One way to look 
at sarcomas is to divide them into categories on the basis of their genetic
make-up. One group of sarcomas has an identifiable, relatively simple genetic
signature, such as the X:18 translocation seen in synovial sarcoma or the 11:22
translocation seen in Ewing's sarcoma. These specific abnormalities often lead to
the presence of fusion proteins, such as EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma, which are
helpful as diagnostic tools and may become therapeutic targets in the future.
Another group of sarcomas is characterized by complex genetic abnormalities as
seen in leiomyosarcoma, osteosarcoma, and undifferentiated sarcoma. It is
important to keep these distinctions in mind when contemplating the development
of targeted agents for sarcomas. Different abnormalities in sarcoma could be
divided by tumor subtype or by the molecular or pathway abnormality. However,
some existing drugs or drugs in development may interfere with or alter more than
one of the presented pathways.

PMCID: PMC3962319
PMID: 24669185  [PubMed]


193. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 17;9(3):e91557. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091557. eCollection
2014.

Effects of THAP11 on erythroid differentiation and megakaryocytic differentiation
of K562 cells.

Kong XZ(1), Yin RH(2), Ning HM(3), Zheng WW(4), Dong XM(5), Yang Y(6), Xu FF(4), 
Li JJ(7), Zhan YQ(4), Yu M(4), Ge CH(4), Zhang JH(4), Chen H(4), Li CY(2), Yang
XM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China; 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of Radiation 
Medicine, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China; State Key Laboratory of 
Proteomics, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation, Affiliated Hospital to Academy of Military Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China. (5)Department of Pharmaceutical 
Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China. (6)Department of Chemistry,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana, United States of America.
(7)Department of Pulmonary Neoplasms Internal Medicine, Affiliated Hospital to
Academy of Military Medicine Sciences, Beijing, China. (8)Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Beijing, China; State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing, China.

Hematopoiesis is a complex process regulated by sets of transcription factors in 
a stage-specific and context-dependent manner. THAP11 is a transcription factor
involved in cell growth, ES cell pluripotency, and embryogenesis. Here we showed 
that THAP11 was down-regulated during erythroid differentiation but up-regulated 
during megakaryocytic differentiation of cord blood CD34+ cells. Overexpression
of THAP11 in K562 cells inhibited the erythroid differentiation induced by hemin 
with decreased numbers of benzidine-positive cells and decreased mRNA levels of
a-globin (HBA) and glycophorin A (GPA), and knockdown of THAP11 enhanced the
erythroid differentiation. Conversely, THAP11 overexpression accelerated the
megakaryocytic differentiation induced by phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) with
increased percentage of CD41+ cells, increased numbers of 4N cells, and elevated 
CD61 mRNA levels, and THAP11 knockdown attenuated the megakaryocytic
differentiation. The expression levels of transcription factors such as c-Myc,
c-Myb, GATA-2, and Fli1 were changed by THAP11 overexpression. In this way, our
results suggested that THAP11 reversibly regulated erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3956667
PMID: 24637716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Jul;177(1):102-9. doi: 10.1111/cei.12310.

The Friend leukaemia virus integration 1 (Fli-1) transcription factor affects
lupus nephritis development by regulating inflammatory cell infiltration into the
kidney.

Sato S(1), Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Ralph H.
Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC, USA.

The transcription factor Friend leukaemia virus integration 1 (Fli-1) is
implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus in both human
patients and murine models of lupus. Murphy Roths large (MRL)/lpr mice and New
Zealand mixed (NZM)2410 mice, murine models of lupus, with decreased expression
of Fli-1 had significantly prolonged survival and reduced nephritis. Lupus
nephritis is a major cause of mortality and morbidity in patients, and
inflammatory cell infiltration plays a key role in the development of the
disease. To study how the expression of Fli-1 affects the infiltration of
inflammatory cells into the kidneys, we generated congenic enhanced green
fluorescent protein (GFP) transgenic MRL/lpr mice. A significantly increased
number of GFP-expressing inflammatory cells infiltrated the kidneys of wild-type 
MRL/lpr mice compared to Fli-1 heterozygous (Fli-1(+/-)) MRL/lpr mice after
injection of GFP(+) cells. Expression of inflammatory chemokine mRNA, including
chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL)2, CCL3, CCL4 and CCL5, was significantly lower
in the kidneys from Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice compared to wild-type littermates.
Numbers of infiltrated cells into the kidneys correlate with expression levels of
CCL2, CCL4 and CCL5, but not the titres of anti-dsDNA autoantibodies in these
mice. Significantly increased inflammatory cells from wild-type MRL/lpr mice
infiltrated into kidneys compared to the cells from Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice. The 
chemotaxis of inflammatory cells from Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice towards each
chemokine was decreased significantly compared to inflammatory cells from
wild-type MRL/lpr mice in the transwell migration assay in vitro. Our results
indicate that Fli-1 affects lupus nephritis development by regulating the
expression of chemokines in the kidney and the migration of inflammatory cells.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4089159
PMID: 24580413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jun;34(6):1249-59. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303240. Epub 2014 Feb 27.

Identification and initial functional characterization of a human vascular
cell-enriched long noncoding RNA.

Bell RD(1), Long X(1), Lin M(1), Bergmann JH(1), Nanda V(1), Cowan SL(1), Zhou
Q(1), Han Y(1), Spector DL(1), Zheng D(1), Miano JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Rochester School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY (R.D.B., X.L., V.N., S.L.C., Q.Z., Y.H.,
J.M.M.); Department of Genetics (M.L., D.Z.) and Departments of Neurology and
Neuroscience (D.Z.), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; and Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY (J.H.B., D.L.S.). (2)From the
Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of Rochester School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Rochester, NY (R.D.B., X.L., V.N., S.L.C., Q.Z., Y.H., J.M.M.);
Department of Genetics (M.L., D.Z.) and Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience
(D.Z.), Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; and Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY (J.H.B., D.L.S.). j.m.miano@rochester.edu
deyou.zheng@einstein.yu.edu.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Jun;34(6):1124-5.

OBJECTIVE: Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) represent a rapidly growing class of RNA
genes with functions related primarily to transcriptional and
post-transcriptional control of gene expression. There is a paucity of
information about lncRNA expression and function in human vascular cells. Thus,
we set out to identify novel lncRNA genes in human vascular smooth muscle cells
and to gain insight into their role in the control of smooth muscle cell
phenotypes.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) of human coronary artery smooth
muscle cells revealed 31 unannotated lncRNAs, including a vascular cell-enriched 
lncRNA (Smooth muscle and Endothelial cell-enriched
migration/differentiation-associated long NonCoding RNA [SENCR]). Strand-specific
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and rapid amplification of 
cDNA ends indicate that SENCR is transcribed antisense from the 5' end of the
FLI1 gene and exists as 2 splice variants. RNA fluorescence in situ hybridization
and biochemical fractionation studies demonstrate SENCR is a cytoplasmic lncRNA. 
Consistent with this observation, knockdown studies reveal little to no
cis-acting effect of SENCR on FLI1 or neighboring gene expression. RNA-seq
experiments in smooth muscle cells after SENCR knockdown disclose decreased
expression of Myocardin and numerous smooth muscle contractile genes, whereas
several promigratory genes are increased. Reverse transcription PCR and Western
blotting experiments validate several differentially expressed genes after SENCR 
knockdown. Loss-of-function studies in scratch wound and Boyden chamber assays
support SENCR as an inhibitor of smooth muscle cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: SENCR is a new vascular cell-enriched, cytoplasmic lncRNA that seems
to stabilize the smooth muscle cell contractile phenotype.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4024079
PMID: 24578380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1064-6. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-3194.
Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Molecular precision chemotherapy: overcoming resistance to targeted therapies?

Burdach S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Author's Affiliation: Technische Universität München, München, Germany.

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1190-203.

Cytotoxic drugs may have specific effects on oncogenes and their downstream
targets. Increase of cancer cell sensitivity due to repression of an oncogene
downstream target can be specifically addressed by combined precision
chemotherapy, increasing the therapeutic index of chemotherapy and overcoming
resistance to highly selective targeted therapies.

©2014 AACR

PMID: 24536061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Mar;74(3):e13. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204749. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

High-density genotyping of immune loci in Koreans and Europeans identifies eight 
new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci.

Kim K(1), Bang SY(2), Lee HS(2), Cho SK(2), Choi CB(2), Sung YK(2), Kim TH(2),
Jun JB(2), Yoo DH(2), Kang YM(3), Kim SK(4), Suh CH(5), Shim SC(6), Lee SS(7),
Lee J(8), Chung WT(9), Choe JY(4), Shin HD(10), Lee JY(11), Han BG(11), Nath
SK(12), Eyre S(13), Bowes J(13), Pappas DA(14), Kremer JM(15), Gonzalez-Gay
MA(16), Rodriguez-Rodriguez L(17), Ärlestig L(18), Okada Y(19), Diogo D(20), Liao
KP(21), Karlson EW(21), Raychaudhuri S(22), Rantapää-Dahlqvist S(18), Martin
J(23), Klareskog L(24), Padyukov L(24), Gregersen PK(25), Worthington J(12),
Greenberg JD(26), Plenge RM(20), Bae SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, Seoul, Republic of Korea Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and
Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and Population
Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Department of
Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Republic
of Korea. (3)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of Korea. (4)Division of 
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Arthritis & Autoimmunity Research 
Center, Catholic University of Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, Republic of
Korea. (5)Department of Rheumatology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Republic of Korea. (6)Division of Rheumatology, Daejeon Rheumatoid & Degenerative
Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea. (7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Chonnam
National University Medical School and Hospital, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Ewha Womans
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (9)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of internal medicine, Dong-A University, Busan, Republic
of Korea. (10)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (11)Center for Genome Science, Korea National Institute of Health, Osong
Health Technology, Chungcheongbuk-do, Republic of Korea. (12)Arthritis and
Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. (13)Arthritis Research UK Epidemiology Unit,
University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester,
UK. (14)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Columbia University,
New York, New York, USA. (15)The Center of Rheumatology, Albany, New York, USA.
(16)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Marques de Valdecilla, IFIMAV,
Santander, Spain. (17)Department of Rheumatology, Hospital Clinico San Carlos,
Madrid, Spain. (18)Department of Clinical Medicine/Rheumatoloy, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden. (19)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of 
Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA Department of Human Genetics and Disease Diversity,
Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan. (20)Division of Rheumatology,
Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (21)Division
of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (22)Division of Rheumatology,
Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA Arthritis
Research UK Epidemiology Unit, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic
Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, UK. (23)Instituto de Parasitologia y
Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain. (24)Rheumatology Unit, Department 
of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University Hospital Solna,
Stockholm, Sweden. (25)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North
Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, Manhasset, New York, USA. (26)Division of
Rheumatology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A highly polygenic aetiology and high degree of allele-sharing between
ancestries have been well elucidated in genetic studies of rheumatoid arthritis. 
Recently, the high-density genotyping array Immunochip for immune disease loci
identified 14 new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci among individuals of European
ancestry. Here, we aimed to identify new rheumatoid arthritis risk loci using
Korean-specific Immunochip data.
METHODS: We analysed Korean rheumatoid arthritis case-control samples using the
Immunochip and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) array to search for new
risk alleles of rheumatoid arthritis with anticitrullinated peptide antibodies.
To increase power, we performed a meta-analysis of Korean data with previously
published European Immunochip and GWAS data for a total sample size of 9299
Korean and 45,790 European case-control samples.
RESULTS: We identified eight new rheumatoid arthritis susceptibility loci
(TNFSF4, LBH, EOMES, ETS1-FLI1, COG6, RAD51B, UBASH3A and SYNGR1) that passed a
genome-wide significance threshold (p<5×10(-8)), with evidence for three
independent risk alleles at 1q25/TNFSF4. The risk alleles from the seven new loci
except for the TNFSF4 locus (monomorphic in Koreans), together with risk alleles 
from previously established RA risk loci, exhibited a high correlation of effect 
sizes between ancestries. Further, we refined the number of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that represent potentially causal variants through a
trans-ethnic comparison of densely genotyped SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the advantage of dense-mapping and
trans-ancestral analysis for identification of potentially causal SNPs. In
addition, our findings support the importance of T cells in the pathogenesis and 
the fact of frequent overlap of risk loci among diverse autoimmune diseases.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMCID: PMC4467986
PMID: 24532676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Hum Pathol. 2014 Mar;45(3):662-3. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.11.007. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Neuroblastoma or not neuroblastoma.

Teshiba R(1), Sartelet H(2), Shimada H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
CA 90027, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Sainte Justine Hospital, Montreal H3T 
1C5, Canada. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's
Hospital Los Angeles, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA. Electronic address: hshimada@chla.usc.edu.

Comment on
    Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1772-6.

PMID: 24529334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Nutr Biochem. 2014 Mar;25(3):319-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2013.11.006. Epub
2013 Dec 1.

In vitro and in vivo mechanistic study of a novel proanthocyanidin, GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG 
from cocoa tea (Camellia ptilophylla) in antiangiogenesis.

Li KK(1), Liu CL(2), Tam JC(2), Kwok HF(2), Lau CP(2), Leung PC(3), Ko CH(4), Ye 
CX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant
Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute. (4)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory of
Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, China; The Chinese University of Hong Kong Shenzhen Research
Institute. Electronic address: gohey@cuhk.edu.hk.

Angiogenesis, the process of blood vessel formation, is critical to tumor growth.
Ant-angiogenic strategies demonstrated importance in cancer therapy. Cocoa tea
(Camellia ptilophylla), a naturally decaffeinated tea commonly consumed as a
healthy drink in southern China, had recently been found to be a potential
candidate for antiangiogenesis. A novel proanthocyanidin, GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG, which
consisted of gallocatechin and gallocatechin 3-O gallate moieties, was discovered
and thought to be one of the effective candidates for antiangiogenesis. Hence,
the present study aimed to evaluate the antiangiogenesis activities of
GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG in vitro and in vivo, and SU5416 was applied as a positive control. 
The inhibitory effects of GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG on three important processes involved in
angiogenesis, i.e., proliferation, migration and differentiation, were examined
using human microvascular endothelial cell line HMEC-1 by MTT assay, scratch
assay and tube formation assay, respectively. Using transgenic zebrafish embryos 
TG(fli1:EGFP)y1/+(AB) as an animal model of angiogenesis, the antiangiogenic
effect of GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG was further verified in vivo. Our results demonstrated
that GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG significantly inhibited migration (P<.001) and tubule formation
(P<.001-.05) of HMEC-1 in dose-dependent manner. Regarding intracellular signal
transduction, GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG attenuated the phosphorylation of ERK, Akt and p38
dose-dependently in HMEC-1. In zebrafish embryo, the formation of new blood
vessels was effectively inhibited by GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG in a dose-dependent manner
after 3 days of treatment (P<.001-.05). In conclusion, these results revealed
that our novel proanthocyanidin, GC-(4<U+2192>8)-GCG might be a potential and promising 
agent of natural resource to be further developed as an antiangiogenic agent.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24524904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Mol Diagn. 2014 May;16(3):361-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 
Feb 8.

ChildSeq-RNA: A next-generation sequencing-based diagnostic assay to identify
known fusion transcripts in childhood sarcomas.

Qadir MA(1), Zhan SH(2), Kwok B(1), Bruestle J(3), Drees B(3), Popescu OE(4),
Sorensen PH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre,
British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)Spiral
Genetics Corporation, Seattle, Washington. (4)Department of Anatomical Pathology,
Children's and Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada. (5)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Department of Pathology, University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address:
psor@mail.ubc.ca.

Childhood sarcomas can be extremely difficult to accurately diagnose on the basis
of morphological characteristics alone. Ancillary methods, such as RT-PCR or
fluorescence in situ hybridization, to detect pathognomonic gene fusions can help
to distinguish these tumors. Two major deficiencies of these assays are their
inability to identify gene fusions at nucleotide resolution or to detect multiple
gene fusions simultaneously. We developed a next-generation sequencing-based
assay designated ChildSeq-RNA that uses the Ion Torrent platform to screen for
EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG, PAX3-FOXO1 and PAX7-FOXO1, EWSR1-WT1, and ETV6-NTRK3
fusions of Ewing sarcoma (ES), alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, desmoplastic small
round cell tumor, and congenital fibrosarcoma, respectively. To rapidly analyze
resulting data, we codeveloped a bioinformatics tool, termed ChildDecode, that
operates on a scalable, cloud-computing platform. Total RNA from four ES cell
lines plus 33 clinical samples representing ES, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma,
desmoplastic small round cell tumor, and congenital fibrosarcoma tumors was
subjected to ChildSeq-RNA. This accurately identified corresponding gene fusions 
in each tumor type, with no examples of false positive fusion detection in this
proof-of-concept study. Comparison with previous RT-PCR findings demonstrated
high sensitivity (96.4%; 95% CI, 82.3%-99.4%) and specificity (100%; 95% CI,
56.6%-100%) of ChildSeq-RNA to detect gene fusions. Herein, we propose
ChildSeq-RNA as a novel tool to detect gene fusions in childhood sarcomas at
single-nucleotide resolution.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24517889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e85814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085814. eCollection 
2014.

Characterization of human mesenchymal stem cells from ewing sarcoma patients.
Pathogenetic implications.

Amaral AT(1), Manara MC(2), Berghuis D(3), Ordóñez JL(4), Biscuola M(5),
Lopez-García MA(5), Osuna D(4), Lucarelli E(6), Alviano F(7), Lankester A(3),
Scotlandi K(2), de Álava E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Institute of Biomedical Research of
Salamanca-Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer 
(IBSAL-CIC), Salamanca, Spain ; Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS),
CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla, Department of Pathology and Biobank, Hospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain. (2)CRS Sviluppo di Terapie
Biomolecolari, Oncologia Sperimentale, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR),
Bologna, Italy. (3)Department of Pediatrics and Biobank, Leiden University
Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Molecular Pathology Program,
Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca-Centro de Investigación del Cáncer,
Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBSAL-CIC), Salamanca, Spain. (5)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla, Department of
Pathology and Biobank, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain.
(6)Osteoarticolar Regeneration Laboratory, Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR),
Bologna, Italy. (7)Dipartimento di Istologia, Embriologia e Biologia, Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli (IOR), Bologna, Italy.

Erratum in
    PLoS One.2014;9(4):e94455.

BACKGROUND: Ewing Sarcoma (EWS) is a mesenchymal-derived tumor that generally
arises in bone and soft tissue. Intensive research regarding the pathogenesis of 
EWS has been insufficient to pinpoint the early events of Ewing sarcomagenesis.
However, the Mesenchymal Stem Cell (MSC) is currently accepted as the most
probable cell of origin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In an initial study regarding a deep characterization of
MSC obtained specifically from EWS patients (MSC-P), we compared them with MSC
derived from healthy donors (MSC-HD) and EWS cell lines. We evaluated the
presence of the EWS-FLI1 gene fusion and EWSR1 gene rearrangements in MSC-P. The 
presence of the EWS transcript was confirmed by q-RT-PCR. In order to determine
early events possibly involved in malignant transformation, we used a
multiparameter quantitative strategy that included both MSC immunophenotypic
negative/positive markers, and EWS intrinsic phenotypical features. Markers
CD105, CD90, CD34 and CD45 were confirmed in EWS samples.
RESULTS: We determined that MSC-P lack the most prevalent gene fusion, EWSR1-FLI1
as well as EWSR1 gene rearrangements. Our study also revealed that MSC-P are more
alike to MSC-HD than to EWS cells. Nonetheless, we also observed that EWS cells
had a few overlapping features with MSC. As a relevant example, also MSC showed
CD99 expression, hallmark of EWS diagnosis. However, we observed that, in
contrast to EWS cells, MSC were not sensitive to the inhibition of CD99.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our results suggest that MSC from EWS patients behave
like MSC-HD and are phenotypically different from EWS cells, thus raising
important questions regarding MSC role in sarcomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC3911896
PMID: 24498265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Feb;97(2):687-9. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2013.05.111.

Cardiac cavernous hemangioma and multiple pulmonary cavernous hemangiomas.

Yang L(1), Dai J(1), Xiao Y(1), Cheng H(1), Ruan Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (2)Institute of Pathology of 
Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: ruanqiurong@sina.com.

We describe for the first time a rare coexistence of a cardiac cavernous
hemangioma with multiple pulmonary cavernous hemangiomas. Computed tomography
revealed bilateral pulmonary nodules, left pleural effusion, and pericardial
effusion. Positron emission tomography showed a pericardial neoplasm.
Pathologically, multiple large dilated vascular spaces, lined by a single layer
of endothelial cells and filled with blood, were revealed in both the cardiac
tumor and the pulmonary nodules. Immunohistochemical examination of the lining
cells showed positivity for CD31, FLI1, FVIII, and CD34. Taken together, these
findings led to the diagnosis of cardiac cavernous hemangioma and multiple
pulmonary cavernous hemangiomas.

Copyright © 2014 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24484810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):338-50.

Pharmacokinetic modeling optimizes inhibition of the 'undruggable' EWS-FLI1
transcription factor in Ewing Sarcoma.

Hong SH(1), Youbi SE, Hong SP, Kallakury B, Monroe P, Erkizan HV,
Barber-Rotenberg JS, Houghton P, Üren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.

Transcription factors have long been deemed 'undruggable' targets for
therapeutics. Enhanced recognition of protein biochemistry as well as the need to
have more targeted approaches to treat cancer has rendered transcription factors 
approachable for therapeutic development. Since transcription factors lack
enzymatic domains, the specific targeting of these proteins has unique
challenges. One challenge is the hydrophobic microenvironment that affects small 
molecules gaining access to block protein interactions. The most attractive
transcription factors to target are those formed from tumor specific chromosomal 
translocations that are validated oncogenic driver proteins. EWS-FLI1 is a fusion
protein that results from the pathognomonic translocation of Ewing sarcoma (ES). 
Our past work created the small molecule YK-4-279 that blocks EWS-FLI1 from
interacting with RNA Helicase A (RHA). To fulfill long-standing promise in the
field by creating a clinically useful drug, steps are required to allow for in
vivo administration. These investigations identify the need for continuous
presence of the small molecule protein-protein inhibitor for a period of days. We
describe the pharmacokinetics of YK-4-279 and its individual enantiomers. In vivo
studies confirm prior in vitro experiments showing (S)-YK-4-279 as the EWS-FLI1
specific enantiomer demonstrating both induction of apoptosis and reduction of
EWS-FLI1 regulated caveolin-1 protein. We have created the first rat xenograft
model of ES, treated with (S)-YK-4-279 dosing based upon PK modeling leading to a
sustained complete response in 2 of 6 ES tumors. Combining laboratory studies,
pharmacokinetic measurements, and modeling has allowed us to create a paradigm
that can be optimized for in vivo systems using both in vitro data and
pharmacokinetic simulations. Thus, (S)-YK-4-279 as a small molecule drug is ready
for continued development towards a first-in-human, first-in-class, clinical
trial.

PMCID: PMC3964211
PMID: 24481407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Clin Invest. 2014 Feb;124(2):580-91. doi: 10.1172/JCI71861. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Thrombocytopenia-associated mutations in the ANKRD26 regulatory region induce
MAPK hyperactivation.

Bluteau D, Balduini A, Balayn N, Currao M, Nurden P, Deswarte C, Leverger G,
Noris P, Perrotta S, Solary E, Vainchenker W, Debili N, Favier R, Raslova H.

Point mutations in the 5' UTR of ankyrin repeat domain 26 (ANKRD26) are
associated with familial thrombocytopenia 2 (THC2) and a predisposition to
leukemia. Here, we identified underlying mechanisms of ANKRD26-associated
thrombocytopenia. Using megakaryocytes (MK) isolated from THC2 patients and
healthy subjects, we demonstrated that THC2-associated mutations in the 5' UTR of
ANKRD26 resulted in loss of runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1) and
friend leukemia integration 1 transcription factor (FLI1) binding. RUNX1 and FLI1
binding at the 5' UTR from healthy subjects led to ANKRD26 silencing during the
late stages of megakaryopoiesis and blood platelet development. We showed that
persistent ANKRD26 expression in isolated MKs increased signaling via the
thrombopoietin/myeloproliferative leukemia virus oncogene (MPL) pathway and
impaired proplatelet formation by MKs. Importantly, we demonstrated that ERK
inhibition completely rescued the in vitro proplatelet formation defect. Our data
identify a mechanism for development of the familial thrombocytopenia THC2 that
is related to abnormal MAPK signaling.

PMCID: PMC3904625
PMID: 24430186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cancer. 2014 Feb 15;120(4):579-88. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28555. Epub 2014 Jan 10.

EWS-FLI-1 regulates the neuronal repressor gene REST, which controls Ewing
sarcoma growth and vascular morphology.

Zhou Z(1), Yu L, Kleinerman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: RE1-silencing transcription factor (REST), a neuronal repressor gene,
regulates neuronal stem cell differentiation. Ewing sarcoma may originate from
neural crest cells. In the current study, the authors investigated whether REST
plays a role in the growth of this tumor.
METHODS: REST expression was determined by Western blot analysis and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in 3 human Ewing sarcoma cell lines and 7
patient tumor samples. The role of REST in tumor growth and tumor vascular
morphology was determined using a Ewing sarcoma xenograft model.
Immunofluorescence staining, Hypoxyprobe, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays were performed to
investigate the impact of REST on pericyte marker expression, hypoxia, and
apoptosis in vivo.
RESULTS: High levels of REST were expressed in all 3 human Ewing sarcoma cell
lines and in 6 of the 7 patient tumor samples. Overexpression of EWS-FLI-1 in
human mesenchymal stem cells and human neural progenitor cells was found to
increase REST expression. Inhibition of EWS-FLI-1 using small interfering RNA
decreased REST expression in human Ewing sarcoma cells. Inhibition of REST did
not affect EWS-FLI-1, but significantly suppressed tumor growth in vivo, reduced 
the tumor vessel pericyte markers a- smooth muscle actin (SMA) and desmin,
increased hypoxia and apoptosis in tumor tissues, and decreased the expression of
delta-like ligand 4 (DLL4) and Hes1.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of REST suppressed tumor growth, inhibited pericyte
marker expression, and increased tumor hypoxia and apoptosis. Because tumor
vessel function has been linked to tumor growth and metastases, REST may be a new
therapeutic target in patients with Ewing sarcoma.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3969734
PMID: 24415532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 6;33:4. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-33-4.

Identification of novel hypermethylated genes and demethylating effect of
vincristine in colorectal cancer.

Moon JW, Lee SK, Lee JO, Kim N, Lee YW, Kim SJ, Kang HJ, Kim J, Kim HS, Park
SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Human Genetics, Korea University College
of Medicine, 126-1, Anam-dong 5-ga, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-705, Republic of
Korea. parksh@korea.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises as a consequence of genetic events
such as gene mutation and epigenetic alteration. The aim of this study was to
identify new hypermethylated candidate genes and methylation-based therapeutic
targets using vincristine in CRC.
METHODS: We analyzed the methylation status of 27,578 CpG sites spanning more
than 14,000 genes in CRC tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues and normal
colon tissues using Illumina bead chip array. Twenty-one hypermethylated genes
and 18 CpG island methylator phenotype markers were selected as candidate genes. 
The methylation status of 39 genes was validated by quantitative
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction in CRC tissues, adjacent normal
tissues, normal colon cells, and three CRC cell lines. Of these, 29
hypermethylated candidate genes were investigated using the demethylating effects
of 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) and vincristine in CRC cells.
RESULTS: Thirty-two out of 39 genes were hypermethylated in CRC tissues compared 
with adjacent normal tissues. Vincristine induced demethylation of methylated
genes in CRC cells to the same extent as 5-aza-dC. The mRNA expression of AKR1B1,
CHST10, ELOVL4, FLI1, SOX5, STK33, and ZNF304 was restored by treatment with
5-aza-dC and vincristine.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that these novel hypermethylated genes AKR1B1, 
CHST10, ELOVL4, SOX5, STK33, and ZNF304 may be potential methylation biomarkers
and therapeutic targets of vincristine in CRC.

PMCID: PMC3923411
PMID: 24393480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Oncol. 2014 Mar;8(2):323-36. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.12.005. Epub 2013 Dec
15.

Pre-clinical efficacy of PU-H71, a novel HSP90 inhibitor, alone and in
combination with bortezomib in Ewing sarcoma.

Ambati SR(1), Lopes EC(2), Kosugi K(2), Mony U(2), Zehir A(2), Shah SK(3),
Taldone T(3), Moreira AL(4), Meyers PA(5), Chiosis G(3), Moore MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: ambatis@mskcc.org.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology & Chemistry Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Department of Cell Biology, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address:
m-moore@ski.mskcc.org.

Ewing sarcoma is characterized by multiple deregulated pathways that mediate cell
survival and proliferation. Heat shock protein 90 (HSP90) is a critical component
of the multi-chaperone complexes that regulate the disposition and activity of a 
large number of proteins involved in cell-signaling systems. We tested the
efficacy of PU-H71, a novel HSP90 inhibitor in Ewing sarcoma cell lines, primary 
samples, benign mesenchymal stromal cells and hematopoietic stem cells. We
performed cell cycle analysis, clonogenic assay, immunoblot analysis and reverse 
phase protein array in Ewing cell lines and in vivo experiments in NSG and nude
mice using the A673 cell line. We noted a significant therapeutic window in the
activity of PU-H71 against Ewing cell lines and benign cells. PU-H71 treatment
resulted in G2/M phase arrest. Exposure to PU-H71 resulted in depletion of
critical proteins including AKT, pERK, RAF-1, c-MYC, c-KIT, IGF1R, hTERT and
EWS-FLI1 in Ewing cell lines. Our results indicated that Ewing sarcoma tumor
growth and the metastatic burden were significantly reduced in the mice injected 
with PU-H71 compared to the control mice. We also investigated the effects of
bortezomib, a proteasome inhibitor, alone and in combination with PU-H71 in Ewing
sarcoma. Combination index (CI)-Fa plots and normalized isobolograms indicated
synergism between PU-H71 and bortezomib. Ewing sarcoma xenografts were
significantly inhibited when mice were treated with the combination compared to
vehicle or either drug alone. This provides a strong rationale for clinical
evaluation of PU-H71 alone and in combination with bortezomib in Ewing sarcoma.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3982393
PMID: 24388362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Pathol. 2014 Apr;232(5):541-52. doi: 10.1002/path.4323. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Flightless I over-expression impairs skin barrier development, function and
recovery following skin blistering.

Kopecki Z(1), Yang GN, Arkell RM, Jackson JE, Melville E, Iwata H, Ludwig RJ,
Zillikens D, Murrell DF, Cowin AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Mawson Institute, University of South
Australia, Adelaide, Australia; Women's and Children's Health Research Institute,
Adelaide, Australia.

Development of an intact epidermis is critical for maintaining the integrity of
the skin. Patients with epidermolysis bullosa (EB) experience multiple erosions, 
which breach the epidermal barrier and lead to increased microbial colocalization
of wounds, infections and sepsis. The cytoskeletal protein Flightless I (Flii) is
a known regulator of both development and wound healing. Using Flii(+/-), WT and 
Flii(Tg/Tg) mice, we investigated the effect of altering Flii levels in embryos
and adult mice on the development of the epidermal barrier and, consequently, how
this affects the integrity of the skin in EB. Flii over-expression resulted in
delayed formation of the epidermal barrier in embryos and decreased expression of
tight junction (TJ) proteins Claudin-1 and ZO-2. Increased intercellular space
and transepidermal water loss was observed in Flii(Tg)(/Tg) adult mouse skin,
while Flii(Tg/Tg) keratinocytes showed altered TJ protein localization and
reduced transepithelial resistance. Flii is increased in the blistered skin of
patients with EB, and over-expression of Flii in experimental EBA showed impaired
Claudin-1 and -4 TJ protein expression and delayed recovery of functional barrier
post-blistering. Immunoprecipitation confirmed Flii associated with TJ proteins
and in vivo actin assays showed that the effect of Flii on actin polymerization
underpinned the impaired barrier function observed in Flii(Tg/Tg) mice. These
results therefore demonstrate an important role for Flii in the development and
regulation of the epidermal barrier, which may contribute to the impaired healing
and skin fragility of EB patients.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24375017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Bioorg Khim. 2014 Jan-Feb;40(1):20-30.

Disordered binding regions of Ewing's sarcoma fusion proteins.

Todorova R.

A relationship was found between the Amino acid (AA) composition, Intrinsic
Protein Disorder (IPD) and Protein Binding Regions (PBRs) of the functional
regions of Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and oncogenic EWS fusion proteins
(EFPs). EWS has high IPD and 64% predicted Disordered Binding Regions (DBRs) by
ANCHOR. The native Transcription Factors, fused to EWS Activation Domain (EAD) in
EFPs, show high DBRs in N-terminal domain and relatively low in C-terminal
domain. EFPs oncogenic function is related to IPD and PBRs probabilities, high
around breakpoint and decreased in the fused Transcription Factor. The increased 
IPD in EAD around (AA 82), and the small RBRs around (AAs (50-60) and 100) are
consistent with the reported physical interactions with RNA Polymerase II
subunits. The AAs (228-264) of EWS, interacting with ZFM1 (SF1), correspond to
two peaks of DBRs by Anchor and high IPD by IUPred. The IQ domain of EAD (AAs
258-280) that is phosphorylated by PKC and interacts with calmodulin, has high
IPD and DBRs probability. The Ser266, conserved site of PKC phosphorylation, is
situated in DBR and IPD region with about 100% probability. The small PBRs found 
in the EAD correspond to important physical protein-protein interactions,
confirmed by experimental data. Thus regions of EWS and EFPs, included in
functional interactions with other partners, are enriched of Protein Binding
Regions by ANCHOR. The development of IPD- and PBRs-related, EWS-FLI1-directed
specific therapies will help the design of antitumor agents against ESFT because 
of high patient mortality in cases of meta- static disease.

PMID: 25898720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Med Life. 2014;7 Spec No. 3:114-9.

Detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion in non-Ewing soft tissue tumors.

Trancau IO(1), Huica R(2), Surcel M(3), Munteanu A(3), Ursaciuc C(3).

Author information: 
(1)"Foisor" Orthopedics Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania ; "Carol Davila"
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. (2)Immunology
Department, "Victor Babes" National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania ; 
"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Immunology Department, "Victor Babes" National Institute of Pathology,
Bucharest, Romania.

Erratum in
    J Med Life. 2015;8 Spec Issue:124.

OBJECTIVES: EWS/FLI-1 fusion mainly appears in Ewing's sarcoma or the primitive
neuroectodermal tumors and represents a genomic marker for these tumors. However,
it can appear with lower frequency in other soft tissue tumors. The paper
investigates the presence of EWS/FLI-1 fusion in clinically diagnosed sarcoma
belonging to different non-Ewing connective tissue tumors in order to search for 
a possible new biomarker valuable for investigators.
METHODOLOGY: 20 patients with soft tissue tumors, who underwent surgery, were
tested. Intra-operative samples of normal and tumor tissue were collected for
histopathological diagnosis and genetics determinations. The patients' RNA from
tumor and normal peritumoral tissue was extracted and EWS/FLI-1 fusion screened
by quantitative real-time PCR. The relative expression of the fusion in the tumor
sample was compared to the similar expression in normal tissue.
RESULTS: The amplification in the threshold zone was shown by 5 samples (25%): 2 
clear cell sarcoma, 1 fibrosarcoma, 1 malignant tumor of nerve sheath, 1
metastatic adenocarcinoma. We differentiated between the unspecific amplification
and concluded that these are weak positive results.
CONCLUSIONS: Genomic investigation may establish the tumor malignancy and its
possible affiliation earlier than histopathology. It can support the screening of
EWS/FLI-1 fusion in a larger variety of clinically diagnosed soft tissue tumors.

PMCID: PMC4391413
PMID: 25870707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2014;37(6):475-87. doi: 10.2177/jsci.37.475.

[A Uuifying hypothesis for the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis based on the
deficiency of transcription factor Fli1 - the development of a new animal model
of systemic sclerosis -].

[Article in Japanese]

Asano Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disease featured by
immune abnormalities, vasculopathy and resultant fibrosis of the skin and various
internal organs. Although the pathogenesis of SSc remains incompletely
elucidated, it is currently accepted that this disease is caused by the complex
interplay between hereditary and environmental factors. The deficiency of
transcription factor Fli1, which is epigenetically suppressed in SSc dermal
fibroblasts, potentially causes SSc-like phenotypical alteration in various cell 
types such as fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages, suggesting that
Fli1 is a predisposing factor of SSc. KLF5 is another transcription factor which 
is suppressed in SSc dermal fibroblasts through an epigenetic mechanism.
Importantly, double heterozygous mice for Fli1 and KLF5 develop three cardinal
features of SSc, including immune abnormalities, vasculopathy and fibrosis.
Therefore, these two transcription factors are likely to be critical predisposing
factors regulating the development of SSc. Given that potential disease modifying
drugs, bosentan and imatinib, reverse the expression and transcriptional activity
of Fli1, the studies on the pathological process of double heterozygous mice and 
the impact of these transcription factors on various cell types may provide a new
clue to further understand the pathogenesis of SSc leading to the development of 
new therapies.

PMID: 25748132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 8;34(2):257-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.541. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

The histone demethylase KDM3A is a microRNA-22-regulated tumor promoter in Ewing 
Sarcoma.

Parrish JK(1), Sechler M(2), Winn RA(3), Jedlicka P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (2)Cancer Biology Graduate Program, University of
Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)1] Department of
Pathology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO,
USA [2] Cancer Biology Graduate Program, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz 
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.

Ewing Sarcoma is a biologically aggressive bone and soft tissue malignancy
affecting children and young adults. Ewing Sarcoma pathogenesis is driven by
EWS/Ets fusion oncoproteins, of which EWS/Fli1 is the most common. We have
previously shown that microRNAs (miRs) regulated by EWS/Fli1 contribute to the
pro-oncogenic program in Ewing Sarcoma. Here we show that miR-22, an
EWS/Fli1-repressed miR, is inhibitory to Ewing Sarcoma clonogenic and
anchorage-independent cell growth, even at modest overexpression levels. Our
studies further identify the H3K9me1/2 histone demethylase KDM3A (JMJD1A/JHDM2A) 
as a new miR-22-regulated gene. We show that KDM3A is overexpressed in Ewing
Sarcoma, and that its depletion inhibits clonogenic and anchorage-independent
growth in multiple patient-derived cell lines, and tumorigenesis in a xenograft
model. KDM3A depletion further results in augmentation of the levels of the
repressive H3K9me2 histone mark, and downregulation of pro-oncogenic factors in
Ewing Sarcoma. Together, our studies identify the histone demethylase KDM3A as a 
new, miR-regulated, tumor promoter in Ewing Sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4477825
PMID: 24362521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. N Engl J Med. 2014 Jan 30;370(5):433-43. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1114576. Epub 2013
Dec 18.

Proteome-wide analysis and CXCL4 as a biomarker in systemic sclerosis.

van Bon L(1), Affandi AJ, Broen J, Christmann RB, Marijnissen RJ, Stawski L,
Farina GA, Stifano G, Mathes AL, Cossu M, York M, Collins C, Wenink M, Huijbens
R, Hesselstrand R, Saxne T, DiMarzio M, Wuttge D, Agarwal SK, Reveille JD,
Assassi S, Mayes M, Deng Y, Drenth JP, de Graaf J, den Heijer M, Kallenberg CG,
Bijl M, Loof A, van den Berg WB, Joosten LA, Smith V, de Keyser F, Scorza R,
Lunardi C, van Riel PL, Vonk M, van Heerde W, Meller S, Homey B, Beretta L, Roest
M, Trojanowska M, Lafyatis R, Radstake TR.

Author information: 
(1)The authors' affiliations are listed in the Appendix.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1562.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1562.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1563-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2014 Apr 17;370(16):1561-2.

BACKGROUND: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells have been implicated in the pathogenesis
of systemic sclerosis through mechanisms beyond the previously suggested
production of type I interferon.
METHODS: We isolated plasmacytoid dendritic cells from healthy persons and from
patients with systemic sclerosis who had distinct clinical phenotypes. We then
performed proteome-wide analysis and validated these observations in five large
cohorts of patients with systemic sclerosis. Next, we compared the results with
those in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, ankylosing spondylitis, and 
hepatic fibrosis. We correlated plasma levels of CXCL4 protein with features of
systemic sclerosis and studied the direct effects of CXCL4 in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Proteome-wide analysis and validation showed that CXCL4 is the
predominant protein secreted by plasmacytoid dendritic cells in systemic
sclerosis, both in circulation and in skin. The mean (±SD) level of CXCL4 in
patients with systemic sclerosis was 25,624±2652 pg per milliliter, which was
significantly higher than the level in controls (92.5±77.9 pg per milliliter) and
than the level in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (1346±1011 pg per
milliliter), ankylosing spondylitis (1368±1162 pg per milliliter), or liver
fibrosis (1668±1263 pg per milliliter). CXCL4 levels correlated with skin and
lung fibrosis and with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Among chemokines, only
CXCL4 predicted the risk and progression of systemic sclerosis. In vitro, CXCL4
down-regulated expression of transcription factor FLI1, induced markers of
endothelial-cell activation, and potentiated responses of toll-like receptors. In
vivo, CXCL4 induced the influx of inflammatory cells and skin transcriptome
changes, as in systemic sclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of CXCL4 were elevated in patients with systemic sclerosis
and correlated with the presence and progression of complications, such as lung
fibrosis and pulmonary arterial hypertension. (Funded by the Dutch Arthritis
Association and others.).

PMCID: PMC4040466
PMID: 24350901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e81485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081485. eCollection
2013.

Impact of a combined high cholesterol diet and high glucose environment on
vasculature.

Wang Z(1), Mao Y(1), Cui T(2), Tang D(3), Wang XL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University Qilu Hospital Research Center for Cell Therapy, Key
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Qilu Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, P. R. China. (2)Shandong University Qilu Hospital
Research Center for Cell Therapy, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and
Function Research, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, P. R. China ;
Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, South Carolina University, Columbus,
South Carolina, United States of America. (3)Shandong University Qilu Hospital
Research Center for Cell Therapy, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and
Function Research, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, P. R. China ;
Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, The Second Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, P.R. China.

AIMS: Vascular complications are the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in 
patients with diabetes. However, proper animal models of diabetic vasculopathy
that recapitulate the accelerated progression of vascular lesions in human are
unavailable. In the present study, we developed a zebrafish model of diabetic
vascular complications and the methodology for quantifying vascular lesion
formation real-time in the living diabetic zebrafish.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Wild type zebrafish (AB) and transgenic zebrafish lines of
fli1:EGFP, lyz:EGFP, gata1:dsRed, double transgenic zebrafish of
gata1:dsRed/fli1:EGFP were exposed to high cholesterol diet and 3% glucose
(HCD-HG) for 10 days. The zebrafish model with HCD-HG treatment was characterized
by significantly increased tissue levels of insulin, glucagon, glucose, total
triglyceride and cholesterol. Confocal microscopic analysis further revealed that
the diabetic larvae developed clearly thickened endothelial layers, distinct
perivascular lipid depositions, substantial accumulations of inflammatory cells
in the injured vasculature, and a decreased velocity of blood flow. Moreover, the
vascular abnormalities were improved by the treatment of pioglitazone and
metformin.
CONCLUSION: A combination of high cholesterol diet and high glucose exposure
induces a rapid onset of vascular complications in zebrafish similar to the early
atherosclerotic vascular injuries in mammalian diabetic models, suggesting that
zebrafish may be used as a novel animal model for diabetic vasculopathy.

PMCID: PMC3857185
PMID: 24349075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4004-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-533166.

Spotlight on FLI1, RUNX1, and platelet dysfunction.

Rao AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)TEMPLE UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE.

Comment on
    Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4090-3.

In this issue of Blood, Stockley et al describe mutations in FLI1 and RUNX1,
identified by next-generation sequencing (NGS) studies, in 6 of 13 patients with 
excessive bleeding and impaired platelet dense granule secretion, and highlight
transcription factor (TF) mutations as an important mechanism for inherited
platelet dysfunction.

PMID: 24335028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Environ Sci Technol. 2014;48(1):804-10. doi: 10.1021/es404322p. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

High-content screening assay for identification of chemicals impacting
spontaneous activity in zebrafish embryos.

Raftery TD(1), Isales GM, Yozzo KL, Volz DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Arnold School of Public Health,
University of South Carolina , Columbia, South Carolina 29208 United States.

Although cell-based assays exist, rapid and cost-efficient high-content screening
(HCS) assays within intact organisms are needed to support prioritization for
developmental neurotoxicity testing in rodents. During zebrafish embryogenesis,
spontaneous tail contractions occur from late-segmentation (~19 h
postfertilization, hpf) through early pharyngula (~29 hpf) and represent the
first sign of locomotion. Using transgenic zebrafish (fli1:egfp) that stably
express eGFP beginning at ~14 hpf, we have developed and optimized a
384-well-based HCS assay that quantifies spontaneous activity within single
zebrafish embryos after exposure to test chemicals in a concentration-response
format. Following static exposure of one embryo per well from 5 to 25 hpf,
automated image acquisition procedures and custom analysis protocols were used to
quantify total body area and spontaneous activity in live embryos. Survival and
imaging success rates across control plates ranged from 87.5 to 100% and
93.3-100%, respectively. Using our optimized procedures, we screened 16 chemicals
within the US EPA's ToxCast Phase-I library, and found that exposure to abamectin
and emamectin benzoate-both potent avermectins-abolished spontaneous activity in 
the absence of gross malformations. Overall, compared to existing
locomotion-based zebrafish assays conducted later in development, this method
provides a simpler discovery platform for identifying potential developmental
neurotoxicants.

PMID: 24328182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2487-501.

Hypoxia shifts activity of neuropeptide Y in Ewing sarcoma from growth-inhibitory
to growth-promoting effects.

Tilan JU(1), Lu C, Galli S, Izycka-Swieszewska E, Earnest JP, Shabbir A, Everhart
LM, Wang S, Martin S, Horton M, Mahajan A, Christian D, O'Neill A, Wang H, Zhuang
T, Czarnecka M, Johnson MD, Toretsky JA, Kitlinska J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Georgetown University Medical Center, Georgetown
University, Washington DC.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive malignancy driven by an oncogenic fusion
protein, EWS-FLI1. Neuropeptide Y (NPY), and two of its receptors, Y1R and Y5R
are up-regulated by EWS-FLI1 and abundantly expressed in ES cells. Paradoxically,
NPY acting via Y1R and Y5R stimulates ES cell death. Here, we demonstrate that
these growth-inhibitory actions of NPY are counteracted by hypoxia, which
converts the peptide to a growth-promoting factor. In ES cells, hypoxia induces
another NPY receptor, Y2R, and increases expression of dipeptidyl peptidase IV
(DPPIV), an enzyme that cleaves NPY to a shorter form, NPY3-36. This truncated
peptide no longer binds to Y1R and, therefore, does not stimulate ES cell death. 
Instead, NPY3-36 acts as a selective Y2R/Y5R agonist. The hypoxia-induced
increase in DPPIV activity is most evident in a population of ES cells with high 
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) activity, rich in cancer stem cells (CSCs).
Consequently, NPY, acting via Y2R/Y5Rs, preferentially stimulates proliferation
and migration of hypoxic ALDHhigh cells. Hypoxia also enhances the angiogenic
potential of ES by inducing Y2Rs in endothelial cells and increasing the release 
of its ligand, NPY3-36, from ES cells. In summary, hypoxia acts as a molecular
switch shifting NPY activity away from Y1R/Y5R-mediated cell death and activating
the Y2R/Y5R/DPPIV/NPY3-36 axis, which stimulates ES CSCs and promotes
angiogenesis. Hypoxia-driven actions of the peptide such as these may contribute 
to ES progression. Due to the receptor-specific and multifaceted nature of NPY
actions, these findings may inform novel therapeutic approaches to ES.

PMCID: PMC3926843
PMID: 24318733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Curr Stem Cell Res Ther. 2014 Jan;9(1):46-62.

Ewing's sarcoma cancer stem cell targeted therapy.

Todorova R(1).

Author information: 
(1)IBPhBME-BAS, Acad G Bonchev str, Bl 21, 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria.
todorova@bio21.bas.bg.

Ewing`s sarcoma (ES) family of tumors (ESFTs) are round cell tumors of bone and
soft tissues, afflicting children and young adults. This review summarizes the
present findings about ES cancer stem cell (CSC) targeted therapy: prognostic
factors, chromosomal translocations, initiation, epigenetic mechanisms, candidate
cell of ES origin (Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and Neural crest stem cells
(NCSCs)). The ES CSC model, histopathogenesis, histogenesis, pathogenesis, ES
mediated Hematopoietic stem progenitor cells (HSPCs) senescence are also
discussed. ESFTs therapy is reviewed concerning CSCs, radiotherapy, risk of
subsequent neoplasms, stem cell (SC) support, promising therapeutic targets for
ES CSCs (CSC markers, immune targeting, RNAi phenotyping screens, proposed new
drugs), candidate EWS-FLI1 target genes and further directions (including human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs)). Bone marrow-derived human MSCs are permissive for 
EWS-FLI1 expression with transition to ESFT-like cellular phenotype. ESFTs are
genetically related to NCSC, permissive for EWS-FLI1 expression and susceptible
to oncogene-induced immortalization. Primitive neuroectodermal features and MSC
origin of ESFTs provide a basis of immune targeting. The microRNAs profile of ES 
CSCs is shared by ESCs and CSCs from divergent tumor types. Successful
reprogramming of differentiated human somatic cells into a pluripotent state
allows creation of patient- and disease-specific SCs. The functional role of
endogenous EWS at stem cell level on both senescence and tumorigenesis is a link 
between cancer and aging. The regulatory mechanisms of oncogenic activity of EWS 
fusions could provide new prognostic biomarkers, therapeutic opportunities and
tumor-specific anticancer agents against ESFTs.

PMID: 24294922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Jul;20(3):503-16. doi: 10.1007/s12253-013-9721-2. Epub
2013 Nov 30.

Clinicopathological and molecular spectrum of ewing sarcomas/PNETs, including
validation of EWSR1 rearrangement by conventional and array FISH technique in
certain cases.

Rekhi B(1), Vogel U, Basak R, Desai SB, Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Parel, Mumbai, India,
rekhi.bharat@gmail.com.

Over the years, a wide clinicopathological spectrum has been identified within
Ewing family of tumors (EFTs). As these tumors are chemosensitive, their correct 
and timely identification is necessary. The aims of this study were (1) to
present the diverse clinicopathological and molecular profile of EFTs in our
settings, (2) to identify a pragmatic approach for diagnosing EFTs, especially
for application of ancillary techniques, namely RT-PCR for specific transcripts
(EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG) and FISH for EWSR1 gene rearrangement, in certain cases and
(3) to show the utility of tissue microarray in establishing a new FISH test.
Fifty-eight EFTs were identified in 38 males and 20 females within an age-range
of 1-65 years (median, 16), mostly in lower extremities (14) (24.1 %).
Therapeutically, most patients underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy with subsequent
surgery. Histopathologically, diagnosis of EFTs was initially offered in 41/58
(70.6 %) tumors. On review, 59 % tumors showed diffuse pattern, while 41 %
displayed rosettes. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were mostly diffusely
positive for CD99 (48/52) (92.3 %); FLI-1 (17/18) (94.4 %); variably for BCL2
(16/18) (88.8 %), synaptophysin (6/20) (35 %), S100-P (2/7) (28.5 %), CD56 (2/5) 
(40 %), NSE (2/5) (40 %), calponin (3/4) (75 %), EMA (5/24) (20.8 %) and CK
(3/24) (12.5 %), the latter two mostly focally. Fifty five tumors were EWS-FLI1
positive, while a single tumor was EWS-ERG positive. Sensitivity for PCR was 61
%. EWSR1 rearrangement was detected by FISH in 12/13 Ewing sarcomas/PNETs.
Sensitivity for EWSR1 test was 92.3 % and specificity was 100 %. Thirty-eight
tumors, including 14 molecular confirmed EFTs and 21 other tumors were tested for
EWSR1 rearrangement. Among 21 unrelated tumors, EWSR1 rearrangement was detected 
in few myoepithelial tumors, occasional desmoplastic small round cell tumor and
an extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma. Further, a tissue microarray with a
separate set of 8 EFTs, confirmed at another laboratory was analysed for
validation of EWSR1 rearrangement test. 23/28 (82.1 %) tissue cores of the tissue
microarray, stained by FISH were interpretable, including EWSR1 rearrangement,
detected in 20/28 tissue cores; not detected in 3 liver cores and uninterpretable
in 5 (17.8 %) cores. Classical EFTs can be diagnosed with diffuse, membranous
CD99 positivity, intranuclear FLI1 positivity and LCA negativity in malignant
round cells. In unconventional cases, it is indispensable to reveal the
concomitant fusion m-RNA by RT-PCR. In case of negative molecular results, it is 
necessary to prove EWSR1 rearrangement by FISH. These tests should be interpreted
with clinicopathological correlation. Tissue microarrays for FISH are useful
during validation of a new test, especially when sarcomas like EFTs show less
genetic heterogeneity within tumor cells.

PMID: 24293381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Arch Dermatol Res. 2014 May;306(4):331-8. doi: 10.1007/s00403-013-1431-9. Epub
2013 Nov 29.

Fli1 deficiency contributes to the suppression of endothelial CXCL5 expression in
systemic sclerosis.

Ichimura Y(1), Asano Y, Akamata K, Takahashi T, Noda S, Taniguchi T, Toyama T,
Aozasa N, Sumida H, Kuwano Y, Yanaba K, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Sato S, Kadono T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

CXCL5 is a member of CXC chemokines with neutrophilic chemoattractant and
pro-angiogenic properties, which has been implicated in the pathological
angiogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel diseases. Since
aberrant angiogenesis is also involved in the developmental process of systemic
sclerosis (SSc), we herein measured serum CXCL5 levels in 63 SSc and 18 healthy
subjects and investigated their clinical significance and the mechanism
explaining altered expression of CXCL5 in SSc. Serum CXCL5 levels were
significantly lower in SSc patients than in healthy subjects. In diffuse
cutaneous SSc (dcSSc), serum CXCL5 levels were uniformly decreased in early stage
(<1 year) and positively correlated with disease duration in patients with
disease duration of <6 years. In non-early stage dcSSc (=1 year), decreased serum
CXCL5 levels were linked to the development of digital ulcers. Consistently, the 
expression levels of CXCL5 proteins were decreased in dermal blood vessels of
early stage dcSSc. Importantly, Fli1 bound to the CXCL5 promoter and its gene
silencing significantly suppressed the CXCL5 mRNA expression in human dermal
microvascular endothelial cells. Furthermore, endothelial cell-specific Fli1
knockout mice, an animal model of SSc vasculopathy, exhibited decreased CXCL5
expression in dermal blood vessels. Collectively, these results indicate that
CXCL5 is a member of angiogenesis-related genes, whose expression is suppressed
at least partially due to Fli1 deficiency in SSc endothelial cells. Since Fli1
deficiency is deeply related to aberrant angiogenesis in SSc, it is plausible
that serum CXCL5 levels inversely reflect the severity of SSc vasculopathy.

PMID: 24292093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1190-203. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-0901.
Epub 2013 Nov 25.

Dual targeting of EWS-FLI1 activity and the associated DNA damage response with
trabectedin and SN38 synergistically inhibits Ewing sarcoma cell growth.

Grohar PJ(1), Segars LE, Yeung C, Pommier Y, D'Incalci M, Mendoza A, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Monroe Carrell Jr. Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt
and the Vanderbilt Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee; Molecular Oncology
Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch; Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland; and Istituto 
di Ricerche Farmacologiche "Mario Negri" -IRCCS, Milan, Italy.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;20(5):1064-6.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study is to optimize the activity of trabectedin for
Ewing sarcoma by developing a molecularly targeted combination therapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have recently shown that trabectedin interferes with the 
activity of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma cells. In this report, we build on this
work to develop a trabectedin-based combination therapy with improved EWS-FLI1
suppression that also targets the drug-associated DNA damage to Ewing sarcoma
cells.
RESULTS: We demonstrate by siRNA experiments that EWS-FLI1 drives the expression 
of the Werner syndrome protein (WRN) in Ewing sarcoma cells. Because
WRN-deficient cells are known to be hypersensitive to camptothecins, we utilize
trabectedin to block EWS-FLI1 activity, suppress WRN expression, and selectively 
sensitize Ewing sarcoma cells to the DNA-damaging effects of SN38. We show that
trabectedin and SN38 are synergistic, demonstrate an increase in DNA
double-strand breaks, an accumulation of cells in S-phase and a low picomolar
IC50. In addition, SN38 cooperates with trabectedin to augment the suppression of
EWS-FLI1 downstream targets, leading to an improved therapeutic index in vivo.
These effects translate into the marked regression of two Ewing sarcoma
xenografts at a fraction of the dose of camptothecin used in other xenograft
studies.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide the basis and rationale for translating this
drug combination to the clinic. In addition, the study highlights an approach
that utilizes a targeted agent to interfere with an oncogenic transcription
factor and then exploits the resulting changes in gene expression to develop a
molecularly targeted combination therapy.

©2013 AACR

PMID: 24277455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Blood. 2014 Jan 23;123(4):501-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-07-514612. Epub 2013 Nov
25.

Aggf1 acts at the top of the genetic regulatory hierarchy in specification of
hemangioblasts in zebrafish.

Li L(1), Chen D, Li J, Wang X, Wang N, Xu C, Wang QK.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics of the Ministry of Education,
Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Center for Human Genome Research, Cardio-X Institute, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; and.

The hemangioblast is a multipotential progenitor, which is derived from the
mesoderm and can further differentiate into hematopoietic and endothelial
lineages. The molecular mechanism governing the specification of hemangioblasts
is fundamental to regenerative medicine based on embryonic stem cells for the
treatment of various hematologic and vascular diseases. Here we show that aggf1
acts at the top of the genetic regulatory hierarchy in the specification of
hemangioblasts in zebrafish. Knockdown of aggf1 expression decreases expression
of endothelial cell-specific markers (cdh5, admr) and disrupts primitive
hematopoiesis as shown by a decreased number of erythroid cells and reduced
expression of gata1 (marker for erythroid progenitors) and pu.1 (myeloid
progenitors). Aggf1 knockdown also decreases expression of runx1 and c-myb,
indicating that it is required for specification of hematopoietic stem cells
(definitive hematopoiesis). Aggf1 knockdown led to dramatically reduced
expression of hemangioblast markers fli1, etsrp, lmo2, and scl, and
hematopoietic/endothelial defects in aggf1 morphants were rescued by messenger
RNA for scl, fli-vp16, or etsrp. Taken together, these data indicate that aggf1
is involved in differentiation of both hematopoietic and endothelial lineages and
that aggf1 acts upstream of scl, fli1, and etsrp in specification of
hemangioblasts.

PMCID: PMC3901065
PMID: 24277077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;22(3):197-201. doi: 10.1177/1066896913510029. Epub
2013 Nov 25.

Small cell tumors of the thyroid gland: a review.

Eloy C(1), Cameselle-Teijeiro JM, Rousseau E, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)1IPATIMUP (Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University
of Porto), Porto, Portugal.

The small cell group of thyroid tumors that includes lymphoma, poorly
differentiated carcinoma, medullary carcinoma, secondary neoplasms, as well as
tumors with uncertain histogenesis, remains as a valid diagnostic cul-de-sac due 
to its heterogeneous constitution. The existence of small cell thyroid tumors
with EWSR1-FLI1 rearrangement together with neuroendocrine and/or carcinomatous
differentiation raises not only differential diagnostic problems but also a very 
interesting therapeutic dilemma. This review explores the classification of small
cell tumors of the thyroid taking into account the immunophenotype and molecular 
profile of such tumors.

PMID: 24275884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cancer Res. 2014 Jan 1;74(1):38-43. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1981. Epub 2013
Nov 18.

The NADH oxidase ENOX1, a critical mediator of endothelial cell
radiosensitization, is crucial for vascular development.

Venkateswaran A(1), Sekhar KR, Levic DS, Melville DB, Clark TA, Rybski WM, Walsh 
AJ, Skala MC, Crooks PA, Knapik EW, Freeman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Departments of Radiation Oncology and Medicine and Cell
& Developmental Biology; Genomic Sciences Resources, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center; Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt School of Engineering,
Nashville, Tennessee; School of Pharmacy, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas; and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California.

ENOX1 is a highly conserved NADH oxidase that helps to regulate intracellular
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide levels in many cell types, including
endothelial cells. Pharmacologic and RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated suppression
of ENOX1 impairs surrogate markers of tumor angiogenesis/vasculogenesis,
providing support for the concept that ENOX1 represents an antiangiogenic
druggable target. However, direct genetic evidence that demonstrates a role for
ENOX1 in vascular development is lacking. In this study, we exploited a zebrafish
embryonic model of development to address this question. Whole-mount in situ
hybridization coupled with immunofluorescence performed on zebrafish embryos
demonstrate that enox1 message and translated protein are expressed in most
tissues, and its expression is enriched in blood vessels and heart.
Morpholino-mediated suppression of Enox1 in Tg(fli1-eGFP) and Tg(flk1-eGFP)
zebrafish embryos significantly impairs the development of vasculature and blood 
circulation. Using in vivo multiphoton microscopy, we show that
morpholino-mediated knockdown of enox1 increases NADH levels, consistent with
loss of enzyme. VJ115 is a small-molecule inhibitor of Enox1's oxidase activity
shown to increase intracellular NADH in endothelial cells; we used VJ115 to
determine if the oxidase activity was crucial for vascular development. We found 
that VJ115 suppressed vasculogenesis in Tg(fli1-eGFP) embryos and impaired
circulation. Previously, it was shown that suppression of ENOX1 radiosensitizes
proliferating tumor vasculature, a consequence of enhanced endothelial cell
apoptosis. Thus, our current findings, coupled with previous research, support
the hypothesis that ENOX1 represents a potential cancer therapy target, one that 
combines molecular targeting with cytotoxic sensitization.

PMCID: PMC3947320
PMID: 24247717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014;151(1):565-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.11.019. Epub 2013
Nov 16.

Molecular mechanisms of angiogenesis effect of active sub-fraction from root of
Rehmannia glutinosa by zebrafish sprout angiogenesis-guided fractionation.

Liu CL(1), Kwok HF(2), Cheng L(2), Ko CH(2), Wong CW(2), Ho TW(2), Leung PC(2),
Fung KP(1), Lau CB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and
Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong; School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and
Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. (3)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong; State Key
Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
Electronic address: claralau@cuhk.edu.hk.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL IMPORTANCE: The root of Rehmannia glutinosa (Rehmanniae
Radix (RR)) is clinically used as a wound-healing agent in traditional Chinese
medicine. Angiogenesis acts crucially in the pathogenesis of chronic wound
healing. The present study investigated the angiogenesis effect and its
underlying mechanism of RR through zebrafish sprout angiogenesis
guided-fractionation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The in vivo angiogenesis effect was studied by analyzing
the number of ectopic sprouts formed upon sub-intestinal vessel of transgenic
TG(fli1:EGFP)(y1)/+(AB) zebrafish embryos by fluorescence microscopy.
Quantitative real-time PCR gene expression of the zebrafish embryos was further
performed using a panel of 30 angiogenesis-associated genes designed for
zebrafish sprout angiogenesis. Classical in vitro angiogenesis assays using human
microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) was accompanied.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that among all RR sub-fractions tested, C1-1
treated-zebrafish embryos possessed the most potent angiogenesis activities (from
190 to 780 ng/ml, p<0.001) in sprout formation in the zebrafish model.
Quantitative gene expression of the treated embryos demonstrated significant
up-regulation in MMP-9 (p<0.05), ANGPT1 (p<0.05), EGFR (p<0.05), EPHB4 (p<0.01), 
and significant down-regulation in Ephrin B2 (p<0.05), Flt-1 (p<0.05) and Ets-1
(p<0.05). C1-1 treatment could also significantly (p<0.001-0.05) stimulate HMEC-1
cell migration in scratch assay. Significant increase (p<0.05) in mean tubule
length was observed in the C1-1-treated HMEC-1 cells in the tubule formation
assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Our zebrafish sprout angiogenesis model-guided fractionation
revealed that C1-1 possessed the most potent angiogenesis effect in RR. The
design of the panel with 30 tailor-made angiogenesis-associated genes exhibited
in zebrafish gene expression analysis showed that C1-1 could trigger differential
expression of various angiogenesis-associated genes, such as VEGFR3 and MMP9,
which played key role in angiogenesis. The pro-angiogenic activity of C1-1 was
further confirmed in the translated study in motogenic and tubule-inducing effect
using HMEC-1.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24247081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2013 Dec;15(12):382. doi: 10.1007/s11926-013-0382-7.

Animal models of scleroderma: current state and recent development.

Asano Y(1), Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan, yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disease characterized
by three cardinal features: immunological abnormalities, vasculopathy, and
fibrosis of skin and certain internal organs. Although several animal models
recapitulating selected aspects of SSc have been reported, the absence of models 
fulfilling the full clinical picture of SSc has hindered progress in the
development and testing of therapy for this disease. In recent years, three new
inducible animal models have revealed the critical importance of reactive oxygen 
species, angiotensin II, and the combination of DNA topoisomerase I immunization 
and IL-6 induction in fibrosis of SSc. In addition, two genetic animal models
have revealed the potential involvement of transcription factors, Fra-2 and Fli1,
in the fibrosis and vasculopathy of SSc. These new animal models provide
important insights into specific pathological processes of SSc and novel
therapeutic targets that may lead to more effective treatment of this incurable
disease.

PMID: 24150871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Aug;22(5):427-33. doi: 10.1177/1066896913502227. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

PNET with neuroendocrine differentiation of the lung: Report of an unusual
entity.

Barroca H(1), Souto Moura C(2), Lopes JM(3), Lisboa S(4), Teixeira MR(4),
Damasceno M(2), Bastos P(5), Sobrinho-Simões M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto, Portugal Departamento de Patologia e
Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal hbarroca@gmail.com. (2)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto, Portugal
Departamento de Patologia e Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (3)Centro Hospitalar S João, Porto,
Portugal Departamento de Patologia e Oncologia Médica da Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia
Molecular da Universidade do Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal. (4)Instituto
Português de Oncologia do Porto e Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar
(ICBAS), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (5)Centro Hospitalar S João,
Porto, Portugal.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) has been the subject of
recent reports describing morphologic variants (adamantinoma-like, large cell,
spindle cell, sclerosing, clear cell, and vascular-like) of the most classic
form, as well as cases displaying unusual morphologic differentiation and
atypical immunohistochemical features. We report a case of an uncommon lung tumor
in a 20-year-old female, morphologically and molecularly consistent with an
Ewing's sarcoma/PNET tumor with foci of squamous differentiation, and peculiar
expression of vimentin, high-molecular-weight keratins, p63, synaptophysin, and
chromogranin. This case raises a challenging differential diagnostic problem with
therapeutic implications: Should the patient be treated following the protocols
for Ewing's sarcoma/PNET tumors or as for lung carcinoma with neuroendocrine
features? The patient we report here was treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy
for Ewing's sarcoma/PNET according to Euro Ewing 99 study protocol followed by
surgery and has no evidence of disease 15 months after the initial diagnosis.
This highlights the importance of achieving the correct diagnosis of these
atypical tumors using all clinical, morphological, and ancillary methods
available to allow for their correct and timely treatment.

© The Author(s) 2013.

PMID: 24141023  [PubMed - in process]


228. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 4;8(10):e77416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077416. eCollection
2013.

Ewing sarcoma cells secrete EWS/Fli-1 fusion mRNA via microvesicles.

Tsugita M(1), Yamada N, Noguchi S, Yamada K, Moritake H, Shimizu K, Akao Y, Ohno 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Gifu, Japan ; United Graduate School of Drug Discovery and
Medical Information Sciences, Gifu, Gifu, Japan.

Tumours defined as Ewing sarcoma (ES) constitute a group of highly malignant
neoplasms that most often affect children and young adults in the first 2 decades
of life. The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene, a product of the translocation t(11;22) (q24;
12), is detected in 95% of ES patients. Recently, it was validated that cells
emit a heterogeneous mixture of vesicular, organelle-like structures
(microvesicles, MVs) into their surroundings including blood and body fluids, and
that these MVs contain a selected set of tumor-related proteins and high levels
of mRNAs and miRNAs. In this present study, we detected the Ewing
sarcoma-specific EWS/Fli-1 mRNA in MVs from the culture medium of ES cell lines
carrying t(11;22) (q24; 12). Also, we detected this fusion gene in approximately 
40% of the blood samples from mice inoculated with xenografts of TC135 or A673
cells. These findings indicate the EWS/Fli-1 mRNA in MVs might be a new
non-invasive diagnostic marker for specific cases of Ewing sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3790721
PMID: 24124617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4090-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-06-506873. Epub 2013
Oct 7.

Enrichment of FLI1 and RUNX1 mutations in families with excessive bleeding and
platelet dense granule secretion defects.

Stockley J(1), Morgan NV, Bem D, Lowe GC, Lordkipanidzé M, Dawood B, Simpson MA, 
Macfarlane K, Horner K, Leo VC, Talks K, Motwani J, Wilde JT, Collins PW, Makris 
M, Watson SP, Daly ME; UK Genotyping and Phenotyping of Platelets Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science, University of Sheffield Medical School, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Dec 12;122(25):4004-6.

We analyzed candidate platelet function disorder genes in 13 index cases with a
history of excessive bleeding in association with a significant reduction in
dense granule secretion and impaired aggregation to a panel of platelet agonists.
Five of the index cases also had mild thrombocytopenia. Heterozygous alterations 
in FLI1 and RUNX1, encoding Friend leukemia integration 1 and RUNT-related
transcription factor 1, respectively, which have a fundamental role in
megakaryocytopoeisis, were identified in 6 patients, 4 of whom had mild
thrombocytopenia. Two FLI1 alterations predicting p.Arg337Trp and p.Tyr343Cys
substitutions in the FLI1 DNA-binding domain abolished transcriptional activity
of FLI1. A 4-bp deletion in FLI1, and 2 splicing alterations and a nonsense
variation in RUNX1, which were predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of either
FLI1 or RUNX1, were also identified. Our findings suggest that alterations in
FLI1 and RUNX1 may be common in patients with platelet dense granule secretion
defects and mild thrombocytopenia.

PMCID: PMC3862284
PMID: 24100448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2013 Oct;27(5):1007-19. doi:
10.1016/j.hoc.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 Aug 3.

Update in treatment and targets in Ewing sarcoma.

Cote GM(1), Choy E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology Oncology, Yawkey Center for Outpatient Care,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 32 Fruit Street, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA.

The improvement in outcome for patients with localized and metastatic Ewing
sarcoma since the development of cytotoxic chemotherapy remains one of the most
profound advances in oncology and one of the proudest achievements of sarcoma
researchers. Identification of molecular targets for new treatments has become an
intense area within Ewing sarcoma research. The development of improved
preclinical Ewing sarcoma models and advanced molecular techniques will build on 
knowledge of EWS/FLI1 function, EWS/FLI1 transcription targets, and the other
critical driver events in these tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24093173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Int J Cell Biol. 2013;2013:642853. doi: 10.1155/2013/642853. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Ewing sarcoma protein: a key player in human cancer.

Paronetto MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Rome "Foro Italico", 00135 Rome, 
Italy ; Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology, Fondazione Santa Lucia
IRCSS, 00143 Rome, Italy.

The Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS) is a well-known player in cancer biology for the 
specific translocations occurring in sarcomas. The EWS-FLI1 gene fusion is the
prototypical translocation that encodes the aberrant, chimeric transcription
factor, which is a landmark of Ewing tumors. In all described Ewing sarcoma
oncogenes, the EWS RNA binding domains are completely missing; thus RNA binding
properties are not retained in the hybrid proteins. However, it is currently
unknown whether the absence of EWS function in RNA metabolism plays a role in
oncogenic transformation or if EWS plays a role by itself in cancer development
besides its contribution to the translocation. In this regard, recent reports
have highlighted an essential role for EWS in the regulation of DNA damage
response (DDR), a process that counteracts genome stability and is often
deregulated in cancer cells. The first part of this review will describe the
structural features of EWS and its multiple roles in the regulation of gene
expression, which are exerted by coordinating different steps in the synthesis
and processing of pre-mRNAs. The second part will examine the role of EWS in the 
regulation of DDR- and cancer-related genes, with potential implications in
cancer therapies. Finally, recent advances on the involvement of EWS in
neuromuscular disorders will be discussed. Collectively, the information reviewed
herein highlights the broad role of EWS in bridging different cellular processes 
and underlines the contribution of EWS to genome stability and proper cell-cycle 
progression in higher eukaryotic cells.

PMCID: PMC3776376
PMID: 24082883  [PubMed]


232. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2013 Dec;17(6):502-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2013.08.004.
Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Atypical fibroxanthoma with pseudoangiomatous features: a histological and
immunohistochemical mimic of cutaneous angiosarcoma.

Thum C(1), Husain EA, Mulholland K, Hornick JL, Brenn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Western General Hospital and The University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Atypical fibroxanthoma and pleomorphic dermal sarcoma may be difficult to
separate from cutaneous angiosarcoma. We aim to study the morphological spectrum 
of pseudoangiomatous features in these tumors and the value of staining for
endothelial markers CD31, CD34, FLI1, and ERG. Eleven atypical fibroxanthomas and
3 pleomorphic dermal sarcomas were identified. All tumors arose on sun-damaged
skin of elderly men. Atypical fibroxanthomas were nodular and confined to the
dermis, whereas pleomorphic dermal sarcoma invaded into underlying fascia. All
tumors were composed of pleomorphic epithelioid and spindle cells showing
blood-filled spaces and intratumoral hemorrhage. Intracytoplasmic vacuoles (n =
4), hemosiderin deposition (n = 2), and keloidal stromal change (n = 1) were also
noted. Immunohistochemically, CD31 was expressed in 43% of cases, FLI1 in 79% and
smooth muscle actin in 50%. Staining for CD34, ERG, S100, HMB-45, desmin, p63 and
cytokeratins was negative. Follow up (median, 43.1 months; range 1-100),
available for 10 patients, showed no adverse outcome. Pseudoangiomatous features 
and aberrant expression of CD31 and FLI1 in atypical fibroxanthoma and
pleomorphic dermal sarcoma may lead to an erroneous diagnosis of cutaneous
angiosarcoma. Negativity for CD34 and ERG, in particular, is a reliable
differentiating feature in this setting.

© 2013.

PMID: 24080496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mod Pathol. 2014 Apr;27(4):496-501. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2013.161. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

ERG and FLI1 protein expression in epithelioid sarcoma.

Stockman DL(1), Hornick JL(2), Deavers MT(1), Lev DC(3), Lazar AJ(4), Wang WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)1] Department of Cancer Biology,
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA [2] Sarcoma
Research Center, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX,
USA. (4)1] Departments of Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA [2] Sarcoma Research Center, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Epithelioid sarcoma is a rare, aggressive keratin-positive sarcoma that
co-expresses CD34 in 50% of cases and may mimic an angiosarcoma. Recently, we
have observed one case of epithelioid sarcoma that labeled for ERG, an ETS family
regulatory transcription factor, which is considered to be a reliable marker for 
vascular differentiation. We investigated the prevalence of nuclear expression of
ERG and FLI1, a homologous transcription factor, in these tumors. A
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarray of 37 epithelioid sarcomas was
examined. Immunohistochemistry was performed using anti-ERG monoclonal antibody
to the N-terminus, anti-ERG monoclonal antibody to the C-terminus and anti-FLI1
monoclonal antibody. Comparison was made with CD34, CD31, and D2-40 labeling. The
extent of immunoreactivity was graded according to the percentage of positive
tumor cell nuclei (0: no staining; 1+: <5%; 2+: 5-25%; 3+: 26-50%; 4+: 51-75%;
and 5+: 76-100%), and the intensity of staining was graded as weak, moderate, or 
strong. Nuclear staining for the N-terminus of ERG was seen in 19 out of 28
cases: 10 with diffuse(4 to 5+) strong/moderate labeling; 1 with 2+ moderate
labeling and 8 with weak labeling (1 to 4+, 2 each). Focal staining for the
C-terminus of ERG was seen in only 1 out of 29 cases (2+ moderate). FLI1 labeling
was seen in nearly all (28 out of 30) cases: 16 with diffuse (5+) predominantly
moderate labeling, and 8 cases with diffuse(5+) weak labeling. The remainder had 
variable moderate (1 to 3+) or weak (1 to 4+) FLI1 staining. CD34 was positive in
22 out of 30 cases and D2-40 was found to be positive in 22 out of 31 cases. All 
cases were negative for CD31 (0 out of 30). Epithelioid sarcoma can label with
antibodies to the N-terminus of ERG, FLI1, and D2-40, which may cause diagnostic 
confusion for a vascular tumor. A panel of other antibodies including SMARCB1 and
CD31 should be used in evaluating these tumors. ERG antibody selection is also
critical, as those directed against the C-terminus are less likely to label
epithelioid sarcoma.

PMID: 24072183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74930. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074930. eCollection
2013.

Fli1 represses transcription of the human a2(I) collagen gene by recruitment of
the HDAC1/p300 complex.

Asano Y(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Fli1, a member of the Ets transcription factor family, is a key repressor of the 
human a2(I) collagen (COL1A2) gene. Although our previous studies have delineated
that TGF-ß induces displacement of Fli1 from the COL1A2 promoter through
sequential post-translational modifications, the detailed mechanism by which Fli1
functions as a potent transcriptional repressor of the COL1A2 gene has not been
fully investigated. To address this issue, we carried out a series of experiments
especially focusing on protein-protein interaction and epigenetic transcriptional
regulation. The combination of tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry
identified HDAC1 as a Fli1 interacting protein. Under quiescent conditions, HDAC1
induced deacetylation of Fli1 resulting in an increase of Fli1 DNA binding
ability and p300 enhanced this process by promoting the formation of a
Fli1-HDAC1-p300 complex. TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
led to disassembly of this protein complex. In quiescent dermal fibroblasts Fli1,
HDAC1, and p300 occupied the -404 to -237 region, including the Fli1 binding
site, of the COL1A2 promoter. TGF-ß induced Fli1 and HDAC1 dissociation from the 
COL1A2 promoter, while promoting Ets1 and p300 recruitment. Furthermore,
acetylation levels of histone H3 around the Fli1 binding site in the COL1A2
promoter inversely correlated with the DNA occupancy of Fli1 and HDAC1, while
positively correlating with that of Ets1 and p300. In the functional studies,
HDAC1 overexpression magnified the inhibitory effect of Fli1 on the COL1A2
promoter. Moreover, pharmacological blockade of HDAC1 by entinostat enhanced
collagen production in dermal fibroblasts. Collectively, these results indicate
that under quiescent conditions Fli1 recruits HDAC1/p300 to the COL1A2 promoter
and suppresses the expression of the COL1A2 gene by chromatin remodeling through 
histone deacetylation. TGF-ß-dependent phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312
is a critical step regulating the remodeling of the Fli1 transcription repressor 
complex, leading to transcriptional activation of the COL1A2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3772867
PMID: 24058639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;45(11):2688-97. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.09.004. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Flightless I homolog negatively regulates ChREBP activity in cancer cells.

Wu L(1), Chen H, Zhu Y, Meng J, Li Y, Li M, Yang D, Zhang P, Feng M, Tong X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, Shanghai Key Laboratory
for Tumor Microenvironment and Inflammation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, 280 S. Chongqing Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

The glucose-responsive transcription factor carbohydrate responsive element
binding protein (ChREBP) plays an important role in regulating glucose metabolism
in support of anabolic synthesis in both hepatocytes and cancer cells. In order
to further investigate the molecular mechanism by which ChREBP regulates
transcription, we used a proteomic approach to identify proteins interacting with
ChREBP. We found several potential ChREBP-interacting partners, one of which,
flightless I homolog (FLII) was verified to interact and co-localize with ChREBP 
in HCT116 colorectal cancer and HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. FLII is a
member of the gelsolin superfamily of actin-remodeling proteins and can function 
as a transcriptional co-regulator. The C-terminal 227 amino acid region of ChREBP
containing the DNA-binding domain interacted with FLII. Both the N-terminal
leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain and C-terminal gelsolin homolog domain (GLD) of 
FLII interacted and co-localized with ChREBP. ChREBP and FLII localized in both
the cytoplasm and nucleus of cancer cells. Glucose increased expression and
nuclear localization of ChREBP, and had minimal effect on the level and
distribution of FLII. FLII knockdown using siRNAs increased mRNA and protein
levels of ChREBP-activated genes and decreased transcription of ChREBP-repressed 
genes in cancer cells. Conversely, FLII overexpression negatively regulated
ChREBP-mediated transcription in cancer cells. Our findings suggest that FLII is 
a component of the ChREBP transcriptional complex and negatively regulates ChREBP
function in cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;33(22):4448-60. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00241-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
16.

A novel role for keratin 17 in coordinating oncogenic transformation and cellular
adhesion in Ewing sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Tanner JM, Bell R, Chaturvedi A, Randall RL, Beckerle MC, Lessnick
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of
Medicine, University of Utah.

Oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma is caused by EWS/FLI, an aberrant
transcription factor fusion oncogene. Glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1)
is a critical target gene activated by EWS/FLI, but the mechanism by which GLI1
contributes to the transformed phenotype of Ewing sarcoma was unknown. In this
work, we identify keratin 17 (KRT17) as a direct downstream target gene
upregulated by GLI1. We demonstrate that KRT17 regulates cellular adhesion by
activating AKT/PKB (protein kinase B) signaling. In addition, KRT17 is necessary 
for oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma and accounts for much of the
GLI1-mediated transformation function but via a mechanism independent of AKT
signaling. Taken together, our data reveal previously unknown molecular functions
for a cytoplasmic intermediate filament protein, KRT17, in coordinating EWS/FLI- 
and GLI1-mediated oncogenic transformation and cellular adhesion in Ewing
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3838177
PMID: 24043308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 10;8(9):e75175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075175. eCollection
2013.

Reducing FLI1 levels in the MRL/lpr lupus mouse model impacts T cell function by 
modulating glycosphingolipid metabolism.

Richard EM(1), Thiyagarajan T, Bunni MA, Basher F, Roddy PO, Siskind LJ, Nietert 
PJ, Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of
America.

Systemic Lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease caused, in part, by
abnormalities in cells of the immune system including B and T cells. Genetically 
reducing globally the expression of the ETS transcription factor FLI1 by 50% in
two lupus mouse models significantly improves disease measures and survival
through an unknown mechanism. In this study we analyze the effects of reducing
FLI1 in the MRL/lpr lupus prone model on T cell function. We demonstrate that
adoptive transfer of MRL/lpr Fli1(+/+) or Fli1(+/-) T cells and B cells into
Rag1-deficient mice results in significantly decreased serum immunoglobulin
levels in animals receiving Fli1(+/-) lupus T cells compared to animals receiving
Fli1(+/+) lupus T cells regardless of the genotype of co-transferred lupus B
cells. Ex vivo analyses of MRL/lpr T cells demonstrated that Fli1(+/-) T cells
produce significantly less IL-4 during early and late disease and exhibited
significantly decreased TCR-specific activation during early disease compared to 
Fli1(+/+) T cells. Moreover, the Fli1(+/-) T cells expressed significantly less
neuraminidase 1 (Neu1) message and decreased NEU activity during early disease
and significantly decreased levels of glycosphingolipids during late disease
compared to Fli1(+/+) T cells. FLI1 dose-dependently activated the Neu1 promoter 
in mouse and human T cell lines. Together, our results suggest reducing FLI1 in
lupus decreases the pathogenicity of T cells by decreasing TCR-specific
activation and IL-4 production in part through the modulation of
glycosphingolipid metabolism. Reducing the expression of FLI1 or targeting the
glycosphingolipid metabolic pathway in lupus may serve as a therapeutic approach 
to treating lupus.

PMCID: PMC3769295
PMID: 24040398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biol Cell. 2013 Nov;105(11):535-47. doi: 10.1111/boc.201300041. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

The Zyxin-related protein thyroid receptor interacting protein 6 (TRIP6) is
overexpressed in Ewing's sarcoma and promotes migration, invasion and cell
growth.

Grunewald TG(1), Willier S, Janik D, Unland R, Reiss C, Prazeres da Costa O, Buch
T, Dirksen U, Richter GH, Neff F, Burdach S, Butt E.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center and Roman Herzog Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Laboratory of Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Klinikum
rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, 80804, Germany.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is the second most common
bone-associated malignancy in children and is driven by the fusion oncogene
EWS/FLI1 and characterised by rapid growth and early metastasis. Here, we
explored the role of the Zyxin-related protein thyroid receptor interacting
protein 6 (TRIP6) in ES. The Zyxin family comprises seven homologous proteins
involved in migration and proliferation of many cell types of which Zyxin has
been described as a tumour suppressor in ES.
RESULTS: By interrogation of published microarray data (n = 1254), we observed
that of all Zyxin proteins, only TRIP6 is highly overexpressed in primary ES
compared with normal tissues. Re-analysis of published EWS/FLI1 gain- and
loss-of-function microarray experiments as well as chromatin-immunoprecipitation 
assays revealed that TRIP6 overexpression is not mediated by EWS/FLI1. Microarray
and subsequent gene-set enrichment analyses of ES cells with and without RNA
interference-mediated TRIP6 knockdown demonstrated that TRIP6 expression confers 
a pro-proliferative and pro-invasive transcriptional signature to ES cells. While
short-term proliferation was not considerably affected by TRIP6 knockdown,
silencing of the protein significantly reduced migration, invasion, long-term
proliferation and clonogenicity of ES cells in vitro as well as tumourigenicity
in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data indicate that TRIP6 acts, in contrast to
Zyxin, as an oncogene that partially accounts for the autonomous migratory,
invasive and proliferative properties of ES cells independent of EWS/FLI1.

© 2013 Société Française des Microscopies and Société de Biologie Cellulaire de
France. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24033704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Oct 1;47(19):11302-10. doi: 10.1021/es403360y. Epub
2013 Sep 19.

High-content screening assay for identification of chemicals impacting
cardiovascular function in zebrafish embryos.

Yozzo KL(1), Isales GM, Raftery TD, Volz DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Arnold School of Public Health,
University of South Carolina , Columbia, South Carolina 29208, United States.

Targeted assays are needed to better evaluate effects of chemicals on
organogenesis and begin classification of chemicals by toxicologically relevant
modes-of-action. Using transgenic zebrafish (fli1:egfp) that stably express eGFP 
within vascular endothelial cells, we have developed and optimized a
384-well-based high-content screening (HCS) assay that enables us to screen and
identify chemicals affecting cardiovascular function at sublethal, nonteratogenic
concentrations. Following static exposure of one embryo per well from 5 to 72 h
postfertilization (hpf), automated image acquisition procedures and custom image 
analysis protocols are used to quantify body length, circulation, heart rate,
pericardial area (a biomarker for cardiac looping defects), and intersegmental
vessel area within freshly hatched live embryos. After optimizing 72 hpf
anesthetization procedures, we evaluated each end point across four independent
control plates containing 384 initial embryos per plate. Survival and imaging
success rates across these plates ranged from 93 to 99% and 42 to 74%,
respectively. Criteria were then defined for assay success and analysis of
treatments, and 10 chemicals were screened for targeted effects on cardiovascular
function. Compared to existing zebrafish-based assays, this method provides a
comprehensive discovery platform with (1) increased sample sizes; (2) broad
concentration-response format; and (3) the ability to identify chemicals that
target cardiovascular function at nonteratogenic concentrations.

PMID: 24015875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):770-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.257. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

CBFB-MYH11/RUNX1 together with a compendium of hematopoietic regulators,
chromatin modifiers and basal transcription factors occupies self-renewal genes
in inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Mandoli A(1), Singh AA(1), Jansen PW(2), Wierenga AT(3), Riahi H(1), Franci G(4),
Prange K(1), Saeed S(1), Vellenga E(5), Vermeulen M(2), Stunnenberg HG(1),
Martens JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Cancer Research, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (3)1] Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine University of Groningen and University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Dipartimento di Biochimica, Biofisica e
Patologia Generale, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Napoli, Italy.
(5)Department of Hematology, University of Groningen and University Medical
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Different mechanisms for CBFß-MYH11 function in acute myeloid leukemia with
inv(16) have been proposed such as tethering of RUNX1 outside the nucleus,
interference with transcription factor complex assembly and recruitment of
histone deacetylases, all resulting in transcriptional repression of RUNX1 target
genes. Here, through genome-wide CBFß-MYH11-binding site analysis and
quantitative interaction proteomics, we found that CBFß-MYH11 localizes to RUNX1 
occupied promoters, where it interacts with TAL1, FLI1 and TBP-associated factors
(TAFs) in the context of the hematopoietic transcription factors ERG, GATA2 and
PU.1/SPI1 and the coregulators EP300 and HDAC1. Transcriptional analysis revealed
that upon fusion protein knockdown, a small subset of the CBFß-MYH11 target genes
show increased expression, confirming a role in transcriptional repression.
However, the majority of CBFß-MYH11 target genes, including genes implicated in
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal such as ID1, LMO1 and JAG1, are actively
transcribed and repressed upon fusion protein knockdown. Together these results
suggest an essential role for CBFß-MYH11 in regulating the expression of genes
involved in maintaining a stem cell phenotype.

PMID: 24002588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 24;33(30):3927-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.361. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Suppression of FOXO1 is responsible for a growth regulatory repressive
transcriptional sub-signature of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma.

Niedan S(1), Kauer M(1), Aryee DN(2), Kofler R(3), Schwentner R(1), Meier A(4),
Pötschger U(1), Kontny U(4), Kovar H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. (2)1] Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna
Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria [2] Department of Pediatrics, Medical
University, Vienna, Austria. (3)Division of Molecular Pathophysiology, Biocenter,
Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (4)Division of Pediatric
Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine,
University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany.

The Ewing sarcoma (ES) EWS-FLI1 chimeric oncoprotein is a prototypic aberrant ETS
transcription factor with activating and repressive regulatory functions. We
report that EWS-FLI1-repressed promoters are enriched in forkhead box (FOX)
recognition motifs, and identify FOXO1 as a EWS-FLI1-suppressed regulator
orchestrating a major subset of EWS-FLI1-repressed genes. In addition to FOXO1
regulation by direct promoter binding of EWS-FLI1, its subcellular localization
and activity is regulated by cyclin-dependent kinase 2- and AKT-mediated
phosphorylation downstream of EWS-FLI1. Restoration of nuclear FOXO1 expression
in ES cells impaired proliferation and significantly reduced clonogenicity.
Gene-expression profiling revealed a significant overlap between
EWS-FLI1-repressed and FOXO1-activated genes. As a proof of principle for a
potential therapeutic application of our findings, the treatment of ES cell lines
with methylseleninic acid (MSA) reactivated endogenous FOXO1 in the presence of
EWS-FLI1 in a dose- and time-dependent manner and induced massive cell death
dependent on FOXO1. In an orthotopic xenograft mouse model, MSA increased FOXO1
expression in the tumor paralleled by a significant decrease in ES tumor growth. 
FOXO1 reactivation by small molecules may therefore serve as a promising strategy
for a future ES-specific therapy.

PMCID: PMC4114138
PMID: 23995784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Blood. 2013 Oct 3;122(14):e12-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-490425. Epub 2013
Aug 23.

Genome-wide analysis of transcriptional regulators in human HSPCs reveals a
densely interconnected network of coding and noncoding genes.

Beck D(1), Thoms JA, Perera D, Schütte J, Unnikrishnan A, Knezevic K, Kinston SJ,
Wilson NK, O'Brien TA, Göttgens B, Wong JW, Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia;

Genome-wide combinatorial binding patterns for key transcription factors (TFs)
have not been reported for primary human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells 
(HSPCs), and have constrained analysis of the global architecture of molecular
circuits controlling these cells. Here we provide high-resolution genome-wide
binding maps for a heptad of key TFs (FLI1, ERG, GATA2, RUNX1, SCL, LYL1, and
LMO2) in human CD34(+) HSPCs, together with quantitative RNA and microRNA
expression profiles. We catalog binding of TFs at coding genes and microRNA
promoters, and report that combinatorial binding of all 7 TFs is favored and
associated with differential expression of genes and microRNA in HSPCs. We also
uncover a previously unrecognized association between FLI1 and RUNX1 pairing in
HSPCs, we establish a correlation between the density of histone modifications
that mark active enhancers and the number of overlapping TFs at a peak, we
demonstrate bivalent histone marks at promoters of heptad target genes in CD34(+)
cells that are poised for later expression, and we identify complex relationships
between specific microRNAs and coding genes regulated by the heptad. Taken
together, these data reveal the power of integrating multifactor sequencing of
chromatin immunoprecipitates with coding and noncoding gene expression to
identify regulatory circuits controlling cell identity.

PMID: 23974199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Nov;12(11):2591-600. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0338.
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Combining PARP-1 inhibition and radiation in Ewing sarcoma results in lethal DNA 
damage.

Lee HJ(1), Yoon C, Schmidt B, Park do J, Zhang AY, Erkizan HV, Toretsky JA,
Kirsch DG, Yoon SS.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Sam S. Yoon, Department of Surgery, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, H-1209, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065.
yoons@mskcc.org.

Ewing sarcomas (ES) harbor a chromosomal translocation that fuses the EWS gene to
an ETS transcription factor, most commonly Friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1). 
The EWS-FLI1 fusion protein acts in a positive feedback loop to maintain the
expression of PARP-1, which is involved in repair of DNA damage. Here, we examine
the effects of PARP-1 inhibition and radiation therapy on Ewing sarcomas. In
proliferation assays, the Ewing sarcoma cell lines RD-ES and SK-N-MC were much
more sensitive than non-Ewing sarcoma cell lines to the PARP-1 inhibitor olaparib
(Ola; IC50 0.5-1 µmol/L vs. >5 µmol/L) and to radiation (IC50 2-4 Gy vs. >6 Gy). 
PARP-1 inhibition with short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or Ola sensitized Ewing sarcoma 
cells, but not non-Ewing sarcoma cells, to radiation therapy in both
proliferation and colony formation assays. Using the Comet assay, radiation of
Ewing sarcoma cells with Ola, compared to without Ola, resulted in more DNA
damage at 1 hour (mean tail moment 36-54 vs. 26-28) and sustained DNA damage at
24 hours (24-29 vs. 6-8). This DNA damage led to a 2.9- to 4.0-fold increase in
apoptosis and a 1.6- to 2.4-fold increase in cell death. The effect of PARP-1
inhibition and radiation therapy on Ewing sarcoma cells was lost when EWS-FLI1
was silenced by shRNA. A small dose of radiation therapy (4 Gy), when combined
with PARP-1 inhibition, stopped the growth of SK-N-MC flank tumors xenografts. In
conclusion, PARP-1 inhibition in Ewing sarcomas amplifies the level and duration 
of DNA damage caused by radiation therapy, leading to synergistic increases in
apoptosis and cell death in a EWS-FLI1-dependent manner.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3823674
PMID: 23966622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Genome Res. 2013 Nov;23(11):1797-809. doi: 10.1101/gr.151340.112. Epub 2013 Aug
12.

Oncogenic ETS fusions deregulate E2F3 target genes in Ewing sarcoma and prostate 
cancer.

Bilke S(1), Schwentner R, Yang F, Kauer M, Jug G, Walker RL, Davis S, Zhu YJ,
Pineda M, Meltzer PS, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA;

Deregulated E2F transcription factor activity occurs in the vast majority of
human tumors and has been solidly implicated in disturbances of cell cycle
control, proliferation, and apoptosis. Aberrant E2F regulatory activity is often 
caused by impairment of control through pRB function, but little is known about
the interplay of other oncoproteins with E2F. Here we show that ETS transcription
factor fusions resulting from disease driving rearrangements in Ewing sarcoma
(ES) and prostate cancer (PC) are one such class of oncoproteins. We performed an
integrative study of genome-wide DNA-binding and transcription data in EWSR1/FLI1
expressing ES and TMPRSS2/ERG containing PC cells. Supported by promoter activity
and mutation analyses, we demonstrate that a large fraction of E2F3 target genes 
are synergistically coregulated by these aberrant ETS proteins. We propose that
the oncogenic effect of ETS fusion oncoproteins is in part mediated by the
disruptive effect of the E2F-ETS interaction on cell cycle control. Additionally,
a detailed analysis of the regulatory targets of the characteristic EWSR1/FLI1
fusion in ES identifies two functionally distinct gene sets. While synergistic
regulation in concert with E2F in the promoter of target genes has a generally
activating effect, EWSR1/FLI1 binding independent of E2F3 is predominantly
associated with repressed differentiation genes. Thus, EWSR1/FLI1 appears to
promote oncogenesis by simultaneously promoting cell proliferation and perturbing
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3814880
PMID: 23940108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Oct;41(19):8853-71. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt678. Epub 2013
Aug 8.

Systems biology of Ewing sarcoma: a network model of EWS-FLI1 effect on
proliferation and apoptosis.

Stoll G(1), Surdez D, Tirode F, Laud K, Barillot E, Zinovyev A, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris cedex 05, France, INSERM U900,
Bioinformatique, biostatistique et épidémiologie d'un système complexe, Paris,
France, Mines ParisTech, Fontainebleau, France, INSERM U830, Unité de Génétique
et Biologie des Cancers, Paris, France and Institut Curie, Unité de génétique
somatique, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most frequent pediatric bone tumor. In most of the
patients, a chromosomal translocation leads to the expression of the EWS-FLI1
chimeric transcription factor that is the major oncogene in this pathology.
Relative genetic simplicity of Ewing sarcoma makes it particularly attractive for
studying cancer in a systemic manner. Silencing EWS-FLI1 induces cell cycle
alteration and ultimately leads to apoptosis, but the exact molecular mechanisms 
underlying this phenotype are unclear. In this study, a network linking EWS-FLI1 
to cell cycle and apoptosis phenotypes was constructed through an original method
of network reconstruction. Transcriptome time-series after EWS-FLI1 silencing
were used to identify core modulated genes by an original scoring method based on
fitting expression profile dynamics curves. Literature data mining was then used 
to connect these modulated genes into a network. The validity of a subpart of
this network was assessed by siRNA/RT-QPCR experiments on four additional Ewing
cell lines and confirmed most of the links. Based on the network and the
transcriptome data, CUL1 was identified as a new potential target of EWS-FLI1.
Altogether, using an original methodology of data integration, we provide the
first version of EWS-FLI1 network model of cell cycle and apoptosis regulation.

PMCID: PMC3799442
PMID: 23935076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013 Jul;116(1):e71-5.

Clinical pathologic conference case 4: a 15-year-old boy with radiographic
changes in the left mandible.

Steyn N(1), Heggie A, MacGregor D, Aldred MJ, Talacko AA, Coleman H, Bonar F,
Slavin J, Wall M, Firth N.

Author information: 
(1)Dorevitch Pathology, Royal Children's Hospital.

PMID: 23926615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Blood. 2013 Sep 26;122(13):2233-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-475772. Epub 2013 
Aug 7.

Deregulation of ETS1 and FLI1 contributes to the pathogenesis of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Bonetti P(1), Testoni M, Scandurra M, Ponzoni M, Piva R, Mensah AA, Rinaldi A,
Kwee I, Tibiletti MG, Iqbal J, Greiner TC, Chan WC, Gaidano G, Piris MA, Cavalli 
F, Zucca E, Inghirami G, Bertoni F.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphoma and Genomics Research Program, Institute of Oncology Research,
Bellinzona, Switzerland;

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 May 8;123(19):3056.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common form of human lymphoma. 
DLBCL is a heterogeneous disease characterized by different genetic lesions. We
herein report the functional characterization of a recurrent gain mapping on
chromosome 11q24.3, found in 23% of 166 DLBCL cases analyzed. The transcription
factors ETS1 and FLI1, located within the 11q24.3 region, had significantly
higher expression in clinical samples carrying the gain. Functional studies on
cell lines showed that ETS1 and FLI1 cooperate in sustaining DLBCL proliferation 
and viability and regulate genes involved in germinal center differentiation.
Taken together, these data identify the 11q24.3 gain as a recurrent lesion in
DLBCL leading to ETS1 and FLI1 deregulated expression, which can contribute to
the pathogenesis of this disease.

PMID: 23926301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e68985. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068985. Print 2013.

Morphoproteomic profiling of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling
pathway in desmoplastic small round cell tumor (EWS/WT1), Ewing's sarcoma
(EWS/FLI1) and Wilms' tumor(WT1).

Subbiah V(1), Brown RE, Jiang Y, Buryanek J, Hayes-Jordan A, Kurzrock R, Anderson
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, Division of Cancer
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
vsubbiah@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare sarcoma in
adolescents and young adults. The hallmark of this disease is a EWS-WT1
translocation resulting from apposition of the Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) gene with
the Wilms' tumor (WT1) gene. We performed morphoproteomic profiling of DSRCT
(EWS-WT1), Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1) and Wilms' tumor (WT1) to better understand
the signaling pathways for selecting future targeted therapies.
METHODOLOGY: This pilot study assessed patients with DSRCT, Wilms' tumor and
Ewing's sarcoma. Morphoproteomics and immunohistochemical probes were applied to 
detect: p-mTOR (Ser2448); p-Akt (Ser473); p-ERK1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204); p-STAT3 (Tyr 
705); and cell cycle-related analytes along with their negative controls.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In DSRCT the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway is constitutively
activated by p-Akt (Ser 473) expression in the nuclear compartment of the tumor
cells and p-mTOR phosphorylated on Ser 2448, suggesting mTORC2 (rictor+mTOR) as
the dominant form. Ewing's sarcoma had upregulated p-Akt and p-mTOR,
predominantly mTORC2. In Wilm's tumor, the mTOR pathway is also activated with
most tumor cells moderately expressing p-mTOR (Ser 2448) in plasmalemmal and
cytoplasmic compartments. This coincides with the constitutive activation of one 
of the downstream effectors of the mTORC1 signaling pathway, namely p-p70S6K (Thr
389). There was constitutive activation of the Ras/Raf/ERK pathway p-ERK 1/2
(Thr202/Tyr204) expression in the Wilms tumor and metastatic Ewing's sarcoma, but
not in the DSRCT.
CONCLUSION: MORPHOPROTEOMIC TUMOR ANALYSES REVEALED CONSTITUTIVE ACTIVATION OF
THE MTOR PATHWAY AS EVIDENCED BY: (a) expression of phosphorylated (p)-mTOR,
p-p70S6K; (b) mTORC 2 in EWS and DSRCT; (c) ERK signaling was seen in the
advanced setting indicating these as resistance pathways to IGF1R related
therapies. This is the first morphoproteomic study of such pathways in these rare
malignancies and may have potential therapeutic implications. Further study using
morphoproteomic assessments of these tumors are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3726753
PMID: 23922674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Clin Invest. 2013 Sep;123(9):3802-14. doi: 10.1172/JCI64721. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia iPS cells exhibit defective
MPL-mediated signaling.

Hirata S(1), Takayama N, Jono-Ohnishi R, Endo H, Nakamura S, Dohda T, Nishi M,
Hamazaki Y, Ishii E, Kaneko S, Otsu M, Nakauchi H, Kunishima S, Eto K.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Application Department, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Congenital amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT) is caused by the loss of
thrombopoietin receptor-mediated (MPL-mediated) signaling, which causes severe
pancytopenia leading to bone marrow failure with onset of thrombocytopenia and
anemia prior to leukopenia. Because Mpl(-/-) mice do not exhibit the human
disease phenotype, we used an in vitro disease tracing system with induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from a CAMT patient (CAMT iPSCs) and
normal iPSCs to investigate the role of MPL signaling in hematopoiesis. We found 
that MPL signaling is essential for maintenance of the CD34+ multipotent
hematopoietic progenitor (MPP) population and development of the CD41+GPA+
megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor (MEP) population, and its role in the fate
decision leading differentiation toward megakaryopoiesis or erythropoiesis
differs considerably between normal and CAMT cells. Surprisingly, complimentary
transduction of MPL into normal or CAMT iPSCs using a retroviral vector showed
that MPL overexpression promoted erythropoiesis in normal CD34+ hematopoietic
progenitor cells (HPCs), but impaired erythropoiesis and increased aberrant
megakaryocyte production in CAMT iPSC-derived CD34+ HPCs, reflecting a difference
in the expression of the transcription factor FLI1. These results demonstrate
that impaired transcriptional regulation of the MPL signaling that normally
governs megakaryopoiesis and erythropoiesis underlies CAMT.

PMCID: PMC3754238
PMID: 23908116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 22;8(7):e69714. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069714. Print 2013.

Differential disruption of EWS-FLI1 binding by DNA-binding agents.

Chen C(1), Wonsey DR, Lemieux ME, Kung AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Fusion of the EWS gene to FLI1 produces a fusion oncoprotein that drives an
aberrant gene expression program responsible for the development of Ewing
sarcoma. We used a homogenous proximity assay to screen for compounds that
disrupt the binding of EWS-FLI1 to its cognate DNA targets. A number of
DNA-binding chemotherapeutic agents were found to non-specifically disrupt
protein binding to DNA. In contrast, actinomycin D was found to preferentially
disrupt EWS-FLI1 binding by comparison to p53 binding to their respective cognate
DNA targets in vitro. In cell-based assays, low concentrations of actinomycin D
preferentially blocked EWS-FLI1 binding to chromatin, and disrupted
EWS-FLI1-mediated gene expression. Higher concentrations of actinomycin D
globally repressed transcription. These results demonstrate that actinomycin D
preferentially disrupts EWS-FLI1 binding to DNA at selected concentrations.
Although the window between this preferential effect and global suppression is
too narrow to exploit in a therapeutic manner, these results suggest that
base-preferences may be exploited to find DNA-binding compounds that
preferentially disrupt subclasses of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3718762
PMID: 23894528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Pathol. 2013 Nov;231(3):323-34. doi: 10.1002/path.4241. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

Clinical and biological significance of hepatoma-derived growth factor in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Yang Y(1), Li H, Zhang F, Shi H, Zhen T, Dai S, Kang L, Liang Y, Wang J, Han A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

We sought to investigate the clinicopathological significance and biological
function of hepatoma-derived growth factor (HDGF) in Ewing's sarcoma. Our results
showed that HDGF expression is up-regulated in Ewing's sarcoma. Nuclear HDGF
expression is significantly associated with tumour volume (p < 0.001), metastases
at diagnosis (p < 0.001), low overall survival rate (p < 0.001) and low
disease-free survival rate (p < 0.001). HDGF knock-down results in significant
reduction of Ewing's sarcoma cell growth, proliferation and enhances
tumourigenesis, both in vitro and in vivo. Meanwhile, HDGF knock-down causes cell
cycle arrest and enhanced sensitization to serum starvation-induced apoptosis.
Furthermore, recombinant HDGF promotes proliferation and colony formation of
Ewing's sarcoma cells. Ninety-eight candidate HDGF downstream genes were
identified in Ewing's sarcoma cells using cDNA microarray analysis. In addition, 
we found that HDGF knock-down inhibited FLI1 expression in Ewing's sarcoma cells 
at the mRNA and protein levels. Our findings suggest that HDGF exhibits oncogenic
properties and may be a novel prognostic factor in Ewing's sarcoma. Targeting
HDGF might be a potential therapeutic strategy for Ewing's sarcoma.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23878072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Gastrointest Surg. 2014 Mar;18(3):635-7. doi: 10.1007/s11605-013-2284-4. Epub
2013 Jul 20.

Primary hepatic Ewing's sarcoma with cytogenetic confirmation.

McGrann PF(1), Pooleman IJ, Wilson CH, Haugk B, Scott J, Charnley RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatopancreaticobiliary Surgery, The Freeman Hospital, Freeman 
Road, High Heaton, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, NE7 7DN.

INTRODUCTION: Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma is reported in the medical
literature, but none has been described as presenting with a resectable liver
mass.
METHODS: A case of a 29-year-old male patient who presented with a large
symptomatic mass in the right lobe of the liver which, following resection,
demonstrated the characteristic histopathology and fusion protein (EWSR1-Fli1)
found in Ewing's sarcoma was reported.
DISCUSSION: Complete surgical resection offers the best long-term outlook. Cure
rates with appropriate surgical and chemotherapeutic management range between 30 
and 60 %.

PMID: 23877327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e68033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068033. Print 2013.

Different regulation of physiological and tumor angiogenesis in zebrafish by
protein kinase D1 (PKD1).

Hollenbach M(1), Stoll SJ, Jörgens K, Seufferlein T, Kroll J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology & Tumorangiogenesis, Center for Biomedicine and
Medical Technology Mannheim, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Protein kinase D isoenzymes (PKDs, Prkds) are serine threonine kinases that
belong to the CAMK superfamily. PKD1 is expressed in endothelial cells and is a
major mediator of biological responses downstream of the VEGFRs that are relevant
for angiogenesis such as endothelial cell migration, proliferation and
tubulogenesis in vitro. PKDs also play a critical role in tumor development and
progression, including tumor angiogenesis. However, given the plethora of
signaling modules that drive angiogenesis, the precise role of PKD1 in both
physiological and tumor angiogenesis in vivo has not been worked out so far. This
study aimed at dissecting the contribution of PKD1 to physiological blood vessel 
formation, PKD1 was found to be widely expressed during zebrafish development. As
far as physiological angiogenesis was concerned, morpholino-based silencing of
PKD1 expression moderately reduced the formation of the intersomitic vessels and 
the dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessel in tg(fli1:EGFP) zebrafish. In
addition, silencing of PKD1 resulted in reduced formation of the parachordal
lymphangioblasts that serves as a precursor for the developing thoracic duct.
Interestingly, tumor angiogenesis was completely abolished in PKD1 morphants
using the zebrafish/tumor xenograft angiogenesis assay. Our data in zebrafish
demonstrate that PKD1 contributes to the regulation of physiological angiogenesis
and lymphangiogenesis during zebrafish development and is essential for tumor
angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3706615
PMID: 23874489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):803-12. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2016. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

The dual inhibitory effect of thiostrepton on FoxM1 and EWS/FLI1 provides a novel
therapeutic option for Ewing's sarcoma.

Sengupta A(1), Rahman M, Mateo-Lozano S, Tirado OM, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Molecular Oncology Program, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20057, USA.

The poor prognosis of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS), together with its high lethal
recurrence rate and the side-effects of current treatments, call for novel
targeted therapies with greater curative effectiveness and substantially reduced 
side-effects. The oncogenic chimeric protein EWS/FLI1 is the key malignancy
driver in most EWSs, regulating numerous target genes, many of which influence
cell cycle progression. It has often been argued that targeting proteins
regulated directly or indirectly by EWS/FLI1 may provide improved therapeutic
options for EWS. In this context, our study examined FoxM1, a key cell cycle
regulating transcription factor, reported to be expressed in EWS and influenced
by EWS/FLI1. Thiostrepton, a naturally occurring small molecule, has been shown
to selectively inhibit FoxM1 expression in cancer cells. We demonstrate that in
EWS, in addition to inhibiting FoxM1 expression, thiostrepton downregulates the
expression of EWS/FLI1, both at the mRNA and protein levels, leading to cell
cycle arrest and, ultimately, to apoptotic cell death. We also show that
thiostrepton treatment reduces the tumorigenicity of EWS cells, significantly
delaying the growth of nude mouse xenograft tumors. Results from this study
demonstrate a novel action of thiostrepton as inhibitor of the expression of the 
EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein in vitro and in vivo, and that it shows greater efficacy
against EWS than against other tumor types, as it is active on EWS cells and
tumors at concentrations lower than those reported to have effective inhibitory
activity on tumor cells derived from other cancers. Owing to the dual action of
this small molecule, our findings suggest that thiostrepton may be particularly
effective as a novel agent for the treatment of EWS patients.

PMCID: PMC3787886
PMID: 23857410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;11(9):1742-50. doi: 10.1111/jth.12355.

RUNX1, but not its familial platelet disorder mutants, synergistically activates 
PF4 gene expression in combination with ETS family proteins.

Okada Y(1), Watanabe M, Nakai T, Kamikawa Y, Shimizu M, Fukuhara Y, Yonekura M,
Matsuura E, Hoshika Y, Nagai R, Aird WC, Doi T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Familial platelet disorder (FPD) is a rare autosomal dominant disease
characterized by thrombocytopenia and abnormal platelet function. Causal
mutations have been identified in the gene encoding runt-related transcription
factor 1 (RUNX1) of FPD patients.
OBJECTIVES: To elucidate the role of RUNX1 in the regulation of expression of
platelet factor 4 (PF4) and to propose a plausible mechanism underlying
RUNX1-mediated induction of the FPD phenotype.
METHODS: We assessed whether RUNX1 and its mutants, in combination with E26
transformation-specific-1 (ETS-1), Core-binding factor subunit beta (CBFß), and
Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1), cooperatively regulate PF4
expression during megakaryocytic differentiation. In an embryonic stem cell
differentiation system, expression levels of endogenous and exogenous RUNX1 and
PF4 were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Promoter activation by the transcription
factors were evaluated by reporter gene assays with HepG2 cells. DNA binding
activity and protein interaction were analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift 
assay and immunoprecipitation assay with Cos-7 cells, respectively. Protein
localization was analyzed by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting with Cos-7 
cells.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that RUNX1 activates endogenous PF4 expression in
megakaryocytic differentiation. RUNX1, but not its mutants, in combination with
ETS-1 and CBFß, or FLI-1, synergistically activated the PF4 promoter. Each RUNX1 
mutant harbors various functional abnormalities, including loss of DNA-binding
activity, abnormal subcellular localization, and/or alterations of binding
affinities for ETS-1, CBFß, and FLI-1.
CONCLUSIONS: RUNX1, but not its mutants, strongly and synergistically activates
PF4 expression along with ETS family proteins. Furthermore, loss of the RUNX1
transcriptional activation function is induced by various functional
abnormalities.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 23848403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Neoplasia. 2013 Jul;15(7):720-6.

Novel 5' fusion partners of ETV1 and ETV4 in prostate cancer.

Barros-Silva JD(1), Paulo P, Bakken AC, Cerveira N, Løvf M, Henrique R, Jerónimo 
C, Lothe RA, Skotheim RI, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

Gene fusions involving the erythroblast transformation-specific (ETS)
transcription factors ERG, ETV1, ETV4, ETV5, and FLI1 are a common feature of
prostate carcinomas (PCas). The most common upstream fusion partner described is 
the androgen-regulated prostate-specific gene TMPRSS2, most frequently with ERG, 
but additional 5' fusion partners have been described. We performed 5' rapid
amplification of cDNA ends in 18 PCas with ETV1, ETV4, or ETV5 outlier expression
to identify the 5' fusion partners. We also evaluated the exon-level expression
profile of these ETS genes in 14 cases. We identified and confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction the two novel chimeric genes OR51E2-ETV1 and UBTF-ETV4 in two
PCas. OR51E2 encodes a G-protein-coupled receptor that is overexpressed in PCas, 
whereas UBTF is a ubiquitously expressed gene encoding an HMG-box DNA-binding
protein involved in ribosome biogenesis. We additionally describe two novel gene 
fusion combinations of previously described genes, namely, SLC45A3-ETV4 and
HERVK17-ETV4. Finally, we found one PCa with TMPRSS2-ETV1, one with
C15orf21-ETV1, one with EST14-ETV1, and two with 14q133-q21.1-ETV1. In nine PCas 
(eight ETV1 and one ETV5), exhibiting ETS outlier expression and genomic
rearrangement detected by FISH, no 5' fusion partner was found. Our findings
contribute significantly to characterize the heterogeneous group of ETS gene
fusions and indicate that all genes described as 5' fusion partners with one ETS 
gene can most likely be rearranged with any of the other ETS genes involved in
prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3689235
PMID: 23814484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Bioinformatics. 2013 Jul 1;29(13):i80-8. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btt243.

Hard-wired heterogeneity in blood stem cells revealed using a dynamic regulatory 
network model.

Bonzanni N(1), Garg A, Feenstra KA, Schütte J, Kinston S, Miranda-Saavedra D,
Heringa J, Xenarios I, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)IBIVU Centre for Integrative Bioinformatics, VU University Amsterdam, AIMMS
Amsterdam Institute for Molecules Medicines and Systems, VU University Amsterdam,
De Boelelaan 1081, NKI-AVL The Netherlands.

MOTIVATION: Combinatorial interactions of transcription factors with
cis-regulatory elements control the dynamic progression through successive
cellular states and thus underpin all metazoan development. The construction of
network models of cis-regulatory elements, therefore, has the potential to
generate fundamental insights into cellular fate and differentiation.
Haematopoiesis has long served as a model system to study mammalian
differentiation, yet modelling based on experimentally informed cis-regulatory
interactions has so far been restricted to pairs of interacting factors. Here, we
have generated a Boolean network model based on detailed cis-regulatory
functional data connecting 11 haematopoietic stem/progenitor cell (HSPC)
regulator genes.
RESULTS: Despite its apparent simplicity, the model exhibits surprisingly complex
behaviour that we charted using strongly connected components and shortest-path
analysis in its Boolean state space. This analysis of our model predicts that
HSPCs display heterogeneous expression patterns and possess many intermediate
states that can act as 'stepping stones' for the HSPC to achieve a final
differentiated state. Importantly, an external perturbation or 'trigger' is
required to exit the stem cell state, with distinct triggers characterizing
maturation into the various different lineages. By focusing on intermediate
states occurring during erythrocyte differentiation, from our model we predicted 
a novel negative regulation of Fli1 by Gata1, which we confirmed experimentally
thus validating our model. In conclusion, we demonstrate that an advanced
mammalian regulatory network model based on experimentally validated
cis-regulatory interactions has allowed us to make novel, experimentally testable
hypotheses about transcriptional mechanisms that control differentiation of
mammalian stem cells.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3694641
PMID: 23813012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Urology. 2013 Aug;82(2):382-6. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2013.04.015. Epub 2013 Jun 
22.

Clinical and pathological features of primary neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma
of the kidney.

Risi E(1), Iacovelli R, Altavilla A, Alesini D, Palazzo A, Mosillo C, Trenta P,
Cortesi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Sapienza University of Rome, Viale Regina Elena,
Rome, Italy. emanuela.risi@libero.it

OBJECTIVE: To collect and analyze clinical and pathological features of primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)/Ewing sarcoma (EWS), a rare tumor occurring most
commonly in bone and soft tissues of young people, which rarely occurs as a
primary renal neoplasm and exhibits highly aggressive biological behavior.
METHODS: All cases of PNET/EWS published from 1975 to February 2012 were
collected. When available, clinical and pathological data were extracted for each
case. Survivals were estimated with the Kaplan-Meier method and compared with the
log-rank test with 95% confidence interval (CI).
RESULTS: A total of 116 cases were found. All patients had clinical symptoms as
first presentation of disease such as pain (54%), hematuria (29%), and bulky
renal mass (28%). Sixty-six percent of patients had stage IV disease at
diagnosis. Median disease-free survival (DFS) was 5.0 months (95% CI 2.4-7.6).
The probability to be alive at 18 months was 60% and 85% for patients with
metastatic disease (M1) or not (M0) at diagnosis, respectively. Median overall
survival (OS) was 24 months (95% CI 4.5-15.1) in patients with M1 disease,
whereas it was not reached in patients with M0 disease (P <.001). In patients
with M0 disease, 50% received neoadjuvant chemotherapy and the 12-month OS was
93% compared to 75% of untreated patients (P = .092). In patients with M1 disease
who underwent treatment, the median progression-free survival (PFS) was 22.0
months (95% CI 17.9-26.1) with a clinical benefit in 74% of cases.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that PNET/EWS is a rare aggressive tumor
affecting principally young people, with a poor prognosis for patients with M1
disease; chemotherapy is an effective strategy in M1 disease and probably also in
M0 disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23800653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Mar;42(3):163-7. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2013.03.005.

[Small cell malignant tumors of bone: comparison between diagnosis using core
needle biopsies and surgical specimens].

[Article in Chinese]

Ding Y(1), Xi Y, Sun XQ, Meng SQ, Liu WF, Huang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jishuitan Hospital, Beijing, China. bootman@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the pathologic diagnosis and immunohistochemistry of small 
cell malignant tumors (SCMT) of bone using both core needle biopsy and surgical
specimen.
METHODS: Seventy-seven cases of SCMT with core needle biopsies and surgical
specimens available were respectively analyzed by histologic examination and
immunohistochemical study, with literature review.
RESULTS: The male-to-female ratio was 48:29. The age of the patients ranged from 
6 to 73 years. The tumors studied included Ewing sarcoma/PNET (n = 38), myeloma
(n = 23), lymphoma (n = 10), small cell osteosarcoma (n = 2), small cell
carcinoma (n = 2) and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma (n = 2). The tumors involved
limbs, axial skeleton and flat bones. Microscopically, the tumors shared similar 
histology, with small round cells and spindly cells arranged in diffuse sheets.
The pathologic diagnosis by core needle biopsies correlated with that by surgical
specimens in 84.4% (65/77) of the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: SCMT represents a heterogeneous group of malignancy. Correlations
with clinicoradiologic findings and application of ancillary investigations
including immunohistochemistry and molecular study are important for definitive
diagnosis. Pathologic diagnosis using core needle biopsies shows good results and
provides useful information for surgical planning.

PMID: 23769434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Front Oncol. 2013 Jun 4;3:142. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00142. eCollection 2013.

ESF-EMBO Symposium "Molecular Biology and Innovative Therapies in Sarcomas of
Childhood and Adolescence" Sept 29-Oct 4, Polonia Castle Pultusk, Poland.

Schäfer BW(1), Koscielniak E, Kovar H, Fulda S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital Zurich , Zurich , Switzerland.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) and Ewing sarcoma (ES) are among the most common pediatric
sarcomas (Arndt et al., 2012). Despite sarcomas representing a highly
heterogeneous group of tumors, ES and alveolar RMS (ARMS) typically share one
common genetic characteristic, namely a specific chromosomal translocation
(Helman and Meltzer, 2003; Lessnick and Ladanyi, 2012). These translocations
generate fusion proteins, which are composed of two transcription factors (TF).
Typically, one TF is a developmentally regulated factor that is essential for
proper specification of a given lineage and provides the DNA-binding domain,
while the partner TF contributes a transactivation domain that drives aberrant
expression of target genes. Based on these common genetic characteristics, the
first ESF-EMBO research conference entitled "Molecular Biology and Innovative
Therapies in Sarcomas of Childhood and Adolescence" with special focus on RMS and
ES was held at the Polonia Castle in Pultusk, Poland. The conference gathered 70 
participants from more than 15 countries and several continents representing most
research groups that are active in this field.

PMCID: PMC3671287
PMID: 23761860  [PubMed]


261. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 4;8(6):e66281. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066281. Print 2013.

Lysyl oxidase is downregulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and its propeptide
domain displays tumor supressor activities in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Agra N(1), Cidre F, García-García L, de la Parra J, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Área de Genética Humana, Instituto de
Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, 
Madrid, Spain.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common bone malignancy in children and young
adults. It is driven by oncogenic fusion proteins (i.e. EWS/FLI1) acting as
aberrant transcription factors that upregulate and downregulate target genes,
leading to cellular transformation. Thus, identificating these target genes and
understanding their contribution to Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis are key for the
development of new therapeutic strategies. In this study we show that lysyl
oxidase (LOX), an enzyme involved in maintaining structural integrity of the
extracellular matrix, is downregulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and in
consequence it is not expressed in Ewing sarcoma cells and primary tumors. Using 
a doxycycline inducible system to restore LOX expression in an Ewing sarcoma
derived cell line, we showed that LOX displays tumor suppressor activities.
Interestingly, we showed that the tumor suppressor activity resides in the
propeptide domain of LOX (LOX-PP), an N-terminal domain produced by proteolytic
cleavage during the physiological processing of LOX. Expression of LOX-PP reduced
cell proliferation, cell migration, anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and
formation of tumors in immunodeficient mice. By contrast, the C-terminal domain
of LOX, which contains the enzymatic activity, had the opposite effects,
corroborating that the tumor suppressor activity of LOX is mediated exclusively
by its propeptide domain. Finally, we showed that LOX-PP inhibits ERK/MAPK
signalling pathway, and that many pathways involved in cell cycle progression
were significantly deregulated by LOX-PP, providing a mechanistic explanation to 
the cell proliferation inhibition observed upon LOX-PP expression. In summary,
our observations indicate that deregulation of the LOX gene participates in Ewing
sarcoma development and identify LOX-PP as a new therapeutic target for one of
the most aggressive paediatric malignancies. These findings suggest that
therapeutic strategies based on the administration of LOX propeptide or
functional analogues could be useful for the treatment of this devastating
paediatric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3672102
PMID: 23750284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Hum Pathol. 2013 Oct;44(10):2010-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.03.003. Epub 2013
May 22.

Integrated multimodal genetic testing of Ewing sarcoma--a single-institution
experience.

Warren M(1), Weindel M, Ringrose J, Venable C, Reyes A, Terashima K, Rao P,
Chintagumpala M, Hicks MJ, Lopez-Terrada D, Lu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is an aggressive malignant small round cell tumor that arises 
in bone or soft tissue of adolescents and young adults. A characteristic
molecular finding in ES is EWSR1 gene fusion with ETS (erythroblast
transformation-specific) family genes including FLI1 (~90%) and ERG (>5%). Here
we report our experience using integrated clinicopathologic, cytogenetic,
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) analyses of 32 pediatric patients with ES diagnosed in a 
single institution between 2005 and 2011. Diagnostic EWSR1 rearrangements were
detected in 30 (93.8%) of 32 patients. Cytogenetics detected t(11;22) (n = 14)
and t(21;22) (n = 1) in 15 (46.9%) patients. FISH detected EWSR1 rearrangements
in 27 (96.4%) of 28 patients tested. RT-PCR was positive in 27 (84.4%) of 32
patients, including 24 EWSR1-FLI1 and 3 EWSR1-ERG. RT-PCR defined breakpoints and
fusion partners in 7 cases with EWSR1 rearrangements detected by FISH. Sanger
sequencing further delineated breakpoints in 21 (77.8%) of 27 RT-PCR positive
cases. In summary, conventional cytogenetic analysis provided a global view but
had a lower detection rate and longer turnaround time than other methods. FISH is
a rapid method and theoretically can detect all EWSR1 rearrangements, but it
cannot identify all partners and is not completely specific for ES. RT-PCR and
sequencing are more sensitive and useful in identifying fusion partners and
refining breakpoints; however, these methods can be compromised by poor RNA
preservation and primer design. In conclusion, an integrated approach that uses
all methods capable of detecting EWSR1 rearrangements has value in the workup of 
suspected cases of ES.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23706910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jun;139(6):771-9. doi: 10.1309/AJCPN4L1BMRQPEIT.

Usefulness of a monoclonal ERG/FLI1 antibody for immunohistochemical
discrimination of Ewing family tumors.

Tomlins SA(1), Palanisamy N, Brenner JC, Stall JN, Siddiqui J, Thomas DG, Lucas
DR, Chinnaiyan AM, Kunju LP.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of
Pathology,University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48104-5054, USA.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) and prostate carcinomas are characterized by
rearrangement of ETS genes, most commonly FLI1 (EFTs) and ERG (prostate
carcinomas). Previously, we characterized an antibody against ERG (EPR3864) for
detecting ERG-rearranged prostate carcinoma. Because EPR3864 also cross-reacts
with FLI1, we evaluated the usefulness of EPR3864 for discriminating EFTs from
other small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs) with immunohistochemistry. Of 57
evaluable EFTs, 47 (82%) demonstrated at least moderate, diffuse, nuclear
ERG/FLI1 staining (including 89% and 100% of cases with confirmed EWSR1:FLI1 and 
EWSR1:ERG fusions, respectively), of which 1, 3, and 43 showed negative,
cytoplasmic, or membranous CD99 staining, respectively. Among other SRBCTs (61
cases, 7 types), at least moderate, diffuse, nuclear EPR3864 staining was seen in
all precursor B-lymphoblastic lymphomas/leukemias and subsets of Burkitt
lymphomas (10%) and synovial sarcomas (45%). In summary, EPR3864 may be useful in
detecting EWSR1:FLI1 and EWSR1:ERG rearranged EFTs in addition to prostate
carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3662488
PMID: 23690120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Zebrafish. 2013 Jun;10(2):249-57. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2012.0813. Epub 2013 May 19.

Imaging beta cell regeneration and interactions with islet vasculature in
transparent adult zebrafish.

Moss LG(1), Caplan TV, Moss JB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Nutrition, Sarah W. Stedman
Nutrition and Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical Center , Durham, NC
27704, USA.

Blood vessel networks provide nutrients and gaseous exchange that are essential
for functions. Pancreatic islet capillaries deliver oxygen to endocrine cells
while transporting hormones to organs and peripheral locations throughout the
body. We have developed a zebrafish diabetes model in which adult islets can be
followed in vivo during beta cell regeneration while calibrating changes in beta 
cell mass and fasting blood glucose levels. After genetic ablation, beta cells
are initially dysfunctional or dying, and blood glucose levels increase fourfold.
During a 2-week period, hyperglycemia eventually normalizes as beta cell mass
regenerates. We show that mCherry-fluorescent, insulin-positive beta cells
re-emerge in close contact with the vascular endothelium. Alterations in the
dense vascular network of zebrafish islets were visualized by the expression of
green fluorescent protein (GFP) in endothelial cells derived from the Fli
transcription factor promoter. The rapid destruction and regeneration of beta
cell mass was evaluated in the same animal over time, providing a functional
model for investigating the interactions of islet cell types with vascular cells 
as well as the consequences of hyperglycemia on other tissues. Regenerating adult
zebrafish can be utilized as vertebrate, metabolically active models for
generating new insights into treatments for type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3673648
PMID: 23682836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int J Oncol. 2013 Jul;43(1):169-76. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1943. Epub 2013 May 16.

Insertional activation of myb by F-MuLV in SCID mice induces myeloid leukemia.

Haeri M(1), Li Y, Li Y, Li Q, Spaner DE, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

Identification of retrovirus integration sites is a powerful method to identify
cancer-related genes. This approach led to the discovery of the Friend murine
leukemia virus (F-MuLV) integration site-1 (fli-1). Viral insertion at the fli-1 
locus induces erythroleukemia in susceptible strains of mice. Our recent data
demonstrated that, F-MuLV-infected SCID mice, in contrast to wt CB17 controls,
developed a non-erythroleukemic leukemia without viral integration at the fli-1
locus. Using ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction (LM-PCR) approach we
identified a total of 15 viral integration sites in F-MuLV-infected SCID mice.
One of the identified insertion sites was located about 62 kb upstream of the
myeloblastosis (myb) gene. While integration within or surrounding the myb gene
has been reported before for murine leukemia viruses, the location of the viral
integration site identified in F-MuLV-infected SCID mice is novel and has never
been reported. Using PCR analysis we showed that viral integration at the myb
locus occurs with a frequency of 35% and therefore is considered as a common
integration site. Integration of F-MuLV in this locus resulted in upregulation of
the MYB protein. Flow cytometry analysis and methylcellulose culture of leukemic 
cells isolated from tumors with viral integration close to the myb indicated
tumors of myeloid origin. Our findings indicate that, in contrast to wt CB17
mice, F-MuLV-infected SCID mice display viral integration within myeloid specific
gene loci that result in the development of myelogenous leukemia.

PMID: 23677281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e62346. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062346. Print 2013.

Fli-1 overexpression in hematopoietic progenitors deregulates T cell development 
and induces pre-T cell lymphoblastic leukaemia/lymphoma.

Smeets MF(1), Chan AC, Dagger S, Bradley CK, Wei A, Izon DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology and Leukaemia Unit, St. Vincent's Institute, University of
Melbourne, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.

The Ets transcription factor Fli-1 is preferentially expressed in hematopoietic
tissues and cells, including immature T cells, but the role of Fli-1 in T cell
development has not been closely examined. To address this we retrovirally
overexpressed Fli-1 in various in vitro and in vivo settings and analysed its
effect on T cell development. We found that Fli-1 overexpression perturbed the DN
to DP transition and inhibited CD4 development whilst enhancing CD8 development
both in vitro and in vivo. Surprisingly, Fli-1 overexpression in vivo eventuated 
in development of pre-T cell lymphoblastic leukaemia/lymphoma (pre-T LBL). Known 
Fli-1 target genes such as the pro-survival Bcl-2 family members were not found
to be upregulated. In contrast, we found increased NOTCH1 expression in all Fli-1
T cells and detected Notch1 mutations in all tumours. These data show a novel
function for Fli-1 in T cell development and leukaemogenesis and provide a new
mouse model of pre-T LBL to identify treatment options that target the Fli-1 and 
Notch1 signalling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3646842
PMID: 23667468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013;15(3):R58.

Adenosine A(2A) receptors promote collagen production by a Fli1- and
CTGF-mediated mechanism.

Chan ES, Liu H, Fernandez P, Luna A, Perez-Aso M, Bujor AM, Trojanowska M,
Cronstein BN.

INTRODUCTION: Adenosine, acting through the A(2A) receptor, promotes tissue
matrix production in the skin and the liver and induces the development of dermal
fibrosis and cirrhosis in murine models. Since expression of A(2A) receptors is
increased in scleroderma fibroblasts, we examined the mechanisms by which the
A(2A) receptor produces its fibrogenic effects.
METHODS: The effects of A(2A) receptor ligation on the expression of the
transcription factor, Fli1, a constitutive repressor for the synthesis of matrix 
proteins, such as collagen, is studied in dermal fibroblasts. Fli1 is also known 
to repress the transcription of CTGF/CCN2, and the effects of A(2A) receptor
stimulation on CTGF and TGF-ß1 expression are also examined.
RESULTS: A(2A) receptor occupancy suppresses the expression of Fli1 by dermal
fibroblasts. A(2A) receptor activation induces the secretion of CTGF by dermal
fibroblasts, and neutralization of CTGF abrogates the A(2A) receptor-mediated
enhancement of collagen type I production. A(2A)R activation, however, resulted
in a decrease in TGF-ß1 protein release.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that Fli1 and CTGF are important mediators of
the fibrogenic actions of adenosine and the use of small molecules such as
adenosine A(2A) receptor antagonists may be useful in the therapy of dermal
fibrosis in diseases such as scleroderma.

PMCID: PMC4060252
PMID: 23663495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Development. 2013 Jun;140(12):2632-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.090829. Epub 2013 May 1.

VEGFA-dependent and -independent pathways synergise to drive Scl expression and
initiate programming of the blood stem cell lineage in Xenopus.

Ciau-Uitz A(1), Pinheiro P, Kirmizitas A, Zuo J, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

The first haematopoietic stem cells share a common origin with the dorsal aorta
and derive from putative adult haemangioblasts in the dorsal lateral plate (DLP) 
mesoderm. Here we show that the transcription factor (TF) stem cell leukaemia
(Scl/Tal1) is crucial for development of these adult haemangioblasts in Xenopus
and establish the regulatory cascade controlling its expression. We show that
VEGFA produced in the somites is required to initiate adult haemangioblast
programming in the adjacent DLP by establishing endogenous VEGFA signalling. This
response depends on expression of the VEGF receptor Flk1, driven by Fli1 and
Gata2. Scl activation requires synergy between this VEGFA-controlled pathway and 
a VEGFA-independent pathway controlled by Fli1, Gata2 and Etv2/Etsrp/ER71, which 
also drives expression of the Scl partner Lmo2. Thus, the two ETS factors Fli1
and Etv6, which drives the VEGFA expression in both somites and the DLP, sit at
the top of the adult haemangioblast gene regulatory network (GRN). Furthermore,
Gata2 is initially activated by Fli1 but later maintained by another ETS factor, 
Etv2. We also establish that Flk1 and Etv2 act independently in the two pathways 
to Scl activation. Thus, detailed temporal, epistatic measurements of key TFs and
VEGFA plus its receptor have enabled us to build a Xenopus adult haemangioblast
GRN.

PMCID: PMC3666388
PMID: 23637333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;22(3):260-5. doi: 10.1177/1066896913486696. Epub 2013
May 1.

Carcinoma of the thyroid with ewing family tumor elements and favorable
prognosis: report of a second case.

Eloy C(1), Oliveira M, Vieira J, Teixeira MR, Cruz J, Sobrinho-Simões M.

Author information: 
(1)1Centro Hospitalar de São João, Porto, Portugal.

Comment in
    Int J Surg Pathol. 2014 Sep;22(6):579-81.

The rare reports of primary, nonneuroendocrine small cell carcinomas of the
thyroid have not provided enough evidence to support the recognition of these
tumors as an entity or to understand their etiopathogenesis. We report the second
case of a primary, nonneuroendocrine small cell carcinoma of the thyroid
displaying diffuse expression of cytokeratins, CD99, and p63, in the absence of
vimentin expression, in a 24-year-old male who is alive without any signs of
disease 13 years after total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine. The tumor
disclosed the EWSR1-FLI1 rearrangement, and we propose to designate it as a
carcinoma of the thyroid with Ewing family tumor elements.

PMID: 23637256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2013 Aug;52(8):733-40. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22068. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

RNA sequencing identifies fusion of the EWSR1 and YY1 genes in mesothelioma with 
t(14;22)(q32;q12).

Panagopoulos I(1), Thorsen J, Gorunova L, Micci F, Haugom L, Davidson B, Heim S.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Cancer Cytogenetics, Institute for Medical Informatics, The
Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
ioannis.panagopoulos@rr-research.no

Mesothelioma is a rare but very aggressive tumor derived from mesothelial cells. 
A number of often complex but nonrandom cytogenetic abnormalities have been found
in these tumors, resulting in loss of chromosome bands 14q32 and 22q12 in more
than 35% of the cases. In this study, we used RNA sequencing to search for fusion
transcripts in a mesothelioma carrying a t(14;22)(q32;q12) as the sole
chromosomal aberration and found an EWSR1-YY1 and its reciprocal YY1-EWSR1 fusion
transcript. Screening 15 additional cases of mesothelioma from which we had RNA
but no cytogenetic information, we identified one more tumor carrying an
EWSR1-YY1 fusion gene but not the reciprocal YY1-EWSR1 transcript. RT-polymerase 
chain reaction and sequencing showed that in both cases exon 8 of EWSR1
(nucleotide 1,139, accession number NM_013986 version 3, former exon 7 in
sequence with accession number X66899) was fused to exon 2 of YY1 (nucleotide
1,160, accession number NM_003403 version 3). The EWSR1 breakpoint in exon 8 in
the EWSR1-YY1 chimeric transcript is similar to what is found in other fusions
involving EWSR1 such as EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-DDIT3, and EWSR1-ATF1. The
EWSR1-YY1-encoded protein is an abnormal transcription factor with the
transactivation domain of EWSR1 and the DNA-binding domain of YY1. This is the
first study to detect a specific fusion gene in mesothelioma (the reason how
frequent the EWSR1-YY1 fusion is remains uncertain) and also the first time that 
direct involvement of YY1 in oncogenesis has been demonstrated.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23630070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Leukemia. 2013 Nov;27(11):2229-41. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.132. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Targeting oncogene expression to endothelial cells induces proliferation of the
myelo-erythroid lineage by repressing the Notch pathway.

Alghisi E(1), Distel M, Malagola M, Anelli V, Santoriello C, Herwig L, Krudewig
A, Henkel CV, Russo D, Mione MC.

Author information: 
(1)1] Chair of Hematology and Unit of Blood Disease and Stem Cell Transplantation
Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia Medical
School, Brescia, Italy [2] Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.

Human oncogenes involved in the development of hematological malignancies have
been widely used to model experimental leukemia. However, models of myeloid
leukemia rarely reproduce the human disease in full, due to genetic complexity or
to difficulties in targeting leukemia initiating cells. Here, we used a zebrafish
genetic model to induce the expression of oncogenic RAS in endothelial cells,
including the hemogenic endothelium of the dorsal aorta that generates
hematopoietic cells, and observed the development of a myelo-erythroid
proliferative disorder. In larvae, the phenotype is characterized by disruption
of the vascular system and prominent expansion of the caudal hematopoietic
tissue. In few surviving juveniles, increased number of immature hematopoietic
cells and arrest of myeloid maturation was found in kidney marrow. Peripheral
blood showed increased erythroblasts and myeloid progenitors. We found that the
abnormal phenotype is associated with a downregulation of the Notch pathway,
whereas overexpressing an activated form of Notch together with the oncogene
prevents the expansion of the myelo-erythroid compartment. This study identifies 
the downregulation of the Notch pathway following an oncogenic event in the
hemogenic endothelium as an important step in the pathogenesis of myelo-erythroid
disorders and describes a number of potential effectors of this transformation.

PMID: 23625115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):258-69. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.016. Epub 2013 
Apr 23.

Mathematical model of a gene regulatory network reconciles effects of genetic
perturbations on hematopoietic stem cell emergence.

Narula J(1), Williams CJ, Tiwari A, Marks-Bluth J, Pimanda JE, Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA.

Interlinked gene regulatory networks (GRNs) are vital for the spatial and
temporal control of gene expression during development. The hematopoietic
transcription factors (TFs) Scl, Gata2 and Fli1 form one such densely connected
GRN which acts as a master regulator of embryonic hematopoiesis. This triad has
been shown to direct the specification of the hemogenic endothelium and emergence
of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in response to Notch1 and Bmp4-Smad signaling.
Here we employ previously published data to construct a mathematical model of
this GRN network and use this model to systematically investigate the network
dynamical properties. Our model uses a statistical-thermodynamic framework to
describe the combinatorial regulation of gene expression and reconciles,
mechanistically, several previously published but unexplained results from
different genetic perturbation experiments. In particular, our results
demonstrate how the interactions of Runx1, an essential hematopoietic TF, with
components of the Bmp4 signaling pathway allow it to affect triad activation and 
acts as a key regulator of HSC emergence. We also explain why heterozygous
deletion of this essential TF, Runx1, speeds up the network dynamics leading to
accelerated HSC emergence. Taken together our results demonstrate that the triad,
a master-level controller of definitive hematopoiesis, is an irreversible
bistable switch whose dynamical properties are modulated by Runx1 and components 
of the Bmp4 signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jun 6;88(6):142. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.105742. Print 2013
Jun.

The imitation switch ATPase Snf2l is required for superovulation and regulates
Fgl2 in differentiating mouse granulosa cells.

Pépin D(1), Paradis F, Perez-Iratxeta C, Picketts DJ, Vanderhyden BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Imitation switch (ISWI) proteins are catalytic subunits of chromatin remodeling
complexes that alter nucleosome positioning by hydrolyzing ATP to regulate access
to DNA. In mice, there are two paralogs, SNF2-homolog (SNF2H) and SNF2-like
(SNF2L), which participate in different complexes and have contrasting patterns
of expression. Here we investigate the role of SNF2L in ovaries by characterizing
a mouse bearing an inactivating deletion of exon 6 that disrupts the ATPase
domain. Snf2l mutant mice produce significantly fewer eggs than control mice when
superovulated. Gonadotropin stimulation leads to a significant deficit in
secondary follicles and an increase in abnormal antral follicles. Mutant females 
also failed to induce fibrinogen-like 2 (Fgl2) in response to human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) stimulation, while overexpression of SNF2L was sufficient to
drive its expression in granulosa cells. SNF2L was also shown to directly
interact with the nuclear receptor co-activator flightless I (FLI-I) as shown by 
immunoprecipitation. These results begin to establish a role for SNF2L in the
precise coordination of gene expression in granulosa cells during
folliculogenesis and its broader implications in fertility.

PMID: 23616592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1105-16. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.04.003. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

V-ATPase is a candidate therapeutic target for Ewing sarcoma.

Avnet S(1), Di Pompo G, Lemma S, Salerno M, Perut F, Bonuccelli G, Granchi D,
Zini N, Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Orthopaedic Pathophysiology and Regenerative Medicine, Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli, via di Barbiano 1/10, 40136, Bologna, Italy.
sofia.avnet@ior.it

Suppression of oxidative phosphorylation combined with enhanced aerobic
glycolysis and the resulting increased generation of protons are common features 
of several types of cancer. An efficient mechanism to escape cell death resulting
from intracellular acidification is proton pump activation. In Ewing sarcoma
(ES), although the tumor-associated chimeric gene EWS-FLI1 is known to induce the
accumulation of hypoxia-induced transcription factor HIF-1a, derangements in
metabolic pathways have been neglected so far as candidate pathogenetic
mechanisms. In this paper, we observed that ES cells simultaneously activate
mitochondrial respiration and high levels of glycolysis. Moreover, although the
most effective detoxification mechanism of proton intracellular storage is
lysosomal compartmentalization, ES cells show a poorly represented lysosomal
compartment, but a high sensitivity to the anti-lysosomal agent bafilomycin A1,
targeting the V-ATPase proton pump. We therefore investigated the role of
V-ATPase in the acidification activity of ES cells. ES cells with the highest
GAPDH and V-ATPase expression also showed the highest acidification rate.
Moreover, the localization of V-ATPase was both on the vacuolar and the plasma
membrane of all ES cell lines. The acidic extracellular pH that we reproduced in 
vitro promoted high invasion ability and clonogenic efficiency. Finally,
targeting V-ATPase with siRNA and omeprazole treatments, we obtained a
significant selective reduction of tumor cell number. In summary, glycolytic
activity and activation of V-ATPase are crucial mechanisms of survival of ES
cells and can be considered as promising selective targets for the treatment of
this tumor.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23579072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genome Res. 2013 Jul;23(7):1182-93. doi: 10.1101/gr.147314.112. Epub 2013 Apr 8.

Cancer translocations in human cells induced by zinc finger and TALE nucleases.

Piganeau M(1), Ghezraoui H, De Cian A, Guittat L, Tomishima M, Perrouault L, René
O, Katibah GE, Zhang L, Holmes MC, Doyon Y, Concordet JP, Giovannangeli C, Jasin 
M, Brunet E.

Author information: 
(1)Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, CNRS UMR7196, Inserm U565, 75005 Paris, 
France.

Chromosomal translocations are signatures of numerous cancers and lead to
expression of fusion genes that act as oncogenes. The wealth of genomic
aberrations found in cancer, however, makes it challenging to assign a specific
phenotypic change to a specific aberration. In this study, we set out to use
genome editing with zinc finger (ZFN) and transcription activator-like effector
(TALEN) nucleases to engineer, de novo, translocation-associated oncogenes at
cognate endogenous loci in human cells. Using ZFNs and TALENs designed to cut
precisely at relevant translocation breakpoints, we induced cancer-relevant
t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocations found in Ewing sarcoma and
anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), respectively. We recovered both
translocations with high efficiency, resulting in the expression of the
EWSR1-FLI1 and NPM1-ALK fusions. Breakpoint junctions recovered after ZFN
cleavage in human embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived mesenchymal precursor cells
fully recapitulated the genomic characteristics found in tumor cells from Ewing
sarcoma patients. This approach with tailored nucleases demonstrates that
expression of fusion genes found in cancer cells can be induced from the native
promoter, allowing interrogation of both the underlying mechanisms and oncogenic 
consequences of tumor-related translocations in human cells. With an analogous
strategy, the ALCL translocation was reverted in a patient cell line to restore
the integrity of the two participating chromosomes, further expanding the
repertoire of genomic rearrangements that can be engineered by tailored
nucleases.

PMCID: PMC3698511
PMID: 23568838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58857. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058857. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Zebrafish hoxd4a acts upstream of meis1.1 to direct vasculogenesis, angiogenesis 
and hematopoiesis.

Amali AA(1), Sie L, Winkler C, Featherstone M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
Singapore.

Mice lacking the 4th-group paralog Hoxd4 display malformations of the anterior
vertebral column, but are viable and fertile. Here, we report that zebrafish
embryos having decreased function of the orthologous hoxd4a gene manifest
striking perturbations in vasculogenesis, angiogenesis and primitive and
definitive hematopoiesis. These defects are preceded by reduced expression of the
hemangioblast markers scl1, lmo2 and fli1 within the posterior lateral plate
mesoderm (PLM) at 13 hours post fertilization (hpf). Epistasis analysis revealed 
that hoxd4a acts upstream of meis1.1 but downstream of cdx4 as early as the
shield stage in ventral-most mesoderm fated to give rise to hemangioblasts,
leading us to propose that loss of hoxd4a function disrupts hemangioblast
specification. These findings place hoxd4a high in a genetic hierarchy directing 
hemangioblast formation downstream of cdx1/cdx4 and upstream of meis1.1. An
additional consequence of impaired hoxd4a and meis1.1 expression is the
deregulation of multiple Hox genes implicated in vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis
which may further contribute to the defects described here. Our results add to
evidence implicating key roles for Hox genes in their initial phase of expression
early in gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3598951
PMID: 23554940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 May;37(5):772-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31828e5168.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumor of soft tissue associated with the vagus
nerve: a case report and review of the literature.

Kikuchi Y(1), Kishimoto T, Ota S, Kambe M, Yonemori Y, Chazono H, Yamasaki K,
Ochiai H, Hiroshima K, Tanaka M, Tanaka Y, Horie H, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine,1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing family tumor (EFT) is a rare subset of EFTs showing mixed
features of Ewing sarcoma and adamantinoma of the long bones. All currently
reported cases of the adamantinoma-like type have been associated with bone.
Recently, a unique type of EFT was reported showing complex epithelial
differentiation associated with the vagus nerve. Here we describe another unique 
type of EFT arising in the soft tissue of the neck associated with the vagus
nerve. An 11-year-old girl presented to our hospital with a neck tumor on her
right side. Surgical resection was performed, and histopathologic examination
demonstrated a high-grade malignant neoplasm. The tumor was composed of sheets of
small round proliferating cells, basaloid tumor nests with marked squamous
differentiation, biphasic growth pattern with epithelioid tumor nests, and
spindle cell proliferation. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed diffuse
expression of CD99 and FLI-1. In addition, small round cells and
basaloid/squamoid components were immunoreactive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, cytokeratin
5/6, high-molecular weight keratin, p63, and p40 (<U+0394>Np63). Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing analysis revealed that the tumor 
harbored a t(11;22) translocation, involving EWSR1 and FLI-1, which are
characteristic of EFTs. According to these findings, our case has characteristics
of both a subset of adamantinoma-like EFT and EFT with complex epithelial
differentiation. We suggest that EFT with complex epithelial differentiation is
in a common spectrum with the adamantinoma-like type and that adamantinoma-like
EFTs can arise in soft tissue, leading to difficulty in differential diagnosis
with malignant epithelial tumors.

PMID: 23552387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1264-70. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300602. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Application of infrared laser to the zebrafish vascular system: gene induction,
tracing, and ablation of single endothelial cells.

Kimura E(1), Deguchi T, Kamei Y, Shoji W, Yuba S, Hitomi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Iwate Medical University, Iwate, Japan.
eijik@iwate-med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Infrared laser-evoked gene operator is a new microscopic method
optimized to heat cells in living organisms without causing photochemical damage.
By combining the promoter system for the heat shock response, infrared
laser-evoked gene operator enables laser-mediated gene induction in targeted
cells. We applied this method to the vascular system in zebrafish embryos and
demonstrated its usability to investigate mechanisms of vascular morphogenesis in
vivo.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: We used double-transgenic zebrafish with fli1:nEGFP to
identify the endothelial cells, and with hsp:mCherry to carry out single-cell
labeling. Optimizing the irradiation conditions, we finally succeeded in inducing
the expression of the mCherry gene in single targeted endothelial cells, at a
maximum efficiency rate of 60%. In addition, we indicated that this system could 
be used for laser ablation under certain conditions. To evaluate infrared
laser-evoked gene operator, we applied this system to the endothelial cells of
the first intersegmental arteries, and captured images of the connection between 
the vascular systems of the brain and spinal cord.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the infrared laser-evoked gene operator
system will contribute to the elucidation of the mechanisms underlying vascular
morphogenesis by controlling spatiotemporal gene activation in single endothelial
cells, by labeling or deleting individual vessels in living embryos.

PMID: 23539214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059369. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

BCL11B is up-regulated by EWS/FLI and contributes to the transformed phenotype in
Ewing sarcoma.

Wiles ET(1), Lui-Sargent B, Bell R, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

The EWS/FLI translocation product is the causative oncogene in Ewing sarcoma and 
acts as an aberrant transcription factor. EWS/FLI dysregulates gene expression
during tumorigenesis by abnormally activating or repressing genes. The expression
levels of thousands of genes are affected in Ewing sarcoma, however, it is
unknown which of these genes contribute to the transformed phenotype. Here we
characterize BCL11B as an up-regulated EWS/FLI target that is necessary for the
maintenance of transformation in patient derived Ewing sarcoma cells lines.
BCL11B, a zinc finger transcription factor, acts as a transcriptional repressor
in Ewing's sarcoma and contributes to the EWS/FLI repressed gene signature.
BCL11B repressive activity is mediated by the NuRD co-repressor complex. We
further demonstrate that re-expression of SPRY1, a repressed target of BCL11B,
limits the transformation capacity of Ewing sarcoma cells. These data define a
new pathway downstream of EWS/FLI required for oncogenic maintenance in Ewing
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3601955
PMID: 23527175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Biol Cell. 2013 Jul;105(7):289-303. doi: 10.1111/boc.201200086. Epub 2013 May 4.

First identification of Ewing's sarcoma-derived extracellular vesicles and
exploration of their biological and potential diagnostic implications.

Miller IV(1), Raposo G, Welsch U, Prazeres da Costa O, Thiel U, Lebar M, Maurer
M, Bender HU, von Luettichau I, Richter GH, Burdach S, Grunewald TG.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum rechts
der Isar, Technische Universität München, 80804 Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: Exosomes are small RNA- and protein-containing
extracellular vesicles (EVs) that are thought to mediate hetero- and homotypic
intercellular communication between normal and malignant cells.Tumour-derived
exosomes are believed to promote re-programming of the tumour-associated stroma
to favour tumour growth and metastasis. Currently, exosomes have been intensively
studied in carcinomas. However, little is known about their existence and
possible role in sarcomas.
RESULTS: Here, we report on the identification of vesicles with exosomal features
derived from Ewing's sarcoma(ES), the second most common soft-tissue or bone
cancer in children and adolescents. ES cell line-derived EV shave been isolated
by ultracentrifugation and analysed by flow-cytometric assessment of the
exosome-associated proteins CD63 and CD81 as well as by electron microscopy. They
proved to contain ES-specific transcripts including EWS-FLI1, which were suitable
for the sensitive detection of ES cell line-derived exosomes by qRT-PCRin a
pre-clinical model for patient plasma. Microarray analysis of ES cell
line-derived exosomes revealed that they share a common transcriptional signature
potentially involved in G-protein-coupled signalling, neurotransmitter signalling
and stemness.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results imply that ES-derived exosomes could
eventually serve as biomarkers for minimal residual disease diagnostics in
peripheral blood and prompt further investigation of their potential biological
role in modification of the ES-associated microenvironment

© 2013 Société Française des Microscopies and Société de Biologie Cellulaire de
France. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23521563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Dermatopathol. 2013 May;35(3):316-8. doi: 10.1097/DAD.0b013e318266b197.

Diagnostic utility of Fli-1 and D2-40 in distinguishing atypical fibroxanthoma
from angiosarcoma.

Cuda J(1), Mirzamani N, Kantipudi R, Robbins J, Welsch MJ, Sundram UN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA,
USA.

Although in most cases one can easily distinguish between atypical fibroxanthomas
and angiosarcomas, hemorrhagic atypical fibroxanthomas can pose a diagnostic
problem. In rare cases, the large atypical cells of atypical fibroxanthoma can
stain with CD31, leading to the erroneous diagnosis of angiosarcoma. We elected
to further study this conundrum with 2 additional markers of lymphatic and
vascular elements, namely D2-40 (podoplanin) and Fli-1, respectively. We studied 
26 cases of atypical fibroxanthoma and 20 cases of angiosarcoma with Fli-1 and
D2-40. We found that both Fli-1 and D2-40 stained a majority of cases of
angiosarcoma (16/20 and 12/20, respectively), although only staining a minority
of cases of atypical fibroxanthoma (8/26 for both). In addition, D2-40 staining
of atypical fibroxanthoma was usually weak when positive, whereas Fli-1 staining 
of angiosarcomas was mostly strong and nuclear. Thus, both D2-40 and Fli-1 seem
to be useful in distinguishing between atypical fibroxanthomas and angiosarcomas.

PMID: 23518636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013 Sep;60(9):1437-46. doi: 10.1002/pbc.24526. Epub 2013
Mar 18.

Pharmacologic inhibition of epigenetic modification reveals targets of aberrant
promoter methylation in Ewing sarcoma.

Nestheide S(1), Bridge JA, Barnes M, Frayer R, Sumegi J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune
Deficiency, Blood and Cancer Research Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (ES), a highly aggressive tumor of children and young
adults, is characterized most commonly by an 11;22 chromosomal translocation that
fuses EWSR1 located at 22q12 with FLI1, coding for a member of the ETS family of 
transcription factors. Although genetic changes in ES have been extensively
researched, our understanding of the role of epigenetic modifications in this
neoplasm is limited.
PROCEDURE: In an effort to improve our knowledge in the role of epigenetic
changes in ES we evaluated the in vitro antineoplastic effect of the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC) and identified
epigenetically silenced genes by pharmacologic unmasking of DNA methylation
coupled with genome-wide expression profiling.
RESULTS: Comparisons between untreated and 5-Aza-dC treated ES cell lines (n = 5)
identified 208 probe sets with at least twofold difference in expression (P =
0.05). The 208 probe sets represented 145 upregulated and 31 down-regulated
genes. Of the 145 genes upregulated after 5-Aza-dC treatment, four: were further 
characterized. ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT were found to be hypermethylated and
transcriptionally down-regulated in ES cell lines. Further studies revealed that 
ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT were often hypermethylated in primary ES tumors.
Transfection-mediated reexpression of ACRC, CLU, MEST, and NNAT in ES cell lines 
resulted in decreased growth in culture.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated epigenetically modified genes in ES cell
lines and primary tumors and suggested that epigenetic dysregulation may
contribute to disease pathogenesis in ES.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23508900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Jun;36(3):191-200. doi: 10.1007/s13402-013-0126-8. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

Multiple splice variants of EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts co-existing in the Ewing
sarcoma family of tumors.

Patócs B(1), Németh K, Garami M, Arató G, Kovalszky I, Szendroi M, Fekete G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Tuzoltó u. 7-9,
Budapest, 1094, Hungary. barbarapatocs@gmail.com

PURPOSE: The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by fusions of 
the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22q12 with either one of the genes encoding members 
of the ETS family of transcription factors, in the majority of cases FLI1 or ERG.
Many alternative EWSR1-ETS gene fusions have been encountered, due to variations 
in the locations of the EWSR1 and ETS genomic breakpoints. The resulting
heterogeneity in EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts may further be increased by the
occurrence of multiple splice variants within the same tumor. Here we present a
retrospective study designed to detect all of the EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG fusion
transcripts in a series of 23 fresh frozen EFT tissues.
METHODS: RT-PCR and nested fluorescent multiplex PCR were used to amplify
EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG transcripts from EFT tissues. Fusion transcripts were
identified by laser-induced fluorescent capillary electrophoresis and confirmed
by sequence analysis.
RESULTS: Nine different EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts and one EWSR1-ERG fusion
transcript were identified in 21 out of 23 fresh frozen EFT tissue samples. In
five cases multiple fusion transcripts were found to coexist in the same tumor
sample. We additionally reviewed previous reports on twelve cases with multiple
EWSR1-ETS fusion transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: Alternative splicing may frequently affect the process of
EFT-associated fusion gene transcription and, as such, may significantly
contribute to the pathogenic role of EFT-associated chromosome translocations. In
a considerable number of cases this may result in multiple splice variants within
the same tumor.

PMID: 23494411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Apr;43(4):417-21. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt011. Epub 2013 Mar 
8.

Ewing sarcoma arising after treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Hiramoto N(1), Kobayashi Y, Nomoto J, Maruyama D, Watanabe T, Tochigi N, Furuta
K, Takeda K, Chuman H, Yagyu S, Hosoi H, Tobinai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

We report the case of a patient in whom the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma arising
from a soft tissue was made after successful treatment of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma. A 65-year-old woman presented with a rapidly growing mass in her left
scapular region 8 years after successful chemotherapy with the cyclophosphamide, 
hydroxydaunomycin hydrochloride, vincristine, prednisolone regimen for diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma. Computed tomographic examination and magnetic resonance
imaging of the thorax revealed an intramuscular tumour measuring 40 mm in size in
the left scapular region. Histopathological examination of an open biopsy
specimen revealed a small round cell tumour that showed positive staining for
CD99. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed a split signal by a break-apart
probe for the EWS gene in chromosome 22q12. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction confirmed the expression of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts. Based on 
these findings, the patient was diagnosed as having secondary Ewing sarcoma.
Despite adjuvant chemotherapy, however, she died of pulmonary metastases 2 years 
after the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma. Therapy-related haematological malignancies
with balanced translocations have been reported previously. A mechanism similar
to that underlying the development of secondary malignancy might explain the
occurrence of this solid cancer.

PMID: 23475435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58123. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058123. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

OP9 bone marrow stroma cells differentiate into megakaryocytes and platelets.

Matsubara Y(1), Ono Y, Suzuki H, Arai F, Suda T, Murata M, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. yumikoma@a7.keio.jp

Platelets are essential for hemostatic plug formation and thrombosis. The
mechanisms of megakaryocyte (MK) differentiation and subsequent platelet
production from stem cells remain only partially understood. The manufacture of
megakaryocytes (MKs) and platelets from cell sources including hematopoietic stem
cells and pluripotent stem cells have been highlighted for studying the platelet 
production mechanisms as well as for the development of new strategies for
platelet transfusion. The mouse bone marrow stroma cell line OP9 has been widely 
used as feeder cells for the differentiation of stem cells into MK lineages. OP9 
cells are reported to be pre-adipocytes. We previously reported that 3T3-L1
pre-adipocytes differentiated into MKs and platelets. In the present study, we
examined whether OP9 cells differentiate into MKs and platelets using MK lineage 
induction (MKLI) medium previously established to generate MKs and platelets from
hematopoietic stem cells, embryonic stem cells, and pre-adipocytes. OP9 cells
cultured in MKLI medium had megakaryocytic features, i.e., positivity for surface
markers CD41 and CD42b, polyploidy, and distinct morphology. The OP9-derived
platelets had functional characteristics, providing the first evidence for the
differentiation of OP9 cells into MKs and platelets. We then analyzed gene
expressions of critical factors that regulate megakaryopoiesis and
thrombopoiesis. The gene expressions of p45NF-E2, FOG, Fli1, GATA2, RUNX1,
thrombopoietin, and c-mpl were observed during the MK differentiation. Among the 
observed transcription factors of MK lineages, p45NF-E2 expression was increased 
during differentiation. We further studied MK and platelet generation using
p45NF-E2-overexpressing OP9 cells. OP9 cells transfected with p45NF-E2 had
enhanced production of MKs and platelets. Our findings revealed that OP9 cells
differentiated into MKs and platelets in vitro. OP9 cells have critical factors
for megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, which might be involved in a mechanism
of this differentiation. p45NF-E2 might also play important roles in the
differentiation of OP9 cells into MK lineages cells.

PMCID: PMC3585802
PMID: 23469264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Cancer. 2013 May;49(8):1932-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2013.01.032. Epub 2013
Feb 26.

Ovarian tissue cryopreserved for fertility preservation from patients with Ewing 
or other sarcomas appear to have no tumour cell contamination.

Greve T(1), Wielenga VT, Grauslund M, Sørensen N, Christiansen DB, Rosendahl M,
Yding Andersen C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Rigshospitalet - Copenhagen University
Hospital, Denmark. tinegreve@gmail.com

AIM: The chemotherapy required to treat patients with sarcoma may as a
side-effect induce infertility in girls and young women. If these patients have
ovarian cortical tissue cryopreserved prior to chemotherapy, they may, if
necessary, have the tissue transplanted and restore their fertility. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the risk of residual cancer cells in the ovarian
cortex intended for transplantation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Ovarian tissue stored for fertility preservation from 16
surviving patients diagnosed with sarcoma (nine with Ewing sarcomas, four with
osteosarcomas, two with synovial sarcomas and one with chondrosarcoma) was
evaluated for the presence of malignant cells by histology and by transplantation
to immunodeficient mice for 20 weeks. A fraction of the tissue from patients with
Ewing sarcoma was also evaluated for the presence of the molecular marker
EWS-FLI1 by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT-qPCR). The transplant itself and selected murine organs were analysed for the
presence of malignant cells by histology.
RESULTS: All the mice accommodated the human tissue for 20 weeks of
transplantation period with none of the mice developing any sign of cancer. In no
instance were any cancer cells detected by histology or RT-qPCR.
CONCLUSION: Ovarian tissue from patients with sarcoma appears to be without
metastatic malignant cells in numbers that allow detection. Although the actual
pieces of ovarian tissue used for transplantation remain unchecked, the current
data indicate that the procedure is safe at least in patients that survive the
sarcoma disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23452988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Front Oncol. 2013 Feb 25;3:24. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00024. eCollection 2013.

Salient features of mesenchymal stem cells-implications for Ewing sarcoma
modeling.

Monument MJ(1), Bernthal NM, Randall RL.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Services, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Huntsman Cancer
Institute, University of Utah Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Despite a heightened appreciation of the many defining molecular aberrations in
Ewing sarcoma, the cooperative genetic environment and permissive cell of origin 
essential for EWS/ETS-mediated oncogenesis remain elusive. Consequently,
inducible animal and in vitro models of Ewing sarcoma from a native cellular
context are unable to fully recapitulate malignant transformation. Despite these 
shortcomings, human, and murine mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are the closest
working in vitro systems available. MSCs are tolerant of ectopic EWS/FLI
expression, which is accompanied by a molecular signature most similar to Ewing
sarcoma. Whether MSCs are the elusive cell of origin or simply a tolerant
platform of the EWS/FLI transcriptome, these cells have become an excellent
molecular tool to investigate and manipulate oncogenesis in Ewing sarcoma. Our
understanding of the biological complexity and heterogeneity of human MSCs
(hMSCs) has increased substantially over time and as such, appreciation and
utilization of these salient complexities may greatly enhance the efficient use
of these cells as surrogate models for Ewing sarcoma tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3580960
PMID: 23443465  [PubMed]


288. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056408. Epub 2013 Feb 18.

Genomic EWS-FLI1 fusion sequences in Ewing sarcoma resemble breakpoint
characteristics of immature lymphoid malignancies.

Berger M(1), Dirksen U, Braeuninger A, Koehler G, Juergens H, Krumbholz M,
Metzler M.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital Erlangen, Department of Pediatrics, Erlangen, Germany.

Chromosomal translocations between the EWS gene and members of the ETS gene
family are characteristic molecular features of the Ewing sarcoma. The most
common translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) fuses the EWS gene to FLI1, and is present
in 85-90% of Ewing sarcomas. In the present study, a specifically designed
multiplex long-range PCR assay was applied to amplify genomic EWS-FLI1 fusion
sites from as little as 100 ng template DNA. Characterization of the EWS-FLI1
fusion sites of 42 pediatric and young adult Ewing sarcoma patients and seven
cell lines revealed a clustering in the 5' region of the EWS-breakpoint cluster
region (BCR), in contrast to random distribution of breakpoints in the FLI1-BCR. 
No association of breakpoints with various recombination-inducing sequence motifs
was identified. The occurrence of small deletions and duplications at the genomic
junction is characteristic of involvement of the non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) repair system, similar to findings at chromosomal breakpoints in pediatric
leukemia and lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3575406
PMID: 23441188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2013 Apr 11;49(1):18-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2013.02.003. Epub
2013 Feb 17.

Shikonin, a natural product from the root of Lithospermum erythrorhizon, is a
cytotoxic DNA-binding agent.

Chen C(1), Shanmugasundaram K(2), Rigby AC(2), Kung AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Division
of Molecular and Vascular Medicine, Center for Vascular Biology Research,
Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Stem 
Cell Transplantation, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
USA. Electronic address: akung@columbia.edu.

To search for compounds that disrupt binding of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein to
its cognate targets, we developed a homogeneous high-throughput proximity assay
and screened 5200 small molecule compounds. Many well-known DNA-binding
chemotherapeutic agents, such as actinomycin D, cisplatin, doxorubicin,
daunorubicin, and epirubicin scored in the assay and not surprising also
disrupted the binding of other transcription factors. Unexpectedly, we found that
Shikonin, a natural product from the root of Lithospermum erythrorhizon,
similarly disrupted protein-DNA interactions. Mechanistic studies demonstrated
that Shikonin displaces SYBR green from binding to the minor groove of DNA and is
able to inhibit topoisomerase mediated DNA relaxation. In cells, Shikonin blocked
the binding of EWS-FLI1 to the NR0B1 promoter, and attenuated gene expression.
Shikonin rapidly induced G2/M arrest and apoptosis in Ewing sarcoma cells. These 
results demonstrate that contrary to other purported mechanisms of action,
Shikonin is a DNA-binding cytotoxic agent.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23422689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Kyobu Geka. 2013 Feb;66(2):142-5.

[Pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendothelioma].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawago M(1), Sakurai H, Watanabe S, Tsuta K, Asamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

A 62-year-old asymptomatic woman was referred to the National Cancer Center
Hospital in Japan because of an abnormal shadow on an annual checkup chest X-ray.
Chest computed tomography(CT)showed a well-demarcated nodular lesion of 3 cm in
diameter in the right lower lobe. Since the nodule was located at the right
pulmonary hilum, she underwent a right lower lobectomy. Histologically, the tumor
was composed of solid nests or anastomosing strands of cells that were embedded
in a hyalinized, focally myxoid stroma. Some of the tumor cells showed a striking
feature of the presence of intracytoplasmic lumina that were visualized as clear 
spaces or vacuoles. These lumina were negative for alcian blue and periodic
Schiff, and contained erythrocytes. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were
stained for CD31 and FLI1. The tumor was diagnosed as a pulmonary epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma.Pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendothelioma is a relatively
rare entity.

PMID: 23381363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054556. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

FOXM1 is an oncogenic mediator in Ewing Sarcoma.

Christensen L(1), Joo J, Lee S, Wai D, Triche TJ, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Saban Research
Institute, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Ewing Family Tumors (Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumor) are common bone and soft tissue malignancies of childhood, adolescence and
young adulthood. Chromosomal translocation in these tumors produces fusion
oncogenes of the EWS/ETS class, with EWS/FLI1 being by far the most common.
EWS/ETS chimera are the only well established driver mutations in these tumors
and they function as aberrant transcription factors. Understanding the downstream
genes whose expression is modified has been a central approach to the study of
these tumors. FOXM1 is a proliferation associated transcription factor which has 
increasingly been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of a wide range of
human cancers. Here we demonstrate that FOXM1 is expressed in Ewing primary
tumors and cell lines. Reduction in FOXM1 expression in Ewing cell lines results 
in diminished potential for anchorage independent growth. FOXM1 expression is
enhanced by EWS/FLI1, though, unlike other tumor systems, it is not driven by
expression of the EWS/FLI1 target GLI1. Thiostrepton is a compound known to
inhibit FOXM1 by direct binding. We show that Thiostrepton diminishes FOXM1
expression in Ewing cell lines and this reduction reduces cell viability through 
an apoptotic mechanism. FOXM1 is involved in Ewing tumor pathogenesis and may
prove to be a useful therapeutic target in Ewing tumors.

PMCID: PMC3554707
PMID: 23365673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Aug;228(8):1774-83. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24337.

Interferon-<U+03B3> promotes vascular remodeling in human microvascular endothelial
cells by upregulating endothelin (ET)-1 and transforming growth factor (TGF) ß2.

Chrobak I(1), Lenna S, Stawski L, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Arthritis Center, Boston, Massachusetts 
02118, USA.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a complex disease characterized by vascular
alterations, activation of the immune system and tissue fibrosis. Previous
studies have implicated activation of the interferon pathways in the pathogenesis
of SSc. The goal of this study was to determine whether interferon type I and/or 
type II could play a pathogenic role in SSc vasculopathy. Human dermal
microvascular endothelial cells (HDMVECs) and fibroblasts were obtained from
foreskins of healthy newborns. The RT Profiler PCR Array System was utilized to
screen for EndoMT genes. Treatment with IFN-a or IFN-<U+03B3> downregulated Fli1 and
VE-cadherin. In contrast, IFN-a and IFN-<U+03B3> exerted opposite effects on the
expression of a-SMA, CTGF, ET-1, and TGFß2, with IFN-a downregulating and IFN-<U+03B3>
upregulating this set of genes. Blockade of TGFß signaling normalized
IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated changes in Fli1, VE-cadherin, CTGF, and ET-1 levels, whereas
upregulation of a-SMA and TGFß2 was not affected. Bosentan treatment was more
effective than TGFß blockade in reversing the actions of IFN-<U+03B3>, including
downregulation of a-SMA and TGFß2, suggesting that activation of the ET-1 pathway
plays a main role in the IFN-<U+03B3> responses in HDMECs. IFN-<U+03B3> induced expression of
selected genes related to endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EndoMT),
including Snail1, FN1, PAI1, TWIST1, STAT3, RGS2, and components of the WNT
pathway. The effect of IFN-<U+03B3> on EndoMT was mediated via TGFß2 and ET-1 signaling 
pathways. This study demonstrates distinct effects of IFN-a and IFN-<U+03B3> on the
biology of vascular endothelial cells. IFN-<U+03B3> may contribute to abnormal vascular 
remodeling and fibrogenesis in SSc, partially via induction of EndoMT.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4072032
PMID: 23359533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Blood. 2013 Mar 21;121(12):2289-300. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-446120. Epub 2013
Jan 17.

Activity of a heptad of transcription factors is associated with stem cell
programs and clinical outcome in acute myeloid leukemia.

Diffner E(1), Beck D, Gudgin E, Thoms JA, Knezevic K, Pridans C, Foster S, Goode 
D, Lim WK, Boelen L, Metzeler KH, Micklem G, Bohlander SK, Buske C, Burnett A,
Ottersbach K, Vassiliou GS, Olivier J, Wong JW, Göttgens B, Huntly BJ, Pimanda
JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2014 May 1;123(18):2901.

Aberrant transcriptional programs in combination with abnormal proliferative
signaling drive leukemic transformation. These programs operate in normal
hematopoiesis where they are involved in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC)
proliferation and maintenance. Ets Related Gene (ERG) is a component of normal
and leukemic stem cell signatures and high ERG expression is a risk factor for
poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, mechanisms that underlie
ERG expression in AML and how its expression relates to leukemic stemness are
unknown. We report that ERG expression in AML is associated with activity of the 
ERG promoters and +85 stem cell enhancer and a heptad of transcription factors
that combinatorially regulate genes in HSCs. Gene expression signatures derived
from ERG promoter-stem cell enhancer and heptad activity are associated with
clinical outcome when ERG expression alone fails. We also show that the heptad
signature is associated with AMLs that lack somatic mutations in NPM1 and confers
an adverse prognosis when associated with FLT3 mutations. Taken together, these
results suggest that transcriptional regulators cooperate to establish or
maintain primitive stem cell-like signatures in leukemic cells and that the
underlying pattern of somatic mutations contributes to the development of these
signatures and modulate their influence on clinical outcome.

PMID: 23327922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Immunology. 2013 Jul;139(3):318-27. doi: 10.1111/imm.12070.

The transcription factor Fli-1 regulates monocyte, macrophage and dendritic cell 
development in mice.

Suzuki E(1), Williams S, Sato S, Gilkeson G, Watson DK, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

Fli-1 belongs to the Ets transcription factor family and is expressed in
haematopoietic cells, including most of the cells that are active in immunity.
The mononuclear phagocytes, i.e. monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells,
originate in haematopoietic stem cells and play an important role in immunity. To
assess the role of Fli-1 in mononuclear phagocyte development in vivo, we
generated mice that express a truncated Fli-1 protein, lacking the C-terminal
transcriptional activation domain (Fli-1(<U+0394>) (CTA) ). Fli-1(<U+0394>) (CTA) (/<U+0394>) (CTA)
mice had significantly increased populations of haematopoietic stem cells and
common dendritic cell precursors in bone marrow compared with wild-type
littermates. Significantly increased classical dendritic cells, plasmacytoid
dendritic cells, and macrophage populations were found in spleens from Fli-1(<U+2206>)
(CTA) (/<U+2206>) (CTA) mice compared with wild-type littermates. Fli-1(<U+0394>) (CTA) (/<U+0394>)
(CTA) mice also had increased pre-classical dendritic cell and monocyte
populations in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Furthermore, bone marrow
reconstitution studies demonstrated that expression of Fli-1 in both
haematopoietic cells and stromal cells affected mononuclear phagocyte development
in mice. Expression of Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3L), a
haematopoietic growth factor, in multipotent progenitors was statistically
significantly increased from Fli-1(<U+2206>) (CTA) (/<U+2206>) (CTA) mice compared with
wild-type littermates. Fli-1 protein binds directly to the promoter region of the
Flt3L gene. Hence, Fli-1 plays an important role in the mononuclear phagocyte
development, and the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain of Fli-1
negatively modulates mononuclear phagocyte development.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3701178
PMID: 23320737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1832(4):553-64. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.001.
Epub 2013 Jan 9.

Loss of connexin43 expression in Ewing's sarcoma cells favors the development of 
the primary tumor and the associated bone osteolysis.

Talbot J(1), Brion R, Picarda G, Amiaud J, Chesneau J, Bougras G, Stresing V,
Tirode F, Heymann D, Redini F, Verrecchia F.

Author information: 
(1)LUNAM Université, France.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a primary bone tumor characterized by a chromosomic
translocation between the EWS gene and a member of the ETS gene family, mainly
FLI1, which leads to an aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1 that promotes
tumorigenicity. Gap junctions are intercellular channels composed of
transmembrane proteins (connexin: Cx), that allow direct intercellular
communication between adjacent cells. Numerous studies have shown that
tumorigenesis may be associated with a loss of gap junctional intercellular
communication (GJIC). Loss of Cx43 expression was observed at the protein and
mRNA levels in ES cell lines compared to those measured in human mesenchymal stem
cells. A673 ES cells stably transfected with an shRNA targeting EWS-FLI1 showed
an increase in Cx43 expression (at the mRNA, protein and transcriptional levels) 
and GJIC. In an osteolytic murine model of ES, the overexpression of Cx43 in ES
cells dramatically reduced tumor growth, leading to a significant increase in
animal survival. In vitro assays showed that Cx43 overexpression increases the
p27 level with an associated marked decrease of Rb phosphorylation, consistent
with the observed blockade of the cell cycle in G0/G1 phase. In addition, the
bone microarchitectural parameters, assessed by micro-CT analysis, showed an
increased bone volume when Cx43 expression was enhanced. Histological analysis
demonstrated that the overexpression of Cx43 in ES tumor cells inhibits
osteoclast activity and therefore bone resorption. Our study demonstrated that
the loss of Cx43 expression in ES cells plays a crucial role in the development
of the primary tumor and the associated bone osteolysis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Apr;11(4):593-604. doi: 10.1111/jth.12131.

Transcription factors in late megakaryopoiesis and related platelet disorders.

Tijssen MR(1), Ghevaert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, UK.

Cell type-specific transcription factors regulate the repertoire of genes
expressed in a cell and thereby determine its phenotype. The differentiation of
megakaryocytes, the platelet progenitors, from hematopoietic stem cells is a
well-known process that can be mimicked in culture. However, the efficient
formation of platelets in culture remains a challenge. Platelet formation is a
complicated process including megakaryocyte maturation, platelet assembly and
platelet shedding. We hypothesize that a better understanding of the
transcriptional regulation of this process will allow us to influence it such
that sufficient numbers of platelets can be produced for clinical applications.
After an introduction to gene regulation and platelet formation, this review
summarizes the current knowledge of the regulation of platelet formation by the
transcription factors EVI1, GATA1, FLI1, NFE2, RUNX1, SRF and its co-factor MKL1,
and TAL1. Also covered is how some platelet disorders including
myeloproliferative neoplasms, result from disturbances of the transcriptional
regulation. These disorders give us invaluable insights into the crucial role
these transcription factors play in platelet formation. Finally, there is
discussion of how a better understanding of these processes will be needed to
allow for efficient production of platelets in vitro.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMCID: PMC3824237
PMID: 23311859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;41(11):729-32. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0529-5807.2012.11.004.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor in female genital tract: a clinicopathologic
study].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang X(1), Wang P, He Y, Yang F, Li L, Wang H, Wang QL, Yao XY, Yang KX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features of primitive neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET) in female genital tract.
METHODS: Six cases of PNET arising in female genital tract were retrospectively
reviewed. The clinicopathologic features, immunohistochemical findings and EWS
gene translocation study results were analyzed.
RESULTS: The age of patients ranged from 10 to 27 years (mean = 20 years). The
sites of involvement included ovary (1 case), uterus (1 case), vulva (2 cases)
and vagina (2 cases). The greatest diameter of the tumor ranged from 2 to 10 cm
(mean = 5.4 cm). The tumor had nodular appearance and showed grayish-pink fleshy 
cut surface, accompanied by foci of hemorrhage and necrosis. Histologically, the 
tumor was composed of malignant small round cells with indistinct cell borders,
hyperchromatic nuclei, dense chromatin, tiny nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. The
tumor cells were arranged in sheets or lobules. Homer-Wright rosettes were
identified in 1 case. Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells were 
positive for CD99, FLI-1 and CD56 (6/6). Focal expression of vimentin (5/6), NSE 
(5/6), nestin (4/6), synaptophysin (4/6), S-100 protein (2/6) and chromogranin A 
(1/6) was also demonstrated. EWS gene translocation was detected in 5 cases
studied. Follow-up information was available in 2 patients (7 and 17 months of
follow up, respectively). One of them died of tumor metastasis 17 months after
diagnosis. The other patient was still alive.
CONCLUSIONS: PNET arising in female genital tract is rare. It mainly involves
ovary, uterus, vulva and vagina. Immunohistochemical study using a panel of
antibodies and fluorescence in-situ hybridization play an important role in
definitive diagnosis of this rare malignancy.

PMID: 23302331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;35(11):814-8.

[Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of trachea: a case report and review 
of literatures].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng GY(1), Xie BS, Yue WX, Li RH, Chen XY, He YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fujian Provincial Hospital, Fuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the understanding of tracheal peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET).
METHODS: A case of tracheal PNET diagnosed in July 2010 was reported and the
related literatures were reviewed. The literature review was carried out
respectively with "primitive neuroectodermal tumor", "peripheral" as the search
terms in Wanfang med online and PubMed database by September 2011.
RESULTS: A case of 63 year-old female patient, who had been misdiagnosed as
having chronic pharyngitis, chronic bronchitis and bronchial asthma, was admitted
to the hospital because of cough and sputum production for 50 days, and
anhelation for 1 month. After admission, the chest computerized tomography showed
a space-occupying lesion in the middle of the trachea. Bronchoscopy showed a
pedicle neoplasm 4 cm under the subglottic, with integral capsule, smooth surface
and rich vascellum. Subsequently, tumor resection under bronchoscope was
performed. Pathology report after operation showed infiltration of flake small
round malignant cells under bronchial mucosa. Immunohistochemistry showed
CD(99)(+), Syn(+) and S-100(+). EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript was detected by
RT-PCR. Accordingly, it was diagnosed as PNET. The symptoms of cough and
anhelation were disappeared after operation. So far, there was no local
recurrence and distant metastasis with 14 months follow-up. A total of 111
literatures were received in Pubmed, including one of prospective study, one of
review, 22 of retrospective study and 87 of case report. Forty literatures and
187 cases in all were received in Wanfang Med Online, including 24 of
retrospective study and 16 of case report. But, there were no reports about
tracheal PNET.
CONCLUSIONS: PNET can occur in the trachea and is easy to be misdiagnosed. To
make a definite diagnosis, histopathology and immunohistochemistry are needed and
detection of EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript is a reliable marker for molecular
diagnosis. The tracheal pPNET may be different with the pPNETs in other parts,
and has a lower-grade invasion and less distant metastasis.

PMID: 23290035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Diagn Cytopathol. 2014 Jun;42(6):516-20. doi: 10.1002/dc.22943. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Pitfalls in the diagnosis of hepatic epithelioid hemangioendothelioma by FNA and 
needle core biopsy.

Jurczyk M(1), Zhu B, Laskin W, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois.

Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma (EHE) of the liver is an extremely rare tumor
that masquerades as an epithelial neoplasm and poses significant diagnostic
pitfalls for the cytopathologist. This report describes a 64-year-old woman whom 
on computerized tomography was found to have multiple peripherally calcified
hypodense lesions throughout the liver and an ipsilateral adrenal mass. Fine
needle aspiration and needle cores biopsies of the largest liver lesion showed
epithelioid cells and spindle cells in fibrous stroma. The epithelioid cells had 
round or oval, hyperchromatic nuclei with smooth nuclear contours, delicate
cytoplasm and indistinct cytoplasmic borders. Rare cells had intracellular
vascular lumen containing fragmented or intact red blood cells. The cells were
individually dispersed or arranged in nests and vague tubular arrays. No mitotic 
figures or necrosis were seen. An immunohistochemical profile demonstrated
diffuse CD31 and focal CD 34 and nuclear Fli-1 immunoexpression and low Ki-67
proliferative activity (1%) within lesional cells confirming the diagnosis of
EHE. The differential diagnosis of EHE which includes cholangiocarcinoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, metastatic carcinoma and melanoma is discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23288560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2013 May;52(5):790-9. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kes379.
Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Decreased cathepsin V expression due to Fli1 deficiency contributes to the
development of dermal fibrosis and proliferative vasculopathy in systemic
sclerosis.

Noda S(1), Asano Y, Takahashi T, Akamata K, Aozasa N, Taniguchi T, Ichimura Y,
Toyama T, Sumida H, Kuwano Y, Yanaba K, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Kadono T, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Cathepsin V (CTSV) is a proteolytic enzyme potentially modulating
angiogenic processes, collagen degradation and keratinocyte differentiation. We
aimed to investigate the clinical association of serum CTSV levels and the
mechanism by which CTSV expression is altered in SSc.
METHODS: Serum CTSV levels were determined by ELISA in 51 SSc and 18 healthy
subjects. CTSV expression was evaluated by immunostaining in SSc and normal skin 
and by RT-real-time PCR in normal and SSc dermal fibroblasts, normal dermal
fibroblasts treated with TGF-ß1 or Fli1 siRNA and human dermal microvascular
endothelial cells (ECs) treated with Fli1 siRNA.
RESULTS: Serum CTSV levels were significantly lower in dcSSc and lcSSc patients
than in healthy controls. In early-stage dcSSc, serum CTSV levels were remarkably
and uniformly decreased compared with healthy controls. The decrease in serum
CTSV levels in mid- and late-stage dcSSc and in lcSSc was linked to the
development of proliferative vasculopathy. CTSV expression was decreased in
microvascular ECs, pericytes/vascular smooth muscle cells and keratinocytes of
dcSSc and lcSSc skin and in dermal fibroblasts of dcSSc skin compared with
control skin. Consistently, CTSV expression was decreased in cultured dermal
fibroblasts from early-stage dcSSc. Furthermore, mRNA levels of the CTSV gene
were significantly decreased in normal fibroblasts treated with TGF-ß1 or Fli1
siRNA and in human dermal microvascular ECs treated with Fli1 siRNA.
CONCLUSION: Loss of CTSV expression may contribute to the development of
fibrosis, vasculopathy and the altered phenotype of keratinocytes in SSc.

PMID: 23287360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52207. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052207. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Influence of the internalization pathway on the efficacy of siRNA delivery by
cationic fluorescent nanodiamonds in the Ewing sarcoma cell model.

Alhaddad A(1), Durieu C, Dantelle G, Le Cam E, Malvy C, Treussart F, Bertrand JR.

Author information: 
(1)Vectorologie et thérapeutiques anti-cancéreuses, CNRS UMR 8203, Université
Paris Sud 11, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are powerful tools commonly used for the specific
inhibition of gene expression. However, vectorization is required to facilitate
cell penetration and to prevent siRNA degradation by nucleases. We have shown
that diamond nanocrystals coated with cationic polymer can be used to carry
siRNAs into Ewing sarcoma cells, in which they remain traceable over long
periods, due to their intrinsic stable fluorescence. We tested two cationic
polymers, polyallylamine and polyethylenimine. The release of siRNA, accompanied 
by Ewing sarcoma EWS-Fli1 oncogene silencing, was observed only with
polyethylenimine. We investigated cell penetration and found that the underlying 
mechanisms accounted for these differences in behavior. Using drugs selectively
inhibiting particular pathways and a combination of fluorescence and electronic
microscopy, we showed that siRNA gene silencing occurred only if the
siRNA:cationic nanodiamond complex followed the macropinocytosis route. These
results have potential implications for the design of efficient drug-delivery
vectors.

PMCID: PMC3527409
PMID: 23284935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Orthopedics. 2013 Jan;36(1):e113-6. doi: 10.3928/01477447-20121217-29.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the proximal humeral
epiphysis.

Morris P(1), Dickman PS, Seidel MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Arizona, Tucson, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) of bone is a rare
childhood tumor most commonly located in the metadiaphysis. In skeletally
immature patients, lesions of the epiphysis are rarely malignant, with the most
common diagnosis being chondroblastoma. This article presents a case of ES/PNET
of the proximal humeral epiphysis in a 12-year-old boy. To the authors'
knowledge, this is the first reported case of epiphyseal ES/PNET confirmed with
molecular testing. Radiographs of the patient's painful shoulder showed a
well-defined lytic lesion within the humeral epiphysis. Magnetic resonance
imaging suggested a chondroid tumor with surrounding edema. Based on the imaging 
characteristics, the patient's age, and the lesion's location, a preliminary
diagnosis of chondroblastoma was made. A trochar biopsy of the lesion
demonstrated a small, round, blue cell tumor on frozen section. Subsequently,
immunohistochemical staining was uniformly positive in a membrane pattern for
CD99, and molecular diagnostic testing demonstrated a EWSR1/FLI1 fusion
transcript, confirming the pathologic diagnosis of ES/PNET. Although
metadiaphyseal locations for ES/PNET are most common, this case adds to
previously reported cases of epiphyseal ES/PNET, suggesting that the diagnosis be
considered for pediatric epiphyseal tumors. This case also demonstrates why
following rigorous oncologic treatment algorithms by obtaining a limited trochar 
biopsy, even in the case of a confident radiographic diagnosis, is critically
important; the biopsy results can lead to a major change in treatment and avoid
contamination of a larger area of soft tissue and bone.

Copyright 2013, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 23276342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2012 Dec;11(12):1401-4. doi: 10.1586/erv.12.122.

Vaccination using peptides spanning the SYT-SSX tumor-specific translocation.

Bloom JE(1), McNeel DG, Olson BM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Carbone Cancer Center, 1111 Highland Avenue, Madison, 
WI 53705, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Sci. 2012 Sep;103(9):1625-30.

Evaluation of: Kawaguchi S, Tsukahara T, Ida K et al. SYT-SSX breakpoint peptide 
vaccines in patients with synovial sarcoma: a study from the Japanese
Musculoskeletal Oncology Group. Cancer Sci. 103(9), 1625-1630 (2012). The
identification of genetic translocations as key tumor-initiating events has led
to the development of novel antigen-specific vaccines targeting these
tumor-specific breakpoint regions. Previous studies have evaluated vaccines
targeting the breakpoints in the BCR-ABL translocation in patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia and EWS-FLI1 in patients with Ewing sarcoma. In the article 
under evaluation, the authors evaluated a peptide vaccine targeting the
breakpoint in the SYT-SSX translocation, the genetic translocation essentially
pathognomonic for synovial sarcoma. This is the second small clinical trial
reported by this group using HLA-A24-binding peptides as vaccine antigens. In
this four-arm trial, using a native or HLA-A24-optimized SYT-SSX peptide with or 
without adjuvant plus IFN-a, they immunized patients with metastatic synovial
sarcoma. Immune responses were evaluated by delayed-type hypersensitivity testing
and tetramer analysis. No robust evidence of immune response to the target
epitope was detected. Some patients treated with peptide in adjuvant plus IFN-a
had stable disease. These results suggest that future similar studies might best 
evaluate patients with a lower burden of disease, consider alternative
immunization approaches to the SYT-SSX target antigen and consider the efficacy
of IFN-a alone for the treatment of synovial sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3556272
PMID: 23252384  [PubMed]


304. Leuk Res Treatment. 2012;2012:179402. doi: 10.1155/2012/179402. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Important genes in the pathogenesis of 5q- syndrome and their connection with
ribosomal stress and the innate immune system pathway.

Fuchs O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, U Nemocnice 1, 128 20 Prague 2,
Czech Republic ; Center of Experimental Hematology, First Medical Faculty,
Charles University, Institute of Pathological Physiology, 128 53 Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.

Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with interstitial deletion of a segment of the
long arm of chromosome 5q [del(5q)] is characterized by bone marrow erythroid
hyperplasia, atypical megakaryocytes, thrombocythemia, refractory anemia, and low
risk of progression to acute myeloid leukemia (AML) compared with other types of 
MDS. The long arm of chromosome 5 contains two distinct commonly deleted regions 
(CDRs). The more distal CDR lies in 5q33.1 and contains 40 protein-coding genes
and genes coding microRNAs (miR-143, miR-145). In 5q-syndrome one allele is
deleted that accounts for haploinsufficiency of these genes. The mechanism of
erythroid failure appears to involve the decreased expression of the ribosomal
protein S14 (RPS14) gene and the upregulation of the p53 pathway by ribosomal
stress. Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (Fli1) is one of the target genes of 
miR145. Increased Fli1 expression enables effective megakaryopoiesis in
5q-syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3504201
PMID: 23213547  [PubMed]


305. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049819. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Potential downstream target genes of aberrant ETS transcription factors are
differentially affected in Ewing's sarcoma and prostate carcinoma.

Camões MJ(1), Paulo P, Ribeiro FR, Barros-Silva JD, Almeida M, Costa VL, Cerveira
N, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Henrique R, Jerónimo C, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute-Porto, Porto, Portugal.

FLI1 and ERG, the major ETS transcription factors involved in rearrangements in
the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) and in prostate carcinomas (PCa),
respectively, belong to the same subfamily, having 98% sequence identity in the
DNA binding domain. We therefore decided to investigate whether the aberrant
transcription factors in both malignancies have some common downstream targets.
We crossed a publicly available list of all putative EWSR1-FLI1 target genes in
ESFT with our microarray expression data on 24 PCa and 6 non-malignant prostate
tissues (NPT) and choose four genes among the top-most differentially expressed
between PCa with (PCa ERG+) and without (PCa ETS-) ETS fusion genes (HIST1H4L,
KCNN2, ECRG4 and LDOC1), as well as four well-validated direct targets of the
EWSR1-FLI1 chimeric protein in ESFT (NR0B1, CAV1, IGFBP3 and TGFBR2). Using
quantitative expression analysis in 16 ESFT and seven alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas 
(ARMS), we were able to validate the four genes previously described as direct
targets of the EWSR1-FLI1 oncoprotein, showing overexpression of CAV1 and NR0B1
and underexpression of IGFBP3 and TGFBR2 in ESFT as compared to ARMS. Although
none of these four genes showed significant expression differences between PCa
ERG+ and PCa ETS-, CAV1, IGFBP3 and TGFBR2 were less expressed in PCa in an
independent series of 56 PCa and 15 NPT, as also observed for ECRG4 and LDOC1,
suggesting a role in prostate carcinogenesis in general. On the other hand, we
demonstrate for the first time that both HIST1H4L and KCNN2 are significantly
overexpressed in PCa ERG+ and that ERG binds to the promoter of these genes.
Conversely, KCNN2 was found underexpressed in ESFT relative to ARMS, suggesting
that the EWSR1-ETS oncoprotein may have the opposite effect of ERG rearrangements
in PCa. We conclude that aberrant ETS transcription factors modulate target genes
differently in ESFT and PCa.

PMCID: PMC3501462
PMID: 23185447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Oncogene. 2013 Oct 17;32(42):5089-100. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.525. Epub 2012 Nov
26.

Mechanism and relevance of EWS/FLI-mediated transcriptional repression in Ewing
sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Bell R, Stephens B, Zhuo R, Sharma S, Bearss DJ, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of
Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing sarcoma provides an important model for transcription-factor-mediated
oncogenic transformation because of its reliance on the ETS-type fusion
oncoprotein EWS/FLI. EWS/FLI functions as a transcriptional activator and
transcriptional activation is required for its oncogenic activity. Here, we
demonstrate that a previously less-well characterized transcriptional repressive 
function of the EWS/FLI fusion is also required for the transformed phenotype of 
Ewing sarcoma. Through comparison of EWS/FLI transcriptional profiling and
genome-wide localization data, we define the complement of EWS/FLI direct
downregulated target genes. We demonstrate that LOX is a previously undescribed
EWS/FLI-repressed target that inhibits the transformed phenotype of Ewing sarcoma
cells. Mechanistic studies demonstrate that the NuRD co-repressor complex
interacts with EWS/FLI, and that its associated histone deacetylase and LSD1
activities contribute to the repressive function. Taken together, these data
reveal a previously unknown molecular function for EWS/FLI, demonstrate a more
highly coordinated oncogenic transcriptional hierarchy mediated by EWS/FLI than
previously suspected, and implicate a new paradigm for therapeutic intervention
aimed at controlling NuRD activity in Ewing sarcoma tumors.

PMCID: PMC3899696
PMID: 23178492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2013 Oct;21(5):379-85. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e318273a9e0.

Study of EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement in 18 cases of CK20+/CM2B4+ Merkel cell
carcinoma using FISH and correlation to the differential diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor.

Fernandez-Flores A(1), Suarez-Peñaranda JM, Alonso S.

Author information: 
(1)*Service of Cellular Pathology, Clinica Ponferrada, Ponferrada Service of
Anatomic Pathology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario Santiago de Compostela
Department of Medicine, University of Santiago de Compostela, Galicia
§Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Guadalajara,
Guadalajara, Spain.

Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) and primary cutaneous Ewing sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PCES/PNET) pose a challenging morphologic differential
diagnosis. Approximately 90% of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(PNETs) have a specific translocation, t(11;22) (q24;q12). The EWS-friend
leukemia integration-1 (FLI-1) fusion results in FLI-1 overexpression. EWS/FLI-1 
rearrangement has been suggested as a useful tool in the diagnosis of PCES/PNET. 
In contrast, Merkel cell polyomavirus was found to be an infective agent related 
to the pathogenesis of MCC. Merkel cell polyomavirus can be immunohistochemically
detected with the antibody CM2B4. To the best of our knowledge, there is no case 
of any cytokeratin (CK)20-/CM2B4+ PNET. The goal of our study was to investigate 
whether EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement was present in cases of MCC. We have studied 18
cases of MCC. To make sure that the cases investigated by fluorescent in situ
hybridization were genuine MCC, we considered only CK20+/CM2B4+ cases. Six cases 
met this criterion. EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement was not evidenced in any of the 18
cases (including the 6 "genuine" cases of MCC). Although our findings were
somewhat expected, we think that they fill a gap in the literature: the
confirmation that MCC is devoid of the EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement.

PMID: 23165331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Am J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;138(6):803-10. doi: 10.1309/AJCP3K5VUFALZTKC.

ERG protein expression in human tumors detected with a rabbit monoclonal
antibody.

Yaskiv O(1), Rubin BP, He H, Falzarano S, Magi-Galluzzi C, Zhou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, North Shore Long Island
Jewish Health System, Long Island, NY, USA.

Avian v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog (ERG) is highly sensitive
and specific for endothelial neoplasms and specific for prostate carcinoma. We
characterized a rabbit anti-ERG antibody as an immunohistochemical agent to
detect ERG expression in various tumors using tissue microarrays with a wide
array of epithelial and mesenchymal tumors. ERG was positive in 63 (38%) of 168
prostate carcinomas and negative in all other epithelial tumors. ERG was positive
in all 125 vascular lesions. It was also positive in the sarcomatoid component of
a high-grade urothelial carcinoma and 6 (40%) of 15 meningiomas. Twelve (80%) of 
15 meningiomas were positive for Fli1, including all 6 ERG-positive cases.
Positive immunostaining with this antibody is therefore highly specific for
prostate carcinoma and vascular lesions, with a few caveats. ERG is rarely
detected in nonvascular mesenchymal tumors with this antibody. Furthermore, about
40% of meningiomas are also positive for ERG immunohistochemically, probably
because of cross-reactivity with Fli1.

PMID: 23161713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. BMC Cancer. 2012 Nov 12;12:513. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-513.

Junction region of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein has a dominant negative effect in
Ewing's sarcoma in vitro.

Jully B(1), Vijayalakshmi R, Gopal G, Sabitha K, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (WIA), 38, Sardar Patel
Road, Chennai, 600036, India.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma is a malignancy characterized by a specific 11:22
chromosomal translocation which generates a novel EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
functioning as an aberrant transcription factor. In the present study, we have
further characterized the junction region of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein.
METHODS: In-silico model of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein was analysed for ligand
binding sites, and a putative region (amino acid (aa) 251-343 of the type 1
fusion protein) in the vicinity of the fusion junction was cloned and expressed
using bacterial expression. The recombinant protein was characterized by Circular
Dichroism (CD). We then expressed aa 251-280 ectopically in Ewing's sarcoma
cell-line and its effect on cell proliferation, tumorigenicity and expression of 
EWS-FLI1 target genes were analysed.
RESULTS: Our modelling analysis indicated that Junction region (aa 251-343)
encompasses potential ligand biding sites in the EWS-FLI1 protein and when
expressed in bacteria was present as soluble form. Ectopically expressing this
region in Ewing's sarcoma cells inhibited tumorigenicity, and EWS-FLI1 target
genes indicating a dominant negative biological effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Junction region can be exploited further as target for drug
development in future to specifically target EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's Sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3519708
PMID: 23145994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 Feb;14(2):75-80. doi: 10.4161/cbt.22635. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Adult primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor: molecular features and
translational opportunities.

Andrei M(1), Cramer SF, Kramer ZB, Zeidan A, Faltas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, NY
USA. mirela.andrei@rochestergeneral.org

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) arising directly from the lung are very
rare but particularly aggressive neoplasms. We report a case of a 31-y-old man
with primary pulmonary neuroectodermal tumor. We review the clinical as well as
pathological features. As typical for these tumors, the diagnosis was initially
delayed in our patient and prognosis was poor despite aggressive surgical
resection, postoperative chemotherapy and local irradiation. Recent biological
insights have revealed unique chromosomal translocations crucial to the
pathogenesis of these tumors, most notably the EWS-FLI-1 translocation. We
provide an overview of the molecular features of the Ewing Sarcoma Family of
Tumors (ESFT) including PNET and their potential implications for therapeutic
targeting.

PMCID: PMC3572002
PMID: 23114712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Urol Int. 2013;90(2):174-8. doi: 10.1159/000342647. Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: a single-institute series of six
patients from China.

Huang J(1), Zhang J, Dong B, Chen Y, Kong W, Liu Q, Xue W, Liu D, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Renal primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a rare and highly
malignant neoplasm. Our study aims to present the clinical findings and prognosis
of 6 patients with renal PNET from China.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: From January 2003 to February 2012, 6 patients with renal
PNET confirmed by immunohistochemical staining and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) treated in our institution were reviewed retrospectively and
our data compared with the literature.
RESULTS: There were 4 male and 2 female patients with a mean age of 35.0 years.
The mean diameter was 13.3 cm. Five of the masses had renal vein thrombosis, and 
3 extended into the inferior vena cava. A lymph node metastasis was detected in 1
patient and a liver metastasis in another patient. Radical nephrectomy was
performed in all cases, with 5 patients following chemotherapy and 1 receiving
Sutent treatment. Within a median follow-up of 7.5 months (range 1-71), median
overall survival was 22.1 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of renal PNET should be considered in young patients
presenting with renal mass and venous thrombosis. It seems that Asian renal PNET 
patients had a higher rate of venous thrombosis than Caucasian populations. CD99 
positivity on immunohistochemistry and EWS-FL1 chimera gene detected by FISH
support the diagnosis. The prognosis is poor despite multimodal treatment.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23108259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Clin Immunol. 2012 Dec;145(3):201-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.09.006. Epub 2012
Sep 28.

Fli-1 transcription factor affects glomerulonephritis development by regulating
expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in endothelial cells in the
kidney.

Suzuki E(1), Karam E, Williams S, Watson DK, Gilkeson G, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Expression of transcription factor Fli-1 is implicated in the development of
glomerulonephritis. Fli-1 heterozygous knockout (Fli1(+/-)) NZM2410 mice, a
murine model of lupus, had significantly improved survival and reduced
glomerulonephritis. In this study, we found that infiltrated inflammatory cells
were significantly decreased in the kidneys from Fli-1(+/-) NZM2410 mice. The
expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) was significantly
decreased in kidneys from Fli-1(+/-) NZM2410 mice. The primary endothelial cells 
isolated from the kidneys of Fli-1(+/-) NZM2410 mice produced significantly less 
MCP-1. In endothelial cells transfected with specific Fli-1 siRNA the production 
of MCP-1 was significantly reduced compared to cells transfected with negative
control siRNA. By Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay, we further
demonstrated that Fli-1 directly binds to the promoter of the MCP-1 gene. Our
data indicate that Fli-1 impacts glomerulonephritis development by regulating
expression of inflammatory chemokine MCP-1 and inflammatory cell infiltration in 
the kidneys in the NZM2410 mice.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3501541
PMID: 23108091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Nov;136(11):1329; author reply 1330. doi:
10.5858/arpa.2012-0153-LE.

CD31 immunohistochemical staining in Kaposi Sarcoma.

Pantanowitz L, Moses AV, Früh K.

Comment on
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Mar;136(3):301-4.

PMID: 23106575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Feb;137(2):216-24. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.10.004.
Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Prospects and challenges for the development of new therapies for Ewing sarcoma.

Grohar PJ(1), Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and the
Monroe Carrell Junior Children's Hospital, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, 2220 
Pierce Ave, PRB 397, Nashville, TN 37232-6310, USA. patrick.grohar@vanderbilt.edu

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors or Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most
common malignant bone tumor of childhood. The prognosis for localized Ewing
sarcoma has improved through the development of intense multimodal therapy over
the past several decades. Unfortunately, patients with recurrent or metastatic
disease continue to have a poor prognosis. Therefore, a number of complementary
approaches are being developed in both the preclinical and clinical arenas to
improve these outcomes. In this review, we will discuss efforts to directly
target the biologic drivers of this disease and relate these efforts to the
experience with several different agents both in the clinic and under
development. We will review the data for compounds that have shown excellent
activity in the clinic, such as the camptothecins, and summarize the biological
data that supports this activity. In addition, we will review the clinical
experience with IGF1 targeted agents, ET-743 and epigenetically targeted
therapies, the substantial amount of literature that supports their activity in
Ewing sarcoma and the challenges remaining translating these therapies to the
clinic. Finally, we will highlight recent work aimed at directly targeting the
EWS-FLI1 transcription factor with small molecules in Ewing tumors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cell. 2012 Oct 26;151(3):559-75. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.032. Epub 2012 Oct
18.

Efficient direct reprogramming of mature amniotic cells into endothelial cells by
ETS factors and TGFß suppression.

Ginsberg M(1), James D, Ding BS, Nolan D, Geng F, Butler JM, Schachterle W,
Pulijaal VR, Mathew S, Chasen ST, Xiang J, Rosenwaks Z, Shido K, Elemento O,
Rabbany SY, Rafii S.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ansary Stem Cell Institute, Department of
Genetic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, 10065, USA.

ETS transcription factors ETV2, FLI1, and ERG1 specify pluripotent stem cells
into induced vascular endothelial cells (iVECs). However, iVECs are unstable and 
drift toward nonvascular cells. We show that human midgestation c-Kit(-)
lineage-committed amniotic cells (ACs) can be reprogrammed into vascular
endothelial cells (rAC-VECs) without transitioning through a pluripotent state.
Transient ETV2 expression in ACs generates immature rAC-VECs, whereas
coexpression with FLI1/ERG1 endows rAC-VECs with a vascular repertoire and
morphology matching mature endothelial cells (ECs). Brief TGFß-inhibition
functionalizes VEGFR2 signaling, augmenting specification of ACs into rAC-VECs.
Genome-wide transcriptional analyses showed that rAC-VECs are similar to adult
ECs in which vascular-specific genes are expressed and nonvascular genes are
silenced. Functionally, rAC-VECs form stable vasculature in Matrigel plugs and
regenerating livers. Therefore, short-term ETV2 expression and TGFß inhibition
with constitutive ERG1/FLI1 coexpression reprogram mature ACs into durable
rAC-VECs with clinical-scale expansion potential. Banking of HLA-typed rAC-VECs
establishes a vascular inventory for treatment of diverse disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3507451
PMID: 23084400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. EMBO J. 2012 Nov 14;31(22):4318-33. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.275. Epub 2012 Oct
12.

RUNX1 reshapes the epigenetic landscape at the onset of haematopoiesis.

Lichtinger M(1), Ingram R, Hannah R, Müller D, Clarke D, Assi SA, Lie-A-Ling M,
Noailles L, Vijayabaskar MS, Wu M, Tenen DG, Westhead DR, Kouskoff V, Lacaud G,
Göttgens B, Bonifer C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Experimental Haematology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.

Cell fate decisions during haematopoiesis are governed by lineage-specific
transcription factors, such as RUNX1, SCL/TAL1, FLI1 and C/EBP family members. To
gain insight into how these transcription factors regulate the activation of
haematopoietic genes during embryonic development, we measured the genome-wide
dynamics of transcription factor assembly on their target genes during the
RUNX1-dependent transition from haemogenic endothelium (HE) to haematopoietic
progenitors. Using a Runx1-/- embryonic stem cell differentiation model
expressing an inducible Runx1 gene, we show that in the absence of RUNX1,
haematopoietic genes bind SCL/TAL1, FLI1 and C/EBPß and that this early priming
is required for correct temporal expression of the myeloid master regulator PU.1 
and its downstream targets. After induction, RUNX1 binds to numerous de novo
sites, initiating a local increase in histone acetylation and rapid global
alterations in the binding patterns of SCL/TAL1 and FLI1. The acquisition of
haematopoietic fate controlled by Runx1 therefore does not represent the
establishment of a new regulatory layer on top of a pre-existing HE program but
instead entails global reorganization of lineage-specific transcription factor
assemblies.

PMCID: PMC3501222
PMID: 23064151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46799. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046799. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Spi-1, Fli-1 and Fli-3 (miR-17-92) oncogenes contribute to a single oncogenic
network controlling cell proliferation in friend erythroleukemia.

Kayali S(1), Giraud G, Morlé F, Guyot B.

Author information: 
(1)CGPhiMC, CNRS UMR5534, Université Claude Bernard Lyon1, Lyon, France.

Clonal erythroleukemia developing in susceptible mice infected by Friend virus
complex are associated with highly recurrent proviral insertions at one of three 
loci called Spi-1, Fli-1 or Fli-3, leading to deregulated expression of oncogenic
Spi-1 or Fli-1 transcription factors or miR-17-92 miRNA cluster, respectively.
Deregulated expression of each of these three oncogenes has been independently
shown to contribute to cell proliferation of erythroleukemic clones. Previous
studies showed a close relationship between Spi-1 and Fli-1, which belong to the 
same ETS family, Spi-1 activating fli-1 gene, and both Spi-1 and Fli-1 activating
multiple common target genes involved in ribosome biogenesis. In this study, we
demonstrated that Spi-1 and Fli-1 are also involved in direct miR-17-92
transcriptional activation through their binding to a conserved ETS binding site 
in its promoter. Moreover, we demonstrated that physiological re-expression of
exogenous miR-17 and miR-20a are able to partially rescue the proliferation loss 
induced by Fli-1 knock-down and identified HBP1 as a target of these miRNA in
erythroleukemic cells. These results establish that three of the most recurrently
activated oncogenes in Friend erythroleukemia are actually involved in a same
oncogenic network controlling cell proliferation. The putative contribution of a 
similar ETS-miR-17-92 network module in other normal or pathological
proliferative contexts is discussed.

PMCID: PMC3466182
PMID: 23056458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Dec;30(6):1473-80. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1150. Epub 2012 Oct
5.

Ciprofloxacin has antifibrotic effects in scleroderma fibroblasts via
downregulation of Dnmt1 and upregulation of Fli1.

Bujor AM(1), Haines P, Padilla C, Christmann RB, Junie M, Sampaio-Barros PD,
Lafyatis R, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Rheumatology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
MA 02118, USA. andabujor@yahoo.com

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by fibrosis of the skin and internal
organs. The present study was undertaken to examine the effects of ciprofloxacin,
a fluoroquinolone antibiotic implicated in matrix remodeling, on dermal and lung 
fibroblasts obtained from SSc patients. Dermal and lung fibroblasts from SSc
patients and healthy subjects were treated with ciprofloxacin. Western blotting
was used to analyze protein levels and RT-PCR was used to measure mRNA
expression. The pharmacologic inhibitor UO126 was used to block Erk1/2 signaling.
SSc dermal fibroblasts demonstrated a significant decrease in collagen type I
mRNA and protein levels after antibiotic treatment, while healthy dermal
fibroblasts were less sensitive to ciprofloxacin, downregulating collagen only at
the protein levels. Connective tissue growth factor (CCN2) gene expression was
significantly reduced and matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) levels were enhanced 
after ciprofloxacin treatment to a similar extent in healthy and SSc fibroblasts.
Ciprofloxacin induced Erk1/2 phosphorylation, and Erk1/2 blockade completely
prevented MMP1 upregulation. However, Smad1 and Smad3 activation in response to
TGFß was not affected. The expression of friend leukemia integration factor 1
(Fli1), a transcriptional repressor of collagen, was increased after treatment
with ciprofloxacin only in SSc fibroblasts, and this was accompanied by a
decrease in the levels of DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1). Similar effects were
observed in SSc-interstitial lung disease (ILD) lung fibroblasts. In summary, our
study demonstrates that ciprofloxacin has antifibrotic actions in SSc dermal and 
lung fibroblasts via the downregulation of Dnmt1, the upregulation of Fli1 and
induction of MMP1 gene expression via an Erk1/2-dependent mechanism. Thus, our
data suggest that ciprofloxacin may be an attractive therapy for SSc skin and
lung fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4035782
PMID: 23041765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Jan;26(1):97-112. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12031. Epub
2012 Nov 6.

Identification of unique sensitizing targets for anti-inflammatory CDDO-Me in
metastatic melanoma by a large-scale synthetic lethal RNAi screening.

Qin Y(1), Deng W, Ekmekcioglu S, Grimm EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Melanoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

CDDO-Me has been shown to exert potent anti-inflammatory activity for chronic
kidney disease and antitumor activity for several tumors, including melanoma, in 
early clinical trials. To improve CDDO-Me response in melanoma, we utilized a
large-scale synthetic lethal RNAi screen targeting 6000 human druggable genes to 
identify targets that would sensitize melanoma cells to CDDO-Me. Based on
screening results, five unique genes (GNPAT, SUMO1, SPINT2, FLI1, and SSX1)
significantly potentiated the growth inhibitory effects of CDDO-Me and induced
apoptosis in A375, a BRAF mutated melanoma line (P < 0.001). These five genes
were then individually validated as targets to potentiate CDDO-Me activity, and
related downstream signaling pathways of these genes were analyzed. In addition, 
the levels of phosphorylated Erk1/2, Akt, GSK-2, and PRAS40 were dramatically
decreased by downregulating each of these five genes separately, suggesting a set
of common mediators. Our findings indicate that GNPAT, SUMO1, SPINT2, FLI1, and
SSX1 play critical roles in synergy with inflammation pathways in modulating
melanoma cell survival and could serve as sensitizing targets to enhance CDDO-Me 
efficacy in melanoma growth control.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3919534
PMID: 23020131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Jan 1;319(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.09.003. Epub 2012
Sep 24.

Valosin containing protein (VCP/p97) is a novel substrate for the protein
tyrosine phosphatase PTPL1.

Abaan OD(1), Hendriks W, Uren A, Toretsky JA, Erkizan HV.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology and Pediatrics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Georgetown University, Washington, DC 20057, USA. oda@georgetown.edu

Identification of Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase (PTP) substrates is critical in
understanding cellular role in normal cells as well as cancer cells. We have
previously shown that reduction of PTPL1 protein levels in Ewings sarcoma (ES)
inhibit cell growth and tumorigenesis. Therefore, we sought to identify novel
PTPL1 substrates that may be important for tumorigenesis. In this current work,
we demonstrated that mouse embryonic fibroblasts without PTPL1 catalytic activity
fail to form foci when transfected with oncogenes. We proved that catalytic
activity of PTPL1 is important for ES cell growth. Using a substrate-trapping
mutant of PTPL1 we identified putative PTPL1 substrates by mass-spectrometry. One
of these putative substrates was characterized as Valosin Containing Protein
(VCP/p97). Using multiple biochemical assays we validated VCP as a novel
substrate of PTPL1. We also provide evidence that tyrosine phosphorylation of VCP
might be important for its midbody localization during cytokinesis. In
conclusion, our work identifies VCP as a new substrate for PTPL1, which may be
important in cellular transformation. Our investigation link an oncogenic
transcription factor EWS-FLI1, with a key transcriptional target protein tyrosine
phosphatase PTPL1, and its substrate VCP. Given our observation that PTPL1
catalytic activity is important for cell transformation, our results may also
suggest that VCP regulation by PTPL1 might be important for tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3638858
PMID: 23018179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Dec;65(12):1112-8. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201154. Epub
2012 Sep 26.

Utilisation of fluorescent multiplex PCR and laser-induced capillary
electrophoresis for the diagnosis of Ewing family of tumours in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissues.

Patócs B(1), Németh K, Garami M, Arató G, Kovalszky I, Szendroi M, Fekete G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Paediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
barbarapatocs@gmail.com

AIMS: The localisation of the translocation breakpoint of the Ewing sarcoma
family of tumours shows significant variability on relatively large regions of
fusion partner genes. As a consequence, many alternative forms of EWSR1-ETS
translocation exist which make the RNA-based molecular diagnostics of Ewing
sarcoma family of tumours complicated. In addition to the heterogeneity of fusion
transcripts, the degradation of RNA also presents a significant difficulty in the
molecular analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. Our aim
was to establish a sensitive method which is able to identify all combinatorially
possible EWSR1-FLI1 and EWSR1-ERG translocation transcripts in FFPE tissue
samples despite significant RNA-degradation.
METHODS: The combination of fluorescent multiplex PCR with laser-induced
capillary electrophoresis was used to detect and identify EWSR1-FLI1 and
EWSR1-ERG chimeric transcripts on the basis of amplicon size, and forward primers
labelled by distinct fluorophores.
RESULTS: Using this method, we processed 60 FFPE samples of Ewing sarcoma family 
of tumours, and identified six types EWSR1-FLI1 and one type EWSR1-ERG chimeric
transcripts acceptable for RT-PCR analysis in 27 out of 45 samples. This result
shows 60% sensitivity for detecting the most frequent Ewing family of tumour
(EFT)-related fusion transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: The utilisation of fluorescent multiplex PCR and laser-induced
fluorescent capillary electrophoresis is effective for the diagnosis of EFT in
FFPE tissue, and after the defined modifications it can offer a sensitive method 
to overcome the diagnostic difficulties connected with heterogeneity of the
variant translocations in EFT.

PMID: 23015660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 12;427(1):223-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.064. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Cautious use of fli1a:EGFP transgenic zebrafish in vascular research.

Liu Z(1), Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Integration of exogenous sequence into an intact genome may cause some artificial
phenotype or unspecific observations. We noticed that there is unspecific
vascular expression when using fli1a:EGFP transgenic embryos for whole-mount in
situ hybridization (WISH) experiments. We therefore tested whether the residual
vector sequence contained in the fli1a:EGFP transgene or the integration of
transgene into the genome may cause this expression 'noise' and/or deregulation
of gene expression at a genome-wide level. RNA probes were synthesized using two 
different methods, i.e. vector-based and PCR-based. The vector-based dnmt3 probe 
showed unspecific vascular expression in fli1a:EGFP embryos, but not in wildtype 
embryos, by WISH. Moreover, we also found that compared to that in wildtype,
there were alterations in gene expression at whole-genome level in the fli1a:EGFP
embryos. Our finding that the vector sequence contained in the fli1a:EGFP genome 
causes unspecific vascular expression by WISH and the genome-wide expression
profiling is altered in fli1a:EGFP embryos strongly argue that extra caution
should be taken for data interpretation when using transgenics, such as
fli1a:EGFP, in developmental biology studies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22995292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 15;32(33):3915-21.

MiR-30a-5p connects EWS-FLI1 and CD99, two major therapeutic targets in Ewing
tumor.

Franzetti GA(1), Laud-Duval K, Bellanger D, Stern MH, Sastre-Garau X, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U830, Génétique et Biologie des cancers, Institut Curie, Centre de
recherche, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is a pediatric bone tumor characterized in 85% of cases by the
fusion between EWS and FLI1 genes that results in the expression of the EWS-FLI1 
aberrant transcription factor. Histologically, the Ewing tumor expresses high
levels of the CD99 membrane glycoprotein. It has been recently described that
CD99 expression contributes to the Ewing tumor oncogenesis by modulating growth
and differentiation of tumor cells. Different studies have also shown that
overexpression of EWS-FLI1 induces CD99 expression in non-Ewing cells. At the
opposite, the knockdown of EWS-FLI1 expression by siRNA approaches has no
significant effect on CD99 mRNA level in Ewing cells. Here, by in vivo and in
vitro studies, we show that while EWS-FLI1 inhibition has only slight effects on 
the amount of CD99 transcript, it induces a dramatic decrease of the CD99 protein
expression level, hence suggesting post-transcriptional regulations, possibly
mediated by microRNAs. To further investigate this issue, we identified a set of 
91 miRNAs that demonstrate EWS-FLI1 modulation, three of them being predicted to 
bind CD99 3' untranslated region (30'UTR). Among these, we show that miR-30a-5p
has the ability to interact with the 30'UTR region of CD99 and to regulate its
expression. Moreover, the re-expression of miRNA-30a-5p in Ewing cell line
induces decreased cell proliferation and invasion. In this study, we therefore
show that miR-30a-5p constitutes a major functional link between EWS-FLI1 and
CD99, two critical biomarkers and therapeutic targets in Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 22986530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):4038-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-429050. Epub 2012
Sep 14.

ERG and FLI1 binding sites demarcate targets for aberrant epigenetic regulation
by AML1-ETO in acute myeloid leukemia.

Martens JH(1), Mandoli A, Simmer F, Wierenga BJ, Saeed S, Singh AA, Altucci L,
Vellenga E, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University, Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science,
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

ERG and FLI1 are closely related members of the ETS family of transcription
factors and have been identified as essential factors for the function and
maintenance of normal hematopoietic stem cells. Here genome-wide analysis
revealed that both ERG and FLI1 occupy similar genomic regions as AML1-ETO in
t(8;21) AMLs and identified ERG/FLI1 as proteins that facilitate binding of
oncofusion protein complexes. In addition, we demonstrate that ERG and FLI1 bind 
the RUNX1 promoter and that shRNA-mediated silencing of ERG leads to reduced
expression of RUNX1 and AML1-ETO, consistent with a role of ERG in
transcriptional activation of these proteins. Finally, we identify H3 acetylation
as the epigenetic mark preferentially associated with ETS factor binding. This
intimate connection between ERG/FLI1 binding and H3 acetylation implies that one 
of the molecular strategies of oncofusion proteins, such as AML1-ETO and
PML-RAR-a, involves the targeting of histone deacetylase activities to ERG/FLI1
bound hematopoietic regulatory sites. Together, these results highlight the dual 
importance of ETS factors in t(8;21) leukemogenesis, both as transcriptional
regulators of the oncofusion protein itself as well as proteins that facilitate
AML1-ETO binding.

PMCID: PMC3496958
PMID: 22983443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Am J Pathol. 2012 Nov;181(5):1782-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.023. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

Oncostatin M is a growth factor for Ewing sarcoma.

David E(1), Tirode F, Baud'huin M, Guihard P, Laud K, Delattre O, Heymann MF,
Heymann D, Redini F, Blanchard F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR, Ligue Team 2012, Nantes, France.

Primary bone tumors, osteosarcomas and chondrosarcomas, derive from mesenchymal
stem cells committed into osteoblasts and chondrocytes; in Ewing sarcomas (ESs), 
the oncogenic fusion protein EWS-FLI1 prevents mesenchymal differentiation and
induces neuroectodermic features. Oncostatin M (OSM) is a cytokine from the IL-6 
family that modulates proliferation and differentiation in numerous cells. The
basis for inhibition versus induction of proliferation by this cytokine is
obscure, although MYC was described as a potent molecular switch in OSM
signaling. We show herein that, in contrast to osteosarcomas and chondrosarcomas,
for which OSM was cytostatic, OSM induced proliferation of ES cell lines.
Knockdown experiments demonstrated that growth induction by OSM depends on both
types I [leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR)] and II [OSM receptor (OSMR)]
receptors, high STAT3 activation, and induction of MYC to a high expression
level. Indeed, ES cell lines, mice xenografts, and patient biopsy specimens
poorly expressed LIF, precluding LIFR lysosomal degradation and OSMR
transcriptional induction, thus leading to a high LIFR/OSMR ratio. Because other 
neuroectodermic tumors (ie, glioma, medulloblastoma, and neuroblastoma) had a
similar expression profile, the main role of EWS-FLI1 could be through
maintenance of stemness and neuroectodermic features, characterized by a low LIF,
a high LIFR/OSMR ratio, and high MYC expression. Thus, this study on rare bone
malignancies gives valuable insights on more common cancer regulatory mechanisms 
and could provide new therapeutic opportunities.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Front Oncol. 2012 Sep 7;2:107. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00107. eCollection 2012.

Acetylation Increases EWS-FLI1 DNA Binding and Transcriptional Activity.

Schlottmann S(1), Erkizan HV, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Knights C, Cheema A, Uren A,
Avantaggiati ML, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Washington, DC,
USA.

Ewing Sarcoma (ES) is associated with a balanced chromosomal translocation that
in most cases leads to the expression of the oncogenic fusion protein and
transcription factor EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 has been shown to be crucial for ES cell 
survival and tumor growth. However, its regulation is still enigmatic. To date,
no functionally significant post-translational modifications of EWS-FLI1 have
been shown. Since ES are sensitive to histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDI), and
these inhibitors are advancing in clinical trials, we sought to identify if
EWS-FLI1 is directly acetylated. We convincingly show acetylation of the
C-terminal FLI1 (FLI1-CTD) domain, which is the DNA binding domain of EWS-FLI1.
In vitro acetylation studies showed that acetylated FLI1-CTD has higher DNA
binding activity than the non-acetylated protein. Over-expression of PCAF or
treatment with HDI increased the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1, when
co-expressed in Cos7 cells. However, our data that evaluates the acetylation of
full-length EWS-FLI1 in ES cells remains unclear, despite creating acetylation
specific antibodies to four potential acetylation sites. We conclude that
EWS-FLI1 may either gain access to chromatin as a result of histone acetylation
or undergo regulation by direct acetylation. These data should be considered when
patients are treated with HDAC inhibitors. Further investigation of this
phenomenon will reveal if this potential acetylation has an impact on tumor
response.

PMCID: PMC3435532
PMID: 22973553  [PubMed]


327. Ann Hematol. 2013 Jan;92(1):11-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1568-1. Epub 2012 Sep
11.

Transcription factors Fli1 and EKLF in the differentiation of megakaryocytic and 
erythroid progenitor in 5q- syndrome and in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.

Neuwirtova R(1), Fuchs O, Holicka M, Vostry M, Kostecka A, Hajkova H, Jonasova A,
Cermak J, Cmejla R, Pospisilova D, Belickova M, Siskova M, Hochova I, Vondrakova 
J, Sponerova D, Kadlckova E, Novakova L, Brezinova J, Michalova K.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Medicine, Department of Hematology, General University
Hospital, U Nemocnice 2, Prague 2, 128 00, Czech Republic.
neuwirtova.radana@vfn.cz

Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (Fli1) and erythroid Krüppel-like factor
(EKLF) participate under experimental conditions in the differentiation of
megakaryocytic and erythroid progenitor in cooperation with other transcription
factors, cytokines, cytokine receptors, and microRNAs. Defective erythropoiesis
with refractory anemia and effective megakaryopoiesis with normal or increased
platelet count is typical for 5q- syndrome. We decided to evaluate the roles of
EKLF and Fli1 in the pathogenesis of this syndrome and of another ribosomopathy, 
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA). Fli1 and EKLF mRNA levels were examined in
mononuclear blood and bone marrow cells from patients with 5q- syndrome, low-risk
MDS patients with normal chromosome 5, DBA patients, and healthy controls. In 5q-
syndrome, high Fli1 mRNA levels in the blood and bone marrow mononuclear cells
were found. In DBA, Fli1 expression did not differ from the controls. EKLF mRNA
level was significantly decreased in the blood and bone marrow of 5q- syndrome
and in all DBA patients. We propose that the elevated Fli1 in 5q- syndrome
protects megakaryocytic cells from ribosomal stress contrary to erythroid cells
and contributes to effective though dysplastic megakaryopoiesis.

PMID: 22965552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 1;72(17):4494-503. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Targeting the EWSR1-FLI1 oncogene-induced protein kinase PKC-ß abolishes ewing
sarcoma growth.

Surdez D(1), Benetkiewicz M, Perrin V, Han ZY, Pierron G, Ballet S, Lamoureux F, 
Rédini F, Decouvelaere AV, Daudigeos-Dubus E, Geoerger B, de Pinieux G, Delattre 
O, Tirode F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, INSERM U830, Unité de Génétique et Biologie des Cancers,
Institut Curie, Unité de génétique somatique, Paris, France.

Ewing sarcoma is a rare but aggressive disease most common in young adults. This 
cancer is driven by a unique chimeric fusion oncogene but targeted strategies
have been elusive. Here we report the identification of the protein kinase PKC-ß 
(PRKCB) as a disease-specific druggable target for treatment of Ewing sarcoma. We
found that transcriptional activation of PRKCB was directly regulated by the
chimeric fusion oncogene EWSR1-FLI1 that drives this cancer. PRKCB phosphorylated
histone H3T6 to permit global maintenance of H3K4 trimethylation at a variety of 
gene promoters. PRKCB loss induced apoptosis in vitro and prevented tumor growth 
in vivo. Gene expression profiling revealed a strong overlap between genes
modulated by EWSR1-FLI1 and PRKCB in regulating crucial signaling pathways. Taken
together, our findings offer a preclinical proof-of-concept for PRKCB as a
promising therapeutic target in Ewing sarcoma.

©2012 AACR.

PMID: 22930730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Gene. 2012 Nov 10;509(2):263-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.012. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

Ewing's sarcoma: analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism in the EWS gene.

Silva DS(1), Sawitzki FR, De Toni EC, Graebin P, Picanco JB, Abujamra AL, de
Farias CB, Roesler R, Brunetto AL, Alho CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Human Genetics, Faculty of Biosciences, PUCRS,
90619-900, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

We aimed to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the EWS gene
breaking region in order to analyze Ewing's sarcoma susceptibility. The SNPs were
investigated in a healthy subject population and in Ewing's sarcoma patients from
Southern Brazil. Genotyping was performed by TaqMan® assay for allelic
discrimination using Real-Time PCR. The analysis of incidence of SNPs or
different SNP-arrangements revealed a higher presence of homozygote TT-rs4820804 
in Ewing's sarcoma patients (p=0.02; Chi Square Test). About 300 bp from the
rs4820804 SNP lies a palindromic hexamer (5'-GCTAGC-3') and three nucleotides
(GTC), which were previously identified to be in close vicinity of the breakpoint
junction in both EWS and FLI1 genes. This DNA segment surrounding the rs4820804
SNP is likely to indicate a breakpoint region. If the T-rs4820804 allele
predisposes a DNA fragment to breakage, homozygotes (TT-rs4820804) would have
double the chance of having a chromosome break, increasing the chances for a
translocation to occur. In conclusion, the TT-rs4820804 EWS genotype can be
associated with Ewing's sarcoma and the SNP rs4820804 can be a candidate marker
to understand Ewing's sarcoma susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Eur Spine J. 2013 May;22 Suppl 3:S373-9. doi: 10.1007/s00586-012-2481-y. Epub
2012 Aug 21.

Ewing sarcoma of the thoracic epidural space in a young child.

Kobayashi S(1), Takahashi J, Sakashita K, Fukushima M, Kato H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Shinshu University,
3-1-1 Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano, 390-8621, Japan.

PURPOSE: To report on the clinical course and treatment of Ewing sarcoma of the
thoracic epidural space in a 5-year-old girl.
METHODS: We present the case of a 5-year-old girl who experienced back pain (day 
1); on day 10, the pain had exacerbated and involuntary movements in the lower
limbs occurred, and an MRI performed in her local hospital revealed a tumor
lesion at the upper thoracic level.
RESULTS: On day 13, emergency surgery was performed for partial resection of the 
tumor. Pathological examination of the resected tumor by immunostaining and gene 
testing revealed that it was MIC2 positive and an EWS-FLI 1 chimera,
respectively, and Ewing sarcoma was diagnosed. The involuntary movements resolved
immediately after the surgery. Three weeks after the operation, chemotherapy and 
radiation therapy were commenced. After 5 months, deep tendon reflexes recovered 
to normal. MRI showed that the tumor has not recurred at 29 months after surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of epidural patients undergo emergency surgery only
after symptom exacerbation, which includes the development of neurological
deficits. Thus, preoperative diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma of the epidural space is 
difficult and diagnosis is frequently made by a post-operative gene test. The
resection area is limited to the intralesional margin area because a larger
resection is difficult due to the characteristics of the affected region; thus,
there is a higher possibility of recurrence and careful follow-up of the case is 
necessary.

PMCID: PMC3641242
PMID: 22907727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Pharmacol Ther. 2012 Nov;136(2):153-68. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2012.08.004.
Epub 2012 Aug 11.

Prevailing importance of the hedgehog signaling pathway and the potential for
treatment advancement in sarcoma.

Kelleher FC(1), Cain JE, Healy JM, Watkins DN, Thomas DM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Service, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 12 St. Andrew's Place,
A'Beckitt Street, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. fergalkelleher@hotmail.com

The hedgehog signaling pathway is important in embryogenesis and post natal
development. Constitutive activation of the pathway due to mutation of pathway
components occurs in ~25% of medulloblastomas and also in basal cell carcinomas. 
In many other malignancies the therapeutic role for hedgehog inhibition though
intriguing, based on preclinical data, is far from assured. Hedgehog inhibition
is not an established part of the treatment paradigm of sarcoma but the
scientific rationale for a possible benefit is compelling. In chondrosarcoma
there is evidence of hedgehog pathway activation and an ontologic comparison
between growth plate chondrocyte differentiation and different chondrosarcoma
subtypes. Immunostaining epiphyseal growth plate for Indian hedgehog is
particularly positive in the zone of pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes which
correlates ontologically with conventional chondrosarcoma. In Ewing sarcoma/PNET 
tumors the Gli1 transcription factor is a direct target of the EWS-FLI1
oncoprotein present in 85% of cases. In many cases of rhabdomyosarcomas there is 
increased expression of Gli1 (Ragazzini et al., 2004). Additionally, a third of
embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas have loss of Chr.9q22 that encompasses the patched
locus (Bridge et al., 2000). The potential to treat osteosarcoma by inhibition of
Gli2 and the role of the pathway in ovarian fibromas and other connective tissue 
tumors is also discussed (Nagao et al., 2011; Hirotsu et al., 2010). Emergence of
acquired secondary resistance to targeted therapeutics is an important issue that
is also relevant to hedgehog inhibition. In this context secondary resistance of 
medulloblastomas to treatment with a smoothened antagonist in two tumor mouse
models is examined.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Nov;6(5):961-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.1034. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Transcriptional regulatory networks in human lung adenocarcinoma.

Meng X(1), Lu P, Bai H, Xiao P, Fan Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, PR China.

Lung adenocarcinoma (AC) is the most common histological subtype of lung cancer
worldwide and its absolute incidence is increasing markedly. Transcriptional
regulation is one of the most fundamental processes in lung AC development.
However, high-throughput functional analyses of multiple transcription factors
and their target genes in lung AC are rare. Thus, the objective of our study was 
to interpret the mechanisms of human AC through the regulatory network using the 
GSE2514 microarray data. Our results identified the genes peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPARG), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (CEBPB), ets
variant 4 (ETV4), Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1), T-cell acute
lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1) and nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene 
enhancer in B-cells 1 (NFKB1) as hub nodes in the transcriptome network. Among
these genes, it appears that: PPARG promotes the PPAR signaling pathway via the
upregulation of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) expression, but suppresses the cell
cycle pathway via downregulation of growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, <U+03B3>
(GADD45G) expression; ETV4 stimulates matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) expression
to induce the bladder cancer pathway; FLI upregulates transforming growth factor,
ß receptor II (TGFBR2) expression to activate TGF-ß signaling and upregulates
cyclin D3 (CCND3) expression to promote the cell cycle pathway; NFKB1 upregulates
interleukin 1, ß (IL-1B) expression and initiates the prostate cancer pathway;
CEBPB upregulates IL-6 expression and promotes pathways in cancer; and TAL1
promotes kinase insert domain receptor (KDR) expression to promote the TGF-ß
signaling pathway. This transcriptional regulation analysis may provide an
improved understanding of the molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic
targets in the treatment of lung AC.

PMID: 22895549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2545-50. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35537. Epub 2012
Aug 7.

SNP array and phenotype correlation shows that FLI1 deletion per se is not
responsible for thrombocytopenia development in Jacobsen syndrome.

Trkova M(1), Becvarova V, Hynek M, Hnykova L, Hlavova E, Kreckova G, Kulovany E, 
Cutka D, Zatloukalova J, Markova K, Sukova M, Horacek J, Stejskal D.

Author information: 
(1)Gennet, Centre for Fetal Medicine, Praha, Czech Republic.
marie.trkova@gennet.cz

Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) is a rare chromosomal disorder caused by terminal
deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11. We report on four prenatally diagnosed
patients with JBS with variable prenatal and postnatal phenotypes and 11q
deletions of varying sizes. Precise characterization of the deleted region in
three patients was performed by SNP arrays. The severity of both the prenatal and
postnatal phenotypes did not correlate with the size of the haploinsufficient
region. Despite the large difference in the deletion size (nearly 6 Mb), both of 
the live-born patients had similar phenotypes corresponding to JBS. However, one 
of the most prominent features of JBS, thrombocytopenia, was only present in the 
live-born boy. The girl, who had a significantly longer deletion spanning all
four genes suspected of being causative of JBS-related thrombocytopenia (FLI1,
ETS1, NFRKB, and JAM3), did not manifest a platelet phenotype. Therefore, our
findings do not support the traditional view of deletion size correlation in JBS 
or the causative role of FLI1, ETS1, NFRKB, and JAM3 deletion per se for the
development of disease-related thrombocytopenia.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Eur J Haematol. 2012 Oct;89(4):345-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2012.01833.x. Epub
2012 Aug 3.

Clonal chromosome anomalies affecting FLI1 mimic inherited thrombocytopenia of
the Paris-Trousseau type.

Noris P(1), Valli R, Pecci A, Marletta C, Invernizzi R, Mare L, Balduini CL,
Maserati E.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo
Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy. p.noris@smatteo.pv.it

INTRODUCTION: The thrombocytopenia of the Paris-Trousseau (TCPT) type is a
contiguous gene syndrome characterized by mild bleeding tendency, variable
thrombocytopenia (THC), abnormal giant alpha-granules in platelets and
dysmegakaryopoiesis: it derives from a constitutional deletion of chromosome 11
leading to the loss of FLI1, a transcription factor involved in megakaryocyte
differentiation and maturation.
CASE REPORT: A women with an acquired, isolated THC developing over 10 yr showed 
morphological features typical of TCPT in platelets and bone marrow (BM). Twenty 
years after the onset of THC, the other hematological parameters are still normal
and the patient is well.
RESULTS: Clonal hemopoiesis was shown and chromosome analyses performed on BM
revealed a clone with 45 chromosomes and a complex unbalanced translocation
involving chromosomes 2, 3, and 11. The anomaly was present in the majority of
bone marrow cells but only in a few peripheral blood elements. A microarray-based
comparative genomic hybridization defined the deleted region of chromosome 11
including the FLI1 locus that was missing.
CONCLUSION: Although our patient presented with nearly all the characteristics of
TCPT, her illness was acquired instead of being inherited and the most
appropriate diagnosis is that of the unilineage dysplasia 'refractory THC.' This 
observation suggests that appropriate cytogenetic investigations should be always
considered in patients with acquired THC of unknown origin.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22775407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cell. 2012 Aug 24;47(4):608-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.05.051. Epub 2012 
Jul 5.

Cofactor-mediated restriction of GATA-1 chromatin occupancy coordinates
lineage-specific gene expression.

Chlon TM(1), Doré LC, Crispino JD.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 are required for the differentiation of
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes. In contrast, mast cell development requires
GATA-1 and the absence of FOG-1. Through genome-wide comparison of the chromatin 
occupancy of GATA-1 and a naturally occurring mutant that cannot bind FOG-1
(GATA-1(V205G)), we reveal that FOG-1 intricately regulates the chromatin
occupancy of GATA-1. We identified GATA1-selective and GATA-1(V205G)-selective
binding sites and show that GATA-1, in the absence of FOG-1, occupies
GATA-1(V205G)-selective sites, but not GATA1-selective sites. By integrating
ChIP-seq and gene expression data, we discovered that GATA-1(V205G) binds and
activates mast cell-specific genes via GATA-1(V205G)-selective sites. We further 
show that exogenous expression of FOG-1 in mast cells leads to displacement of
GATA-1 from mast cell-specific genes and causes their downregulation. Together
these findings establish a mechanism of gene regulation whereby a non-DNA binding
cofactor directly modulates the occupancy of a transcription factor to control
lineage specification.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432917
PMID: 22771118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mod Pathol. 2012 Oct;25(10):1378-83. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.97. Epub 2012
Jul 6.

Expression of ERG, an Ets family transcription factor, identifies ERG-rearranged 
Ewing sarcoma.

Wang WL(1), Patel NR, Caragea M, Hogendoorn PC, López-Terrada D, Hornick JL,
Lazar AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. wlwang@mdanderson.org

ERG gene encodes for an Ets family regulatory transcription factor and is
involved in recurrent chromosomal translocations found in a subset of acute
myeloid leukemias, prostate carcinomas and Ewing sarcomas. The purpose of this
study was to examine the utility of an ERG antibody to detect EWSR1-ERG
rearranged Ewing sarcomas. A formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue microarray
and whole-tissue sections from 32 genetically characterized Ewing sarcomas were
examined: 22 with EWSR1-FLI1, 8 with EWSR1-ERG and 2 with EWSR1-NFATC2.
Immunohistochemistry was performed using a rabbit anti-ERG monoclonal antibody
directed against the C-terminus of the protein and a mouse anti-FLI1 monoclonal
antibody against a FLI1 Ets domain (C-terminus) fusion protein. Immunoreactivity 
was graded for extent and intensity of positive tumor cell nuclei. ERG labeling
was seen in 7/8 EWSR1-ERG cases (predominantly diffuse (5+), moderate to strong),
while only 3/24 non-EWR1-ERG cases showed labeling (very weak). FLI1 labeling was
observed in 29/31 cases regardless of fusion variant; 23 displayed diffuse (5+)
strong/moderate labeling (5/7 EWSR1-ERG, 18/22 EWSR1-FLI1). Both EWSR1-NFATC2
cases had weak reactivity with FLI1 and weak or no reactivity for ERG. In
conclusion, strong nuclear ERG immunoreactivity is specific for Ewing sarcomas
with EWSR1-ERG rearrangement. In contrast, FLI1 was not specific to rearrangement
type, likely because of cross reactivity with the highly homologous Ets
DNA-binding domain present in the C-terminus of both ERG and FLI1.

PMID: 22766791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer Genet. 2012 Jun;205(6):304-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2012.04.004.

EWS/FLI-responsive GGAA microsatellites exhibit polymorphic differences between
European and African populations.

Beck R(1), Monument MJ, Watkins WS, Smith R, Boucher KM, Schiffman JD, Jorde LB, 
Randall RL, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Children's Cancer Research, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA.

The genetics of Ewing sarcoma development remain obscure. The incidence of Ewing 
sarcoma is ten-fold less in Africans as compared to Europeans, irrespective of
geographic location, suggesting population-specific genetic influences. Since
GGAA-containing microsatellites within key target genes are necessary for Ewing
sarcoma-specific EWS/FLI DNA binding and gene activation, and gene expression is 
positively correlated with the number of repeat motifs in the promoter/enhancer
region, we sought to determine if significant polymorphisms exist between African
and European populations which might contribute to observed differences in Ewing 
sarcoma incidence and outcomes. GGAA microsatellites upstream of two critical
EWS/FLI target genes, NR0B1 and CAV1, were sequenced from subjects of European
and African descent. While the characteristics of the CAV1 promoter
microsatellites were similar across both populations, the NR0B1 microsatellite in
African subjects was significantly larger, harboring more repeat motifs, a
greater number of repeat segments, and longer consecutive repeats, than in
European subjects. These results are biologically intriguing as NR0B1 was the
most highly enriched EWS/FLI bound gene in prior studies, and is absolutely
necessary for oncogenic transformation in Ewing sarcoma. These data suggest that 
GGAA microsatellite polymorphisms in the NR0B1 gene might influence disease
susceptibility and prognosis in Ewing sarcoma in unanticipated ways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3389350
PMID: 22749036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Discov Med. 2012 Jun;13(73):405-15.

Ewing's sarcoma: overcoming the therapeutic plateau.

Subbiah V(1), Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics and Division of Cancer
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd.,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. vsubbiah@mdanderson.org

The hallmark of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) is a translocation--t(11;22)(q24;q12)--that
most frequently results in the EWS/FLI1 aberrant chimeric gene. Because EWS
afflicts young patients, it stands out among the diverse sarcoma subtypes. The
frontline, standard-of-care cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens produce minimal
benefit in patients with metastases at presentation or those with relapsed
disease. While the outcomes of chemorefractory EWS patients are generally poor,
recent developments have led to the promising use of targeted therapy.
Specifically, inhibition of insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R)
signaling and the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathways has emerged as a 
targeted therapy in EWS, with select patients experiencing dramatic therapeutic
responses. However, targeted therapies in general, and these responders in
particular, are faced with the ultimate conundrum of eventual resistance. To
optimize response, combining IGF1R and mTOR inhibitor-based regimens with
chemotherapy in the upfront setting in newly diagnosed high-risk EWS may clarify 
the true benefit of IGF1R inhibitors in these patients. Another option is to
explore novel targeted multikinase inhibitors and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitors, which have experienced a surge in supporting preclinical data.
Drugs inhibiting the downstream targets of EWS/FLI1 are also in preclinical
development. However, ultimately, the underlying biomarker correlates of
resistance and response must be delineated along with ways to overcome them.
Novel agents, together with integration of advances in multimodal approaches
(including surgery and radiation), as well as offering targeted therapies early
in the disease course represent new strategies for confronting the challenges of 
EWS.

PMCID: PMC3893930
PMID: 22742646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Jul;136(7):829-31. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0403-CR.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma of the retina.

Grossniklaus HE(1), Shehata B, Sorensen P, Bergstrom C, Hubbard GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA. ophtheg@emory.edu

An 11-year-old boy underwent enucleation of his left eye for an intraocular
tumor. Examination showed a small, round blue cell tumor arising in the
peripheral retina near the ciliary body. Immunohistochemical stain results were
positive for neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, cluster of differentiation
99 (CD99), Friend leukemia integration 1, and CD56. Ultrastructural findings
included occasional intracytoplasmic dense core granules. Polymerase chain
reaction of the tumor showed a Ewing sarcoma/Friend leukemia integration gene
fusion product. The tumor was classified as a primitive neuroectodermal
tumor/Ewing sarcoma of the retina and should be distinguished from
retinoblastoma. To our knowledge, this is the first case of primary primitive
neuroectodermal tumor of the retina.

PMID: 22742557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Aug;10(8):1098-108. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0086. Epub
2012 Jun 20.

EWS/FLI1 regulates EYA3 in Ewing sarcoma via modulation of miRNA-708, resulting
in increased cell survival and chemoresistance.

Robin TP(1), Smith A, McKinsey E, Reaves L, Jedlicka P, Ford HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric cancer of the bone and soft tissue, in
which patients whose tumors have a poor histologic response to initial
chemotherapy have a poor overall prognosis. Therefore, it is important to
identify molecules involved in resistance to chemotherapy. Herein, we show that
the DNA repair protein and transcriptional cofactor, EYA3, is highly expressed in
Ewing sarcoma tumor samples and cell lines compared with mesenchymal stem cells, 
the presumed cell-of-origin of Ewing sarcoma, and that it is regulated by the
EWS/FLI1 fusion protein transcription factor. We further show that EWS/FLI1
mediates upregulation of EYA3 via repression of miR-708, a miRNA that targets the
EYA3 3'-untranslated region, rather than by binding the EYA3 promoter directly.
Importantly, we show that high levels of EYA3 significantly correlate with low
levels of miR-708 in Ewing sarcoma samples, suggesting that this miR-mediated
mechanism of EYA3 regulation holds true in human cancers. Because EYA proteins
are important for cell survival during development, we examine, and show, that
loss of EYA3 decreases survival of Ewing sarcoma cells. Most importantly,
knockdown of EYA3 in Ewing sarcoma cells leads to sensitization to DNA-damaging
chemotherapeutics used in the treatment of Ewing sarcoma, and as expected, after 
chemotherapeutic treatment, EYA3 knockdown cells repair DNA damage less
effectively than their control counterparts. These studies identify EYA3 as a
novel mediator of chemoresistance in Ewing sarcoma and define the molecular
mechanisms of both EYA3 overexpression and of EYA3-mediated chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC3432289
PMID: 22723308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2012 Sep;31(9):2117-23. doi: 10.1002/etc.1918. Epub 2012
Jul 20.

Toxicological effect of joint cadmium selenium quantum dots and copper ion
exposure on zebrafish.

Zhang W(1), Sun X, Chen L, Lin KF, Dong QX, Huang CJ, Fu RB, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environmental Risk Assessment
and Control on Chemical Process/Shanghai Key Laboratory of Functional Materials
Chemistry, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China.
wzhang@ecust.edu.cn

Quantum dots (QDs) have strong adsorption capacity; therefore, their potential
toxicity to aquatic organisms from the facilitated transport of other trace toxic
pollutants when they coexist has received increasing interest. However, the
impact of cadmium selenium (CdSe) QDs and copper ion (Cu(2+)) joint exposure on
zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryo and larvae remains almost unknown. Therefore, the 
present study was performed to determine the developmental toxicities to
zebrafish exposed to combined pollution with CdSe QDs (500 µg/L) and Cu(2+) (0,
0.1, 1, 10, and 100 µg/L CuC1(2)) compared with single exposure. Our findings for
the first time revealed that: (1) QDs facilitated the accumulation of Cu(2+) in
zebrafish; (2) QDs caused higher mortality, lower hatch rate, and more
malformations of the exposed zebrafish; (3) junction, bifurcation, crossing,
particles, and aggregation of the exposed FLI-1 transgenic zebrafish larvae can
be observed; (4) embryo cell apoptosis appeared in the head and tail region; and 
(5) synergistic effects played an important role during joint exposure. These
observations provide a basic understanding of CdSe QDs and Cu(2+) joint toxicity 
to aquatic organisms and suggest the need for additional research to identify the
toxicological mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 SETAC.

PMID: 22714141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Hum Pathol. 2012 Oct;43(10):1772-6. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.03.006. Epub 2012
Jun 14.

Extraosseous Ewing sarcoma with foci of neuroblastoma-like differentiation
associated with EWSR1(Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1)/FLI1 translocation
without prior chemotherapy.

Vali K(1), Kokta V, Beaunoyer M, Fetni R, Teira P, Sartelet H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2014 Mar;45(3):662-3.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma and neuroblastoma are
distinct malignant tumors belonging to the group of undifferentiated solid
pediatric tumors. We report a case of a 14-year-old adolescent girl who presented
with a right lower quadrant mass. At surgery, a mobile retroperitoneal mass was
entirely removed. Histologic evaluation revealed 2 distinct components; the
first, consisting of sheets of undifferentiated cells, was CD99+ and CD56-,
whereas the second, consisting of multiple foci of neuropil and maturing
neuroblasts, was CD99- and CD56+. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
revealed the presence of EWSR1/FLI1 translocation in both histologic distinct
components. MYCN (myelocytomatosis viral related oncogene, neuroblastoma derived)
was not amplified. The tests for t(11;22) and t(21;22) performed by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were negative. The final diagnosis
corresponds to an extraosseous Ewing sarcoma with foci of neuroblastoma-like
differentiation. This is the first case, documented by molecular studies, in
which neuroblastoma-like differentiation has been noted in primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma without prior chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22703924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Blood. 2012 Sep 27;120(13):2719-22. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

MYH10 protein expression in platelets as a biomarker of RUNX1 and FLI1
alterations.

Antony-Debré I(1), Bluteau D, Itzykson R, Baccini V, Renneville A, Boehlen F,
Morabito M, Droin N, Deswarte C, Chang Y, Leverger G, Solary E, Vainchenker W,
Favier R, Raslova H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de
Recherche (UMR) 1009, Villejuif, France.

RUNX1 gene alterations are associated with acquired and inherited hematologic
malignancies that include familial platelet disorder/acute myeloid leukemia,
primary or secondary acute myeloid leukemia, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia.
Recently, we reported that RUNX1-mediated silencing of nonmuscle myosin heavy
chain IIB (MYH10) was required for megakaryocyte ploidization and maturation.
Here we demonstrate that runx1 deletion in mice induces the persistence of MYH10 
in platelets, and a similar persistence was observed in platelets of patients
with constitutional (familial platelet disorder/acute myeloid leukemia) or
acquired (chronic myelomonocytic leukemia) RUNX1 mutations. MYH10 was also
detected in platelets of patients with the Paris-Trousseau syndrome, a
thrombocytopenia related to the deletion of the transcription factor FLI1 that
forms a complex with RUNX1 to regulate megakaryopoiesis, whereas MYH10
persistence was not observed in other inherited forms of thrombocytopenia. We
propose MYH10 detection as a new and simple tool to identify inherited platelet
disorders and myeloid neoplasms with abnormalities in RUNX1 and its associated
proteins.

PMID: 22677128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 5;109(23):9083-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1112570109. Epub 2012 May 21.

Oncogene-mediated alterations in chromatin conformation.

Rickman DS(1), Soong TD, Moss B, Mosquera JM, Dlabal J, Terry S, MacDonald TY,
Tripodi J, Bunting K, Najfeld V, Demichelis F, Melnick AM, Elemento O, Rubin MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, HRH Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal
Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Emerging evidence suggests that chromatin adopts a nonrandom 3D topology and that
the organization of genes into structural hubs and domains affects their
transcriptional status. How chromatin conformation changes in diseases such as
cancer is poorly understood. Moreover, how oncogenic transcription factors, which
bind to thousands of sites across the genome, influence gene regulation by
globally altering the topology of chromatin requires further investigation. To
address these questions, we performed unbiased high-resolution mapping of intra- 
and interchromosome interactions upon overexpression of ERG, an oncogenic
transcription factor frequently overexpressed in prostate cancer as a result of a
gene fusion. By integrating data from genome-wide chromosome conformation capture
(Hi-C), ERG binding, and gene expression, we demonstrate that oncogenic
transcription factor overexpression is associated with global, reproducible, and 
functionally coherent changes in chromatin organization. The results presented
here have broader implications, as genomic alterations in other cancer types
frequently give rise to aberrant transcription factor expression, e.g., EWS-FLI1,
c-Myc, n-Myc, and PML-RARa.

PMCID: PMC3384175
PMID: 22615383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Nov;167(5):1098-105. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11055.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Constitutive activation of c-Abl/protein kinase C-d/Fli1 pathway in dermal
fibroblasts derived from patients with localized scleroderma.

Noda S(1), Asano Y, Akamata K, Aozasa N, Taniguchi T, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y,
Toyama T, Sumida H, Yanaba K, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Kadono T, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

BACKGROUND: A noncanonical pathway of transforming growth factor-ß signalling,
the c-Abl/protein kinase C-d (PKC-d)/Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (Fli1)
axis, is a powerful regulator of collagen synthesis in dermal fibroblasts.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the significance of the c-Abl/PKC-d/Fli1 pathway for
the establishment of the profibrotic phenotype in lesional dermal fibroblasts
from patients with localized scleroderma (LSc).
METHODS: The activation status of the c-Abl/PKC-d/Fli1 pathway was evaluated by
immunoblotting and chromatin immunoprecipitation using cultured dermal
fibroblasts from patients with LSc and closely matched healthy controls and by
immunostaining on skin sections. The effects of a platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor inhibitor AG1296 and gene silencing of c-Abl on the expression levels of
type I collagen were evaluated by immunoblotting.
RESULTS: The phosphorylation levels of Fli1 at threonine 312 were increased,
while the total Fli1 levels and the binding of Fli1 to the COL1A2 promoter were
decreased, in cultured LSc fibroblasts compared with cultured normal fibroblasts.
Furthermore, in cultured LSc fibroblasts, the expression levels of c-Abl were
elevated compared with cultured normal fibroblasts and PKC-d was preferentially
localized in the nucleus. These findings were also confirmed in vivo by
immunohistochemistry using skin sections. Moreover, gene silencing of c-Abl, but 
not AG1296, significantly suppressed the expression of type I collagen in
cultured LSc fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: Constitutive activation of the c-Abl/PKC-d/Fli1 pathway at least
partially contributes to the establishment of the profibrotic phenotype in LSc
dermal fibroblasts, which provides a novel molecular basis to explain the
efficacy of imatinib against skin sclerosis in a certain subset of LSc.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22591006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(5):e1002710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002710. Epub 2012 May 
10.

Bmps and id2a act upstream of Twist1 to restrict ectomesenchyme potential of the 
cranial neural crest.

Das A(1), Crump JG.

Author information: 
(1)Broad CIRM Center, University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Cranial neural crest cells (CNCCs) have the remarkable capacity to generate both 
the non-ectomesenchyme derivatives of the peripheral nervous system and the
ectomesenchyme precursors of the vertebrate head skeleton, yet how these
divergent lineages are specified is not well understood. Whereas studies in mouse
have indicated that the Twist1 transcription factor is important for
ectomesenchyme development, its role and regulation during CNCC lineage decisions
have remained unclear. Here we show that two Twist1 genes play an essential role 
in promoting ectomesenchyme at the expense of non-ectomesenchyme gene expression 
in zebrafish. Twist1 does so by promoting Fgf signaling, as well as potentially
directly activating fli1a expression through a conserved ectomesenchyme-specific 
enhancer. We also show that Id2a restricts Twist1 activity to the ectomesenchyme 
lineage, with Bmp activity preferentially inducing id2a expression in
non-ectomesenchyme precursors. We therefore propose that the ventral migration of
CNCCs away from a source of Bmps in the dorsal ectoderm promotes ectomesenchyme
development by relieving Id2a-dependent repression of Twist1 function. Together
our model shows how the integration of Bmp inhibition at its origin and Fgf
activation along its migratory route would confer temporal and spatial
specificity to the generation of ectomesenchyme from the neural crest.

PMCID: PMC3349740
PMID: 22589745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1521-31. doi: 10.1002/stem.1115.

The Flk1-Cre-mediated deletion of ETV2 defines its narrow temporal requirement
during embryonic hematopoietic development.

Wareing S(1), Mazan A, Pearson S, Göttgens B, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Stem Cell Hematopoiesis Group, Paterson Institute for
Cancer Research, University of Manchester, Wilmslow Road, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

During embryonic development, the emergence of hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis
is tightly associated, with many transcription factors implicated in both
developmental processes. Among those factors, ETV2 acts at the top of the
hierarchy and controls the formation of both lineages. However, it is not known
at which stage of mesoderm development ETV2 is acting and whether ETV2 activity
is further required once mesodermal precursors have been specified to the
hematopoietic and endothelial fates. In this study, we characterize the
developmental window during which ETV2 expression is required for hematopoietic
and endothelial development. Using cre-mediated deletion of ETV2, we demonstrate 
that ETV2 is acting prior to or at the time of FLK1 expression in mesodermal
precursors to initiate the hematopoietic and endothelial program. Using the in
vitro differentiation of embryonic stem cells as a model system, we further show 
that ETV2 re-expression in Etv2(-/-) Flk1-negative precursors drives
hematopoiesis specification and switches on the expression of most genes known to
be implicated in hematopoietic and endothelial development. Among the downstream 
targets of ETV2, we identify the transcription factors SCL, GATA2, and FLI1 known
to operate a recursive loop controlling hematopoietic development. Surprisingly, 
SCL re-expression in Etv2(-/-) cells fully rescues hematopoiesis, while the
re-expression of FLI1 or GATA2 promotes only a very limited rescue. Altogether,
our data establish that ETV2 is required very transiently to specify mesodermal
precursors to hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis and that SCL is one of the key
downstream targets of ETV2 in controlling hematopoietic specification.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22570122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(5):3421-30. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0243-7. Epub 2012 May 
6.

Prediction and identification of B cell epitopes derived from EWS/FLI-l fusion
protein of Ewing's sarcoma.

Liu H(1), Huang L, Luo J, Chen W, Zhang Z, Liao X, Dai M, Shu Y, Cao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, 330006, People's Republic of China.

To predict B cell epitope of Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI-l fusion protein and to
analyze its antigenicity and immunogenicity. Comprehensive algorithms were
applied to predict the possible B cell epitopes of EWS/FLI-l fusion protein.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis
were performed to identify the synthesized epitope peptides, ELISA assays and
Western blot to detect the antigenicity, and the immunogenicity of epitope
peptides. Three B cell epitopes were screened out, and HPLC and MS analysis
confirmed all three synthesized epitope peptides were demandable. ELISA assays
verified all three epitope peptides could prime intense antigen-antibody reaction
and induce ideal antibody titers after immunization to the New Zealand white
rabbit. However, Western blot confirmed that antiserum of one of these epitope
peptides could not recognize EWS/FLI-1 protein. Two B cell epitopes,
PQDGNKPTETSQPQ and DPDEVARRWGQRKS, derived from EWS/FLI-l protein, are identified
to have potential antigenicity and immunogenicity.

PMID: 22562156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Infect Genet Evol. 2012 Jul;12(5):1102-10. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2012.03.017.
Epub 2012 Mar 28.

Wound healing genes and susceptibility to cutaneous leishmaniasis in Brazil.

Castellucci L(1), Jamieson SE, Almeida L, Oliveira J, Guimarães LH, Lessa M,
Fakiola M, Jesus AR, Nancy Miller E, Carvalho EM, Blackwell JM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Science and Technology in Tropical Diseases, Brazil and 
Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil. leacastel@hotmail.com

Leishmania braziliensis causes cutaneous (CL) and mucosal (ML) leishmaniasis. In 
the mouse, Fli1 was identified as a gene influencing enhanced wound healing and
resistance to CL caused by Leishmania major. Polymorphism at FLI1 is associated
with CL caused by L. braziliensis in humans, with an inverse association observed
for ML disease. Here we extend the analysis to look at other wound healing genes,
including CTGF, TGFB1, TGFBR1/2, SMADS 2/3/4/7 and FLII, all functionally linked 
along with FLI1 in the TGF beta pathway. Haplotype tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms (tag-SNPs) were genotyped using Taqman technology in 325 nuclear
families (652 CL cases; 126 ML cases) from Brazil. Robust case-pseudocontrol
(CPC) conditional logistic regression analysis showed associations between CL and
SNPs at CTGF (SNP rs6918698; CC genotype; OR 1.67; 95%CI 1.10-2.54; P=0.016),
TGFBR2 (rs1962859; OR 1.50; 95%CI 1.12-1.99; P=0.005), SMAD2 (rs1792658; OR 1.57;
95%CI 1.04-2.38; P=0.03), SMAD7 (rs4464148; AA genotype; OR 2.80; 95%CI
1.00-7.87; P=0.05) and FLII (rs2071242; OR 1.60; 95%CI 1.14-2.24; P=0.005), and
between ML and SNPs at SMAD3 (rs1465841; OR 2.15; 95%CI 1.13-4.07; P=0.018) and
SMAD7 (rs2337107; TT genotype; OR 3.70; 95%CI 1.27-10.7; P=0.016). Stepwise
logistic regression analysis showed that all SNPs associated with CL at FLI1,
CTGF, TGFBR2, and FLII showed independent effects from each other, but SNPs at
SMAD2 and SMAD7 did not add independent effects to SNPs from other genes. These
results suggest that TGFß signalling via SMAD2 is important in directing events
that contribute to CL, whereas signalling via SMAD3 is important in ML. Both are 
modulated by the inhibitory SMAD7 that acts upstream of SMAD2 and SMAD3 in this
signalling pathway. Along with the published FLI1 association, these data further
contribute to the hypothesis that wound healing processes are important
determinants of pathology associated with cutaneous forms of leishmaniasis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372530
PMID: 22554650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2012 Aug;16(4):267-74. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2011.07.011. 
Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: clinicopathologic
analysis of 34 cases.

Karpate A(1), Menon S, Basak R, Yuvaraja TB, Tongaonkar HB, Desai SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

The present study describes the clinicopathologic analysis of 34 cases of Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor occurring in the kidney. The patients
were 21 males and 13 females with an age range of 6 to 44 years. Clinically,
patients presented with multiple symptoms including hematuria, pain, and/or lump 
in the abdomen. Nephrectomy was performed in most of the cases. Grossly, whole of
the renal parenchyma was involved by a variegated tumor. Histologically, the
tumor was composed of monomorphic, small, and round cells arranged in a variety
of patterns. Rosettes, geographical areas of necrosis, and arborizing vascular
pattern were the prominent histologic features. The nucleus was monomorphic and
round. Anisonucleosis was also noted in some cases. The nucleus was mostly
hyperchromatic. A mixture of hyperchromatic and powdery chromatin was noted in
few cases. Immunohistochemically, MIC2 (CD99) was positive in 32 of 34 cases
followed by neuron-specific enolase (9/12 cases), vimentin (8/14 cases),
synaptophysin (1/8 cases), and S-100 protein (1/4 cases). Molecular analysis by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction that was carried out in 26 cases 
revealed presence of EWS-FLI-1 type 1 translocation in 12 cases, EWS-FLI-1 type 2
translocation in 10 cases, and both type 1 and type 2 EWS-FLI-1 translocation in 
2 cases. Two cases did not demonstrate any translocation. Follow-up data were
available for 17 of 34 cases. Local recurrence of the tumor was seen in 4
patients, and 10 patients were recorded to have distant metastasis in various
organs, such as lung, bone, and lymph node, during the course of the disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22534242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Clin Oncol. 2012 May 20;30(15):1849-56. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.37.2359. Epub
2012 Apr 16.

Phase II study of ganitumab, a fully human anti-type-1 insulin-like growth factor
receptor antibody, in patients with metastatic Ewing family tumors or
desmoplastic small round cell tumors.

Tap WD(1), Demetri G, Barnette P, Desai J, Kavan P, Tozer R, Benedetto PW,
Friberg G, Deng H, McCaffery I, Leitch I, Badola S, Chang S, Zhu M, Tolcher A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
tapw@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Ganitumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody against type-1
insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF1R). An open-label phase II study was
conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of ganitumab monotherapy in
patients with metastatic Ewing family tumors (EFT) or desmoplastic small round
cell tumors (DSRCT).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients =16 years of age with relapsed or refractory EFT
or DSRCT received 12 mg/kg of ganitumab every 2 weeks. Objective response rate
(ORR) was the primary end point. Secondary end points included clinical benefit
rate (CBR = complete + partial responses + stable disease [SD] = 24 weeks) and
safety and pharmacokinetic profiles of ganitumab. The relationship between tumor 
response and EWS gene translocation status and IGF-1 levels was evaluated.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients (22 with EFT; 16 with DSRCT) received one or more 
doses of ganitumab. Twenty-four patients (63%) experienced ganitumab-related
adverse events. Grade 3 related events included hyperglycemia (n = 2),
thrombocytopenia (n = 5), neutropenia (n = 2), leukopenia (n = 1), and transient 
ischemic attack (n = 1). There were no grade 4 or 5 treatment-related events. Of 
35 patients assessed for response, two had partial responses (ORR, 6%) and 17
(49%) had SD. Four patients had SD = 24 weeks, contributing to a CBR of 17%. The 
pharmacokinetic profile of ganitumab was similar to that observed in the
first-in-human trial. Elevation of IGF-1 levels was observed postdose. EWS-Fli1
translocations were analyzed by RNA sequencing and fluorescent in situ
hybridization, and novel translocations were observed in EFT and DSCRT. No
apparent relationship between tumor response and IGF-1 levels or EWS gene
translocations was observed.
CONCLUSION: Ganitumab was well tolerated and demonstrated antitumor activity in
patients with advanced recurrent EFT or DSRCT.

PMID: 22508822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Ann Hematol. 2012 Aug;91(8):1221-33. doi: 10.1007/s00277-012-1457-7. Epub 2012
Apr 10.

Prognostic significance of combined MN1, ERG, BAALC, and EVI1 (MEBE) expression
in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes.

Thol F(1), Yun H, Sonntag AK, Damm F, Weissinger EM, Krauter J, Wagner K, Morgan 
M, Wichmann M, Göhring G, Bug G, Ottmann O, Hofmann WK, Schambach A,
Schlegelberger B, Haferlach T, Bowen D, Mills K, Ganser A, Heuser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Overexpression of MN1, ERG, BAALC, and EVI1 (MEBE) genes in cytogenetically
normal acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients is associated with poor prognosis,
but their prognostic effect in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) has 
not been studied systematically. Expression data of the four genes from 140 MDS
patients were combined in an additive score, which was validated in an
independent patient cohort of 110 MDS patients. A high MEBE score, defined as
high expression of at least two of the four genes, predicted a significantly
shorter overall survival (OS) (HR 2.29, 95 % CI 1.3-4.09, P=<U+2009>.005) and time to
AML progression (HR 4.83, 95 % CI 2.01-11.57, P<<U+2009>.001) compared to a low MEBE
score in multivariate analysis independent of karyotype, percentage of bone
marrow blasts, transfusion dependence, ASXL1, and IDH1 mutation status. In a
validation cohort of 110 MDS patients, a high MEBE score predicted shorter OS (HR
1.77; 95 % CI 1.04-3.0, P=<U+2009>.034) and time to AML progression (HR 3.0, 95 % CI
1.17-7.65, P=<U+2009>.022). A high MEBE expression score is an unfavorable prognostic
marker in MDS and is associated with an increased risk for progression to AML.
Expression of the MEBE genes is regulated by FLI1 and c-MYC, which are potential 
upstream targets of the MEBE signature.

PMID: 22488406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 2012 Mar 28;483(7391):570-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11005.

Systematic identification of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells.

Garnett MJ(1), Edelman EJ, Heidorn SJ, Greenman CD, Dastur A, Lau KW, Greninger
P, Thompson IR, Luo X, Soares J, Liu Q, Iorio F, Surdez D, Chen L, Milano RJ,
Bignell GR, Tam AT, Davies H, Stevenson JA, Barthorpe S, Lutz SR, Kogera F,
Lawrence K, McLaren-Douglas A, Mitropoulos X, Mironenko T, Thi H, Richardson L,
Zhou W, Jewitt F, Zhang T, O'Brien P, Boisvert JL, Price S, Hur W, Yang W, Deng
X, Butler A, Choi HG, Chang JW, Baselga J, Stamenkovic I, Engelman JA, Sharma SV,
Delattre O, Saez-Rodriguez J, Gray NS, Settleman J, Futreal PA, Haber DA,
Stratton MR, Ramaswamy S, McDermott U, Benes CH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2012 May;11(5):353.
    Nature. 2012 Mar 29;483(7391):544-5.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May;12(5):315.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 May;9(5):249.
    Nat Rev Genet. 2012 May;13(5):300.

Clinical responses to anticancer therapies are often restricted to a subset of
patients. In some cases, mutated cancer genes are potent biomarkers for responses
to targeted agents. Here, to uncover new biomarkers of sensitivity and resistance
to cancer therapeutics, we screened a panel of several hundred cancer cell
lines--which represent much of the tissue-type and genetic diversity of human
cancers--with 130 drugs under clinical and preclinical investigation. In
aggregate, we found that mutated cancer genes were associated with cellular
response to most currently available cancer drugs. Classic oncogene addiction
paradigms were modified by additional tissue-specific or expression biomarkers,
and some frequently mutated genes were associated with sensitivity to a broad
range of therapeutic agents. Unexpected relationships were revealed, including
the marked sensitivity of Ewing's sarcoma cells harbouring the EWS (also known as
EWSR1)-FLI1 gene translocation to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors. 
By linking drug activity to the functional complexity of cancer genomes,
systematic pharmacogenomic profiling in cancer cell lines provides a powerful
biomarker discovery platform to guide rational cancer therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3349233
PMID: 22460902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Blood. 2012 May 10;119(19):e139-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-396754. Epub 2012 
Mar 21.

Dynamic HoxB4-regulatory network during embryonic stem cell differentiation to
hematopoietic cells.

Fan R(1), Bonde S, Gao P, Sotomayor B, Chen C, Mouw T, Zavazava N, Tan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Efficient in vitro generation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) from embryonic
stem cells (ESCs) holds great promise for cell-based therapies to treat
hematologic diseases. To date, HoxB4 remains the most effective transcription
factor (TF) the overexpression of which in ESCs confers long-term repopulating
ability to ESC-derived HSCs. Despite its importance, the components and dynamics 
of the HoxB4 transcriptional regulatory network is poorly understood, hindering
efforts to develop more efficient protocols for in vitro derivation of HSCs. In
the present study, we performed global gene-expression profiling and ChIP coupled
with deep sequencing at 4 stages of the HoxB4-mediated ESC differentiation toward
HSCs. Joint analyses of ChIP/deep sequencing and gene-expression profiling
unveiled several global features of the HoxB4 regulatory network. First, it is
highly dynamic and gradually expands during the differentiation process. Second, 
HoxB4 functions as a master regulator of hematopoiesis by regulating multiple
hematopoietic TFs and chromatin-modification enzymes. Third, HoxB4 acts in
different combinations with 4 other hematopoietic TFs (Fli1, Meis1, Runx1, and
Scl) to regulate distinct sets of pathways. Finally, the results of our study
suggest that down-regulation of mitochondria and lysosomal genes by HoxB4 plays a
role in the impaired lymphoid lineage development from ESC-derived HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3362371
PMID: 22438249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2012 Dec;31(6):341-8. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2012.659397.
Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Ewing sarcoma with 7;22 translocation: three new cases and clinicopathological
characterization.

Shulman SC(1), Katzenstein H, Bridge J, Bannister LL, Qayed M, Oskouei S, Shehata
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia
30322, USA.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is the second most common primary bone malignancy in children 
and is typically characterized by a translocation involving the EWS gene on
chromosome 22 and a member of the ETS family of genes: FLI1 (90%), ERG1 (5%),
ETV1 (1%), ETV4 (1%), and FEV (1%). We identified three new cases of t(7;22)
(p22;q12) (EWS-ETV1) ES and a literature search revealed an additional six cases.
In comparison to conventional ES with t(11;22) (q24;q12) (EWS-FLI1), the t(7;22) 
ES variant has a higher propensity for females and children in a younger age
group and it occurs more commonly in extraosseous locations.

PMID: 22432475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 20;31:24. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-24.

An integrated analysis of miRNA and gene copy numbers in xenografts of Ewing's
sarcoma.

Mosakhani N(1), Guled M, Leen G, Calabuig-Fariñas S, Niini T, Machado I, Savola
S, Scotlandi K, López-Guerrero JA, Llombart-Bosch A, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and HUSLAB, University of Helsinki
and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Xenografts have been shown to provide a suitable source of tumor
tissue for molecular analysis in the absence of primary tumor material. We
utilized ES xenograft series for integrated microarray analyses to identify novel
biomarkers.
METHOD: Microarray technology (array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and
micro RNA arrays) was used to screen and identify copy number changes and
differentially expressed miRNAs of 34 and 14 passages, respectively. Incubated
cells used for xenografting (Passage 0) were considered to represent the primary 
tumor. Four important differentially expressed miRNAs (miR-31, miR-31*, miR-145, 
miR-106) were selected for further validation by real time polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Integrated analysis of aCGH and miRNA data was performed on 14
xenograft passages by bioinformatic methods.
RESULTS: The most frequent losses and gains of DNA copy number were detected at
9p21.3, 16q and at 8, 15, 17q21.32-qter, 1q21.1-qter, respectively. The presence 
of these alterations was consistent in all tumor passages. aCGH profiles of
xenograft passages of each series resembled their corresponding primary tumors
(passage 0). MiR-21, miR-31, miR-31*, miR-106b, miR-145, miR-150*, miR-371-5p,
miR-557 and miR-598 showed recurrently altered expression. These miRNAS were
predicted to regulate many ES-associated genes, such as genes of the IGF1
pathway, EWSR1, FLI1 and their fusion gene (EWS-FLI1). Twenty differentially
expressed miRNAs were pinpointed in regions carrying altered copy numbers.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, ES xenografts were successfully applied for
integrated microarray analyses. Our findings showed expression changes of miRNAs 
that were predicted to regulate many ES associated genes, such as IGF1 pathway
genes, FLI1, EWSR1, and the EWS-FLI1 fusion genes.

PMCID: PMC3338077
PMID: 22429812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32272. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032272. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

A possible contribution of altered cathepsin B expression to the development of
skin sclerosis and vasculopathy in systemic sclerosis.

Noda S(1), Asano Y, Akamata K, Aozasa N, Taniguchi T, Takahashi T, Ichimura Y,
Toyama T, Sumida H, Yanaba K, Tada Y, Sugaya M, Kadono T, Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Cathepsin B (CTSB) is a proteolytic enzyme potentially modulating angiogenic
processes and extracellular matrix remodeling. While matrix metalloproteinases
are shown to be implicated in tissue fibrosis and vasculopathy associated with
systemic sclerosis (SSc), the role of cathepsins in this disease has not been
well studied. The aim of this study is to evaluate the roles of CTSB in SSc.
Serum pro-CTSB levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 55 
SSc patients and 19 normal controls. Since the deficiency of transcription factor
Fli1 in endothelial cells is potentially associated with the development of SSc
vasculopathy, cutaneous CTSB expression was evaluated by immunostaining in
Fli1(+/-) and wild type mice as well as in SSc and control subjects. The effects 
of Fli1 gene silencing and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) on CTSB
expression were determined by real-time PCR in human dermal microvascular
endothelial cells (HDMECs) and dermal fibroblasts, respectively. Serum pro-CTSB
levels were significantly higher in limited cutaneous SSc (lcSSc) and late-stage 
diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc) patients than in healthy controls. In dcSSc,
patients with increased serum pro-CTSB levels showed a significantly higher
frequency of digital ulcers than those with normal levels. CTSB expression in
dermal blood vessels was increased in Fli1(+/-) mice compared with wild type mice
and in SSc patients compared with healthy controls. Consistently, Fli1 gene
silencing increased CTSB expression in HDMECs. In cultured dermal fibroblasts
from early dcSSc, CTSB expression was decreased compared with normal fibroblasts 
and significantly reversed by TGF-ß1 antisense oligonucleotide. In conclusion,
up-regulation of endothelial CTSB due to Fli1 deficiency may contribute to the
development of SSc vasculopathy, especially digital ulcers, while reduced
expression of CTSB in lesional dermal fibroblasts is likely to be associated with
skin sclerosis in early dcSSc.

PMCID: PMC3285678
PMID: 22384200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Oncotarget. 2012 Feb;3(2):172-82.

Single enantiomer of YK-4-279 demonstrates specificity in targeting the oncogene 
EWS-FLI1.

Barber-Rotenberg JS(1), Selvanathan SP, Kong Y, Erkizan HV, Snyder TM, Hong SP,
Kobs CL, South NL, Summer S, Monroe PJ, Chruszcz M, Dobrev V, Tosso PN, Scher LJ,
Minor W, Brown ML, Metallo SJ, Üren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Georgetown University Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Washington, DC, USA.

Oncogenic fusion proteins, such as EWS-FLI1, are excellent therapeutic targets as
they are only located within the tumor. However, there are currently no agents
targeted toward transcription factors, which are often considered to be
'undruggable.' A considerable body of evidence is accruing that refutes this
claim based upon the intrinsic disorder of transcription factors. Our previous
studies show that RNA Helicase A (RHA) enhances the oncogenesis of EWS-FLI1, a
putative intrinsically disordered protein. Interruption of this protein-protein
complex by small molecule inhibitors validates this interaction as a unique
therapeutic target. Single enantiomer activity from a chiral compound has been
recognized as strong evidence for specificity in a small molecule-protein
interaction. Our compound, YK-4-279, has a chiral center and can be separated
into two enantiomers by chiral HPLC. We show that there is a significant
difference in activity between the two enantiomers. (S)-YK-4-279 is able to
disrupt binding between EWS-FLI1 and RHA in an immunoprecipitation assay and
blocks the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1, while (R)-YK-4-279 cannot.
Enantiospecific effects are also established in cytotoxicity assays and caspase
assays, where up to a log-fold difference is seen between (S)-YK-4-279 and the
racemic YK-4-279. Our findings indicate that only one enantiomer of our small
molecule is able to specifically target a protein-protein interaction. This work 
is significant for its identification of a single enantiomer effect upon a
protein interaction suggesting that small molecule targeting of intrinsically
disordered proteins can be specific. Furthermore, proving YK-4-279 has only one
functional enantiomer will be helpful in moving this compound towards clinical
trials.

PMCID: PMC3326647
PMID: 22383402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Hypertens. 2012 Jun;25(6):690-6. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2012.17. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Monoclonal antibody against marinobufagenin reverses cardiac fibrosis in rats
with chronic renal failure.

Haller ST(1), Kennedy DJ, Shidyak A, Budny GV, Malhotra D, Fedorova OV, Shapiro
JI, Bagrov AY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cardiotonic steroids (CTS) are implicated in pathophysiology of
uremic cardiomyopathy. In the present study, we tested whether a monoclonal
antibody (mAb) against the bufadienolide CTS, marinobufagenin (MBG), alleviates
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in partially nephrectomized (PNx) rats.
METHODS: In PNx rats, we compared the effects of 3E9 anti-MBG mAb and of
Digibind, an affinity-purified digoxin antibody, on blood pressure and cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis following 4 weeks after the surgery.
RESULTS: In PNx rats, a fourfold elevation in plasma MBG levels was associated
with hypertension, increased cardiac levels of carbonylated protein, cardiac
hypertrophy, a reduction in cardiac expression of a nuclear transcription factor 
which is a negative regulator of collagen synthesis, Friend leukemia
integration-1 (Fli-1), and an increase in the levels of collagen-1. A single
intraperitoneal administration of 3E9 mAb to PNx rats reduced blood pressure by
59 mm Hg for 7 days and produced a significant reduction in cardiac weight and
cardiac levels of oxidative stress, an increase in the expression of Fli-1, and a
reduction in cardiac fibrosis. The effects of Digibind were similar to those of
3E9 mAb, but were less pronounced.
CONCLUSIONS: In experimental chronic renal failure, elevated levels of MBG
contribute to hypertension and induce cardiac fibrosis via suppression of Fli-1, 
representing a potential target for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3355226
PMID: 22378033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Mar;136(3):301-4. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0213-OA.

Utility of immunohistochemical staining with FLI1, D2-40, CD31, and CD34 in the
diagnosis of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome-related and non-acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome-related Kaposi sarcoma.

Rosado FG(1), Itani DM, Coffin CM, Cates JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. flavia.nunes@vanderbilt.edu

Comment in
    Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Nov;136(11):1329; author reply 1330.

CONTEXT: Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is a vascular tumor frequently associated with
advanced human immunodeficiency virus infection, advanced age, or iatrogenic
immunosuppression. Immunohistochemistry for CD31 and CD34, and more recently for 
FLI1 and D2-40, has been used as ancillary diagnostic tests for KS, despite
little information regarding the sensitivities and differential staining patterns
of the latter 2 markers in the major clinical subtypes and histologic stages of
KS.
OBJECTIVE: This retrospective study aims to assess the prevalence of the vascular
markers D2-40 and FLI1 in the main clinical subgroups and tumor stages of KS.
DESIGN: Twenty-four cases of KS (12 acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
[AIDS]-related cases and 12 non-AIDS-related cases; 11 nodular-stage and 13
patch/plaque-stage KS) were stained for CD34, CD31, D2-40, and FLI1 by
immunohistochemistry. The distribution of immunoreactivity was compared between
the clinical subtypes and tumor stages of KS using the Mann-Whitney test.
RESULTS: CD31, CD34, D2-40, and FLI1 strongly and diffusely stained tumor cells
in 75%, 92%, 67%, and 92% of AIDS-related cases and 58%, 92%, 67%, and 75% of
non-AIDS-related cases, respectively. Differences in the proportions of positive 
cases between AIDS-related and non-AIDS-related cases did not reach statistical
significance. No significant staining differences were observed between nodular- 
and patch/plaque-stage KS either.
CONCLUSIONS: There are no differences in the distribution of immunohistochemical 
reactivity for CD31, CD34, D2-40, or FLI1 between AIDS-related and
non-AIDS-related KS or between nodular- and patch/plaque-stage KS. All of the
markers studied demonstrated high sensitivity in both clinical settings and both 
stages of tumor progression.

PMID: 22372906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Pathol Res Pract. 2012 Apr 15;208(4):245-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2012.01.004. Epub 
2012 Feb 24.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the cervix confirmed with molecular
analysis in a 23-year-old woman: A case report.

Masoura S(1), Kourtis A, Kalogiannidis I, Kotoula V, Anagnostou E, Angelidou S,
Agorastos T.

Author information: 
(1)4th Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor (PNET) of the genital tract is very rare,
especially in the cervix. A case report of a young woman with a diagnosis of PNET
originating from the uterine cervix is presented here. A 23-year-old woman
presented with abnormal uterine bleeding and sharp lower abdominal pain of two
months duration. CT and MRI of the abdomen and thorax revealed the presence of a 
large mass in the uterine cervix, enlarged pelvic lymph nodes and
broncho-pulmonary infiltrations with regional nodes. Pathological examination of 
the tumor revealed a malignant neoplasm composed predominantly of small cells,
immunohistochemically positive for CD99, vimentin and c-Kit. Molecular testing
demonstrated the expression of EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts corresponding to the
t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation, which confirmed the diagnosis of PNET of the
uterine cervix. Despite surgical excision and administration of the first cycle
of adjuvant chemotherapy, the patient died from multiple-organ failure and
cardiac arrest. PNET arising from the genital tract, especially in the uterine
cervix, is very rare and presents a diagnostic challenge. A timely confirmation
with molecular analysis is essential for the diagnosis of such a tumor at an
unusual site as in the present case.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22365564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031708. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Quercetin-4'-O-ß-D-glucopyranoside (QODG) inhibits angiogenesis by suppressing
VEGFR2-mediated signaling in zebrafish and endothelial cells.

Lin C(1), Wu M, Dong J.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy School, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, People's
Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis plays an important role in many physiological and
pathological processes. Identification of small molecules that block angiogenesis
and are safe and affordable has been a challenge in drug development. Hypericum
attenuatum Choisy is a Chinese herb medicine commonly used for treating
hemorrhagic diseases. The present study investigates the anti-angiogenic effects 
of quercetin-4'-O-ß-D-glucopyranoside (QODG), a flavonoid isolated from Hypericum
attenuatum Choisy, in vivo and in vitro, and clarifies the underlying mechanism
of the activity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Tg(fli1:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish embryos were
treated with different concentrations of quercetin-4'-O-ß-D-glucopyranoside
(QODG) (20, 60, 180 µM) from 6 hours post fertilisation (hpf) to 72 hpf, and
adult zebrafish were allowed to recover in different concentrations of QODG (20, 
60, 180 µM) for 7 days post amputation (dpa) prior morphological observation and 
angiogenesis phenotypes assessment. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) were treated with or without VEGF and different concentrations of QODG
(5, 20, 60, 180 µM), then tested for cell viability, cell migration, tube
formation and apoptosis. The role of VEGFR2-mediated signaling pathway in
QODG-inhibited angiogenesis was evaluated using quantitative real-time PCR
(qRT-PCR) and Western blotting.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Quercetin-4'-O-ß-D-glucopyranoside (QODG) was shown to
inhibit angiogenesis in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro 
and zebrafish in vivo via suppressing VEGF-induced phosphorylation of VEGFR2. Our
results further indicate that QODG inhibits angiogenesis via inhibition of
VEGFR2-mediated signaling with the involvement of some key kinases such as c-Src,
FAK, ERK, AKT, mTOR and S6K and induction of apoptosis. Together, this study
reveals, for the first time, that QODG acts as a potent VEGFR2 kinase inhibitor, 
and exerts the anti-angiogenic activity at least in part through VEGFR2-mediated 
signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3278463
PMID: 22348123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Syst Biol Med. 2012 May-Jun;4(3):285-95. doi:
10.1002/wsbm.1163. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Establishing the stem cell state: insights from regulatory network analysis of
blood stem cell development.

Schütte J(1), Moignard V, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Transcription factors (TFs) have long been recognized as powerful regulators of
cell-type identity and differentiation. As TFs function as constituents of
regulatory networks, identification and functional characterization of key
interactions within these wider networks will be required to understand how TFs
exert their powerful biological functions. The formation of blood cells
(hematopoiesis) represents a widely used model system for the study of cellular
differentiation. Moreover, specific TFs or groups of TFs have been identified to 
control the various cell fate choices that must be made when blood stem cells
differentiate into more than a dozen distinct mature blood lineages. Because of
the relative ease of accessibility, the hematopoietic system represents an
attractive experimental system for the development of regulatory network models. 
Here, we review the modeling efforts carried out to date, which have already
provided new insights into the molecular control of blood cell development. We
also explore potential areas of future study such as the need for new
high-throughput technologies and a focus on studying dynamic cellular systems.
Many leukemias arise as the result of mutations that cause transcriptional
dysregulation, thus suggesting that a better understanding of transcriptional
control mechanisms in hematopoiesis is of substantial biomedical relevance.
Moreover, lessons learned from regulatory network analysis in the hematopoietic
system are likely to inform research on less experimentally tractable tissues.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22334489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):2153-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27472. Epub 2012 Mar
29.

Small-molecule screen identifies modulators of EWS/FLI1 target gene expression
and cell survival in Ewing's sarcoma.

Boro A(1), Prêtre K, Rechfeld F, Thalhammer V, Oesch S, Wachtel M, Schäfer BW,
Niggli FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital, Steinwiesstrasse 75, Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by the presence of
chromosomal translocations leading to the expression of oncogenic transcription
factors such as, in the majority of cases, EWS/FLI1. Because of its key role in
Ewing's sarcoma development and maintenance, EWS/FLI1 represents an attractive
therapeutic target. Here, we characterize PHLDA1 as a novel direct target gene
whose expression is repressed by EWS/FLI1. Using this gene and additional
specific well-characterized target genes such as NROB1, NKX2.2 and CAV1, all
activated by EWS/FLI1, as a read-out system, we screened a small-molecule
compound library enriched for FDA-approved drugs that modulated the expression of
EWS/FLI1 target genes. Among a hit-list of nine well-known drugs such as
camptothecin, fenretinide, etoposide and doxorubicin, we also identified the
kinase inhibitor midostaurin (PKC412). Subsequent experiments demonstrated that
midostaurin is able to induce apoptosis in a panel of six Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines in vitro and can significantly suppress xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
These results suggest that midostaurin might be a novel drug that is active
against Ewing's cells, which might act by modulating the expression of EWS/FLI1
target genes.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22323082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2012 Oct;35(4):361-5. doi: 10.3109/01480545.2011.627864. Epub 
2012 Feb 8.

Caffeine treatment disturbs the angiogenesis of zebrafish embryos.

Yeh CH(1), Liao YF, Chang CY, Tsai JN, Wang YH, Cheng CC, Wen CC, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, Tamkang University, Tamsui, New Taipei
City, Taiwan.

Caffeine is a widely consumed substance that occurs in numerous dietary sources, 
but teratogenic effects of caffeine intake during embryonic development are still
not clear. In the present study, we used the zebrafish as a model to assess
caffeine-induced toxicity on embryonic vascular development. A green fluorescent 
vascular endothelium transgenic line, Tg(fli1:egfp), was utilized for the
sensitive detection of vascular development, including vasculo- and angiogenesis.
Caffeine-treated embryos showed no defects in vasculogenesis, but revealed
dose-dependent (250-350 ppm) developmental defects in intersegmental vessels,
dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessels, and subintestinal vein sprouting.
Further, real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of caffeine-treated embryos
showed an upregulation of nrp1a along with a downregulation of sema3aa and
sema3c. In conclusion, caffeine treatment induces defects of angiogenesis in
zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 22313413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Res. 2012 Apr 1;72(7):1608-13. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3648. Epub
2012 Jan 27.

PARP-1 inhibition as a targeted strategy to treat Ewing's sarcoma.

Brenner JC(1), Feng FY, Han S, Patel S, Goyal SV, Bou-Maroun LM, Liu M, Lonigro
R, Prensner JR, Tomlins SA, Chinnaiyan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) refers to aggressive malignancies which
frequently harbor characteristic EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG genomic fusions. Here, we
report that these fusion products interact with the DNA damage response protein
and transcriptional coregulator PARP-1. ESFT cells, primary tumor xenografts, and
tumor metastases were all highly sensitive to PARP1 inhibition. Addition of a
PARP1 inhibitor to the second-line chemotherapeutic agent temozolamide resulted
in complete responses of all treated tumors in an EWS-FLI1-driven mouse xenograft
model of ESFT. Mechanistic investigations revealed that DNA damage induced by
expression of EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG fusion genes was potentiated by PARP1
inhibition in ESFT cell lines. Notably, EWS-FLI1 fusion genes acted in a positive
feedback loop to maintain the expression of PARP1, which was required for
EWS-FLI-mediated transcription, thereby enforcing oncogene-dependent sensitivity 
to PARP-1 inhibition. Together, our findings offer a strong preclinical rationale
to target the EWS-FLI1:PARP1 intersection as a therapeutic strategy to improve
the treatment of ESFTs.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3319786
PMID: 22287547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012 Feb;93(2):e27-9. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.08.039.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the heart.

Nwaejike N(1), Rassl D, Ford H, Large SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Papworth Hospital, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.

We present a case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the left atrium with
involvement of the coronary sinus. The initial presentation was of cardiac
tamponade resulting from the size of the tumor. There was no evidence of tumor
elsewhere, and after complete resection and without adjuvant chemotherapy the
patient is well at 2-year follow-up. There has been no evidence of tumor
recurrence. This is a rare reported case of resection of a cardiac primitive
neuroectodermal tumor without adjuvant chemotherapy. Other cases in the
literature have been treated by orthoptic transplantation and resection with
chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2012 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22269764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer Lett. 2012 Jul 1;320(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Jan 20.

Impairment of p53 acetylation by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in Ewing family
tumors.

Li Y(1), Li X, Fan G, Fukushi J, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, People's Republic of China.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, 
which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs). Previous
studies have shown the ability of EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein to silence p53
activity. Here we demonstrate that the introduction of EWS-Fli1 significantly
inhibited p300-mediated acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 and depletion of EWS-Fli1
protein by small interfering RNAs (siRNA) in EFTs cells facilitated it in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, the deacetylation of p53 by EWS-Fli1
suppressed its transcriptional activity and enhanced mdm2-mediated p53
degradation. On the other hand, immunoprecipitation study shows that N-terminal
region of EWS-Fli1 associated with histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to forms a
complex with p53. Knockdown of HDAC1, but not HDAC2 or HDAC3 protein restored the
expression of p53 Lys-382 in EFTs cells. Overexpression of HDAC1 also
significantly inhibited p53 transcriptional activity. Pharmacologic inhibitor of 
HDAC, trichostatin A (TSA) promoted p53-p300 interaction and recruitment of p53
Lys-382 to promoter regions of its target genes p21 and Puma, consequently
inducing apoptosis and stabilizing the acetylation of p53 at Lys-382 together
with the upregulation of p21 and Puma, which were impaired in EFTs cells after
the knockdown of p53 expression. Our data indicate EWS-Fli1 might deacetylate p53
to inhibit its transcriptional function and protein stability via the recruitment
of HDAC1. These results might elucidate a novel molecular mechanism about the
abrogation of p53 pathway by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1260-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-2254. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

PRAS40 is a functionally critical target for EWS repression in Ewing sarcoma.

Huang L(1), Nakai Y, Kuwahara I, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Entomology Laboratory, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are highly aggressive and highly metastatic
tumors caused by a chromosomal fusion between the Ewing sarcoma protein (EWS)
with the transcription factor FLI-1. However, expression of the EWS/FLI-1
chimeric oncogene by itself is insufficient for carcinogenesis, suggesting that
additional events are required. Here, we report the identification of the Akt
substrate PRAS40 as an EWS target gene. EWS negatively regulates PRAS40
expression by binding the 3' untranslated region in PRAS40 mRNA. ESFT cell
proliferation was suppressed by treatment with an Akt inhibitor, and ESFT cell
proliferation and metastatic growth were suppressed by siRNA-mediated PRAS40
knockdown. Furthermore, PRAS40 knockdown was sufficient to reverse an increased
cell proliferation elicited by EWS knockdown. In support of a pathologic role for
PRAS40 elevation in EFST, we documented inverse protein levels of EWS and PRAS40 
in ESFT cells. Together, our findings suggest that PRAS40 promotes the
development of ESFT and might therefore represent a novel therapeutic target in
this aggressive disease.

PMID: 22241085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Apr;90(4):769-81. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22794. Epub 2011 Dec 20.

Calpain 2 is required for the invasion of glioblastoma cells in the zebrafish
brain microenvironment.

Lal S(1), La Du J, Tanguay RL, Greenwood JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331, USA.

Glioblastoma is an aggressive primary brain tumor with a 5-year survival rate of 
less than 5%. The ability of glioblastoma cells to invade surrounding brain
tissue presents the primary challenge for the success of focal therapeutic
approaches. We previously reported that the calcium-activated protease calpain 2 
is critical for glioblastoma cell invasion in vitro. Here, we show that
expression of calpain 2 is required for the dispersal of glioblastoma cells in a 
living brain microenvironment. Knockdown of calpain 2 resulted in a 2.9-fold
decrease in the invasion of human glioblastoma cells in zebrafish brain. Control 
cells diffusely migrated up to 450 µm from the site of injection, whereas
knockdown cells remained confined in clusters. The invasion study was repeated in
organotypic mouse brain tissues, and calpain 2 knockdown cells demonstrated a
2.3-fold lower area of dispersal compared with control cells. In zebrafish brain,
glioblastoma cells appeared to migrate in part along the blood vessels of the
host. Furthermore, angiogenesis was detected in 27% of zebrafish injected with
control cells, whereas only 12.5% of fish receiving knockdown cells showed the
formation of new vessels, suggesting a role for calpain 2 in tumor cell
angiogenesis. Consistent with the progression of glioblastoma in humans,
transplanted tumor cells were not observed to metastasize outside the brain of
zebrafish. This study demonstrates that calpain 2 expression is required for the 
dispersal of glioblastoma cells within the dynamic microenvironment of the brain,
identifying zebrafish as a valuable orthotopic system for studying glioblastoma
cell invasion.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3274595
PMID: 22183788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jan 31;139(2):447-53. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.11.031. Epub
2011 Nov 26.

Angiogenic efficacy of simplified 2-herb formula (NF3) in zebrafish embryos in
vivo and rat aortic ring in vitro.

Tse HY(1), Hui MN, Li L, Lee SM, Leung AY, Cheng SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Diabetic foot ulceration results in high risk of 
lower extremity amputation, and represents a significant health care expenditure 
worldwide. Radix Astragali (RA) and Radix Rehmanniae (RR) are widely used Chinese
medicinal herbs in treating diabetes, and have shown positive effects in
enhancing wound healing in diabetic foot ulcer animal model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The angiogenic efficacy of NF3, a simplified 2-herb
formula consisting of RA and RR in 2:1 ratio, was investigated. Median lethal
concentration (LC50) and median effective concentration (EC50) were determined by
treating zebrafish embryos with different concentrations of NF3 from 20 hpf to 72
hpf. The angiogenic activity of NF3 was examined in zebrafish embryos in vivo and
by rat aortic ring assay in vitro. Cell cycle analysis of endothelial cells
induced by NF3 was analyzed by flow cytometry using transgenic zebrafish
Tg(fli1:EGFP). Real-time PCR was used to analyze mRNA expression profiles of
selected genes involved in VEGF, FGF and MAPK pathways.
RESULTS: NF3 enhanced blood vessel formation as indicated by extra growth of
intersegmental vessels in zebrafish embryos, and increased microvessels formation
in rat aortic ring. NF3 also enhanced endothelial cells proliferation as shown by
increased percentage of cells accumulating in S phase and G2/M phase of the cell 
cycle. NF3 exposure significantly induced up-regulation of VEGF-A, Flk-1, fgf1
and bRaf expression in zebrafish embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrated that NF3 was effective in promoting
angiogenesis in zebrafish embryos and by rat aortic ring assay, which provided
scientific basis to support the use of NF3 as potential therapeutics in treating 
diabetic foot ulceration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:352580. doi: 10.1155/2011/352580. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Factors Affecting EWS-FLI1 Activity in Ewing's Sarcoma.

Herrero-Martin D(1), Fourtouna A, Niedan S, Riedmann LT, Schwentner R, Aryee DN.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, 1090
Vienna, Austria.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations, which give rise to EWS-ETS chimeric proteins. These aberrant
transcription factors are the main pathogenic drivers of ESFT. Elucidation of the
factors influencing EWS-ETS expression and/or activity will guide the development
of novel therapeutic agents against this fatal disease.

PMCID: PMC3216314
PMID: 22135504  [PubMed]


373. Glia. 2012 Mar;60(3):343-57. doi: 10.1002/glia.22269. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Stab wound injury of the zebrafish telencephalon: a model for comparative
analysis of reactive gliosis.

Baumgart EV(1), Barbosa JS, Bally-Cuif L, Götz M, Ninkovic J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research
Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany.

Reactive glia, including astroglia and oligodendrocyte progenitors (OPCs) are at 
the core of the reaction to injury in the mammalian brain with initially
beneficial and later partially adverse functions such as scar formation. Given
the different glial composition in the adult zebrafish brain with radial
ependymoglia but no parenchymal astrocytes, we examined the glial response to an 
invasive stab wound injury model in the adult zebrafish telencephalon.
Strikingly, already a few days after injury the wound was closed without any scar
tissue. Similar to mammals, microglia cells reacted first and accumulated close
to the injury site, while neither GFAP+ radial ependymoglia nor adult OPCs were
recruited to the injury site. Moreover, OPCs failed to increase their
proliferation after this injury, while the number of proliferating GFAP+ glia was
increased until 7 days after injury. Importantly, neurogenesis was also increased
after injury, generating additional neurons recruited to the parenchyma which
survived for several months. Thus, these data suggest that the specific glial
environment in the adult zebrafish telencephalon is not only permissive for
long-term neuronal survival, but avoids scar formation. Invasive injury in the
adult zebrafish telencephalon may therefore provide a useful model to untangle
the molecular mechanisms involved in these beneficial glial reactions.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22105794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Genome Res. 2012 Feb;22(2):259-70. doi: 10.1101/gr.125666.111. Epub 2011 Nov 15.

Tumor-specific retargeting of an oncogenic transcription factor chimera results
in dysregulation of chromatin and transcription.

Patel M(1), Simon JM, Iglesia MD, Wu SB, McFadden AW, Lieb JD, Davis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving transcription factor genes have been
identified in an increasingly wide range of cancers. Some translocations can
create a protein "chimera" that is composed of parts from different proteins. How
such chimeras cause cancer, and why they cause cancer in some cell types but not 
others, is not understood. One such chimera is EWS-FLI, the most frequently
occurring translocation in Ewing Sarcoma, a malignant bone and soft tissue tumor 
of children and young adults. Using EWS-FLI and its parental transcription
factor, FLI1, we created a unique experimental system to address questions
regarding the genomic mechanisms by which chimeric transcription factors cause
cancer. We found that in tumor cells, EWS-FLI targets regions of the genome
distinct from FLI1, despite identical DNA-binding domains. In primary endothelial
cells, however, EWS-FLI and FLI1 demonstrate similar targeting. To understand
this mistargeting, we examined chromatin organization. Regions targeted by
EWS-FLI are normally repressed and nucleosomal in primary endothelial cells. In
tumor cells, however, bound regions are nucleosome depleted and harbor the
chromatin signature of enhancers. We next demonstrated that through chimerism,
EWS-FLI acquired the ability to alter chromatin. Expression of EWS-FLI results in
nucleosome depletion at targeted sites, whereas silencing of EWS-FLI in tumor
cells restored nucleosome occupancy. Thus, the EWS-FLI chimera acquired
chromatin-altering activity, leading to mistargeting, chromatin disruption, and
ultimately, transcriptional dysregulation.

PMCID: PMC3266033
PMID: 22086061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Mar;51(3):240-9. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20948. Epub 2011
Nov 12.

FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene fusions in prostate
cancer.

Paulo P(1), Barros-Silva JD, Ribeiro FR, Ramalho-Carvalho J, Jerónimo C, Henrique
R, Lind GE, Skotheim RI, Lothe RA, Teixeira MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Porto, Portugal.

To characterize the pattern of ETS rearrangements and to uncover novel ETS fusion
genes, we analyzed 200 prostate carcinomas (PCa) with TaqMan low-density arrays
(TLDAs), followed by selective analyses with fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH), RT-PCR, and sequencing. Besides confirming the recurrent presence of ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and ETV5 rearrangements, we here report FLI1 as the fifth ETS
transcription factor involved in fusion genes in prostate cancer. Outlier
expression of the FLI1 gene was detected by TLDAs in one PCa that showed relative
overexpression of FLI1 exons 4:5 as compared with FLI1 exons 2:3. A structural
rearrangement was found using FISH probes flanking the FLI1 gene and RT-PCR and
sequencing analyses showed fusion of SLC45A3 exon 1 with FLI1 exon 3.
Interestingly, we found four cases with two different ETS rearrangements in the
index tumor, thus revealing intratumor genetic heterogeneity. Correlation
analysis with clinico-pathological data showed association of ERG rearrangements 
with locally advanced disease (pT3, P = 0.007) and MYC overexpression (P =
0.001), and association of ETV1 rearrangements with PTEN downregulation (P =
0.015). We report that FLI1 is a novel ETS transcription factor involved in gene 
fusions in prostate cancer and that intratumor genetic heterogeneity of ETS
rearrangements can occasionally be found in index primary tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22081504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Jan;10(1):52-65. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0524. Epub
2011 Nov 11.

STEAP1 is associated with the invasive and oxidative stress phenotype of Ewing
tumors.

Grunewald TG(1), Diebold I, Esposito I, Plehm S, Hauer K, Thiel U, da
Silva-Buttkus P, Neff F, Unland R, Müller-Tidow C, Zobywalski C, Lohrig K,
Lewandrowski U, Sickmann A, Prazeres da Costa O, Görlach A, Cossarizza A, Butt E,
Richter GH, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research and Roman Herzog Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Laboratory of Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Germany.
thomas.gruenewald@lrz.tum.de

Ewing tumors comprise the second most common type of bone-associated cancer in
children and are characterized by oncogenic EWS/FLI1 fusion proteins and early
metastasis. Compelling evidence suggests that elevated levels of intracellular
oxidative stress contribute to enhanced aggressiveness of numerous cancers,
possibly including Ewing tumors. Using comprehensive microarray analyses and RNA 
interference, we identified the six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the
prostate 1 (STEAP1)-a membrane-bound mesenchymal stem cell marker of unknown
function-as a highly expressed protein in Ewing tumors compared with benign
tissues and show its regulation by EWS/FLI1. In addition, we show that STEAP1
knockdown reduces Ewing tumor proliferation, anchorage-independent colony
formation as well as invasion in vitro and decreases growth and metastasis of
Ewing tumor xenografts in vivo. Moreover, transcriptome and proteome analyses as 
well as functional studies revealed that STEAP1 expression correlates with
oxidative stress responses and elevated levels of reactive oxygen species that in
turn are able to regulate redox-sensitive and proinvasive genes. In synopsis, our
data suggest that STEAP1 is associated with the invasive behavior and oxidative
stress phenotype of Ewing tumors and point to a hitherto unanticipated oncogenic 
function of STEAP1.

PMID: 22080479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5577-86. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101626. Epub 2011
Nov 7.

CD84 negatively regulates IgE high-affinity receptor signaling in human mast
cells.

Álvarez-Errico D(1), Oliver-Vila I, Ainsua-Enrich E, Gilfillan AM, Picado C,
Sayós J, Martín M.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

CD84 is a self-binding receptor from the CD150 (or signaling lymphocyte
activation molecule [SLAM]) family that is broadly expressed in hematopoietic
cells. It has been described that the adaptors SLAM-associated protein (SAP) and 
EWS-FLI1-activated transcript 2 (EAT-2) are critical for CD150 family members'
signaling and function. We observed that human mast cells express CD84 but lack
SAP or EAT-2, that CD84 is tyrosine phosphorylated upon FceRI engagement, and
that the release of granule contents is reduced when FceRI is coengaged with CD84
in LAD2 and human CD34(+)-derived mast cells. In addition, we observed that the
release of IL-8 and GM-CSF was also reduced in FceRI/CD84-costimulated cells as
compared with FceRI/Ig control. To understand how CD84 downregulates
FceRI-mediated function, we analyzed signaling pathways affected by CD84 in human
mast cells. Our results showed that CD84 dampens FceRI-mediated calcium
mobilization after its co-cross-linking with the receptor. Furthermore,
FceRI-mediated Syk-linker for activation of T cells-phospholipase C-<U+03B3>1 axis
activity is downregulated after CD84 stimulation, compared with FceRI/Ig control.
The inhibitory kinase Fes phosphorylates mainly the inhibitory motif for CD84.
Moreover, Fes, which has been described to become phosphorylated after substrate 
binding, also gets phosphorylated when coexpressed with CD84. Consistently, Fes
was observed to be more phosphorylated after CD84 and FceRI co-cross-linking. The
phosphorylation of the protein phosphatase Src homology region 2
domain-containing phosphatase-1 also increases after CD84 and FceRI coengagement.
Taken together, our results show that CD84 is highly expressed in mast cells and 
that it contributes to the regulation of FceRI signaling in SAP- and
EAT-2-independent and Fes- and Src homology region 2 domain-containing
phosphatase-1-dependent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3233232
PMID: 22068234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):439-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.023. Epub 2011 
Oct 26.

ETS-dependent regulation of a distal Gata4 cardiac enhancer.

Schachterle W(1), Rojas A, Xu SM, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158-2517, USA.

The developing heart contains an inner tube of specialized endothelium known as
endocardium, which performs multiple essential functions. In spite of the
essential role of the endocardium in heart development and function, the
transcriptional pathways that regulate its development remain largely undefined. 
GATA4 is a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple
cardiovascular lineages and is required for endocardial cushion development and
embryonic viability, but the transcriptional pathways upstream of Gata4 in the
endocardium and its derivatives in the endocardial cushions are unknown. Here, we
describe a distal enhancer from the mouse Gata4 gene that is briefly active in
multiple cardiac lineages early in cardiac development but restricts to the
endocardium where it remains active through cardiogenesis. The activity of this
Gata4 cardiac enhancer in transgenic embryos and in cultured aortic endothelial
cells is dependent on four ETS sites. To identify which ETS transcription factors
might be involved in Gata4 regulation via the ETS sites in the enhancer, we
determined the expression profile of 24 distinct ETS factors in embryonic mouse
hearts. Among multiple ETS transcripts present, ETS1, FLI1, ETV1, ETV5, ERG, and 
ETV6 were the most abundant in the early embryonic heart. We found that ETS1,
FLI1, and ERG were strongly expressed in the heart at embryonic day 8.5 and that 
ETS1 and ERG bound to the endogenous Gata4 enhancer in cultured endothelial
cells. Thus, these studies define the ETS expression profile in the early
embryonic heart and identify an ETS-dependent enhancer from the Gata4 locus.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3246565
PMID: 22056786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Radiat Res. 2011 Dec;176(6):716-24. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Megakaryocytopoiesis and thrombopoiesis in hematopoietic stem cells exposed to
ionizing radiation.

Monzen S(1), Tashiro E, Kashiwakura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Life Sciences, Hirosaki University Graduate School 
of Health Sciences, 66-1 Hon-cho, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8564, Japan.

Hematopoietic processes, especially megakaryocytopoiesis and thrombopoiesis, are 
highly sensitive to extracellular oxidative stresses such as ionizing radiation
and chemotherapeutic agents. This study examined the terminal maturation of
megakaryocytes and platelet production in hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
(HSPCs) exposed to ionizing radiation. Highly purified CD34(+) cells derived from
human placental/umbilical cord blood were exposed to X rays (2 Gy, 150 kVp, 20
mA; 0.5-mm aluminum and 0.3-mm copper filters) at a dose rate of approximately 1 
Gy/min and then cultured in a serum-free medium supplemented with thrombopoietin 
and interleukin-3. The number of cells generated from X-irradiated CD34(+) cells 
decreased with the time in culture. However, the fraction of CD34(+)Tie-2(+) and 
CD41(+)Tie-2(+) cells among the total cells generated from X-irradiated cells
increased significantly in comparison to nonirradiated controls on day 7. In
addition, the CD42a(+) particles, which appeared to be platelets, generated from 
the X-irradiated HSPCs appeared to be normal. Quantitative real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of the expression of various
genes in cells harvested from the cultures showed that the early
hematopoiesis-related genes FLI1, HOXB4 and Tie-2, the cytokine receptor genes
KIT and IL3RA, and the oxidative stress-related genes HO1 and NQO1 were
upregulated on day 7. These results suggest that normal terminal maturation of
megakaryocytes and platelet production occur in residual HSPCs after exposure to 
ionizing radiation despite the adverse effect of radiation on proliferation and
differentiation of HSPCs. Ionizing radiation may have the potential to promote
both megakaryocytopoiesis and thrombopoiesis.

PMID: 22026586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26060. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026060. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

R1507, an anti-insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antibody, and
EWS/FLI-1 siRNA in Ewing's sarcoma: convergence at the IGF/IGFR/Akt axis.

Huang HJ(1), Angelo LS, Rodon J, Sun M, Kuenkele KP, Parsons HA, Trent JC,
Kurzrock R.

Author information: 
(1)Phase I Program, Department of Investigational Cancer Therapeutics, The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.

A subset of patients with Ewing's sarcoma responds to anti-insulin-like growth
factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) antibodies. Mechanisms of sensitivity and resistance
are unknown. We investigated whether an anti-IGF-1R antibody acts via a pathway
that could also be suppressed by small interfering (si) RNA against the EWS/FLI-1
fusion protein, the hallmark of Ewing's sarcoma. The growth of two Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines (TC-32 and TC-71) was inhibited by the fully human anti-IGF-1R
antibody, R1507 (clonogenic and MTT assays). TC-32 and TC-71 cells express high
levels of IGF-2, while RD-ES and A4573 Ewing's cell lines, which were less
responsive to R1507 in our assays, express low or undetectable IGF-2,
respectively. TC-71 cells also expressed high levels of IGF-1R, and R1507
decreased steady-state levels of this receptor by internalization/degradation, an
effect which was associated with a decrease in p-IGF-1R, p-IRS-1, and p-Akt.
EWS/FLI-1 siRNA also decreased p-Akt, due to its ability to increase IGF-BP3
levels and subsequently decrease IGF-1 and IGF-2 levels, thus inhibiting
signaling through p-IGF-1R. This inhibition correlated with growth suppression
and apoptosis. The attenuation of Akt activation was confirmed in TC-71 and
HEK-293 (human embryonic kidney) cells by transfecting them with IGF-1R siRNA. We
conclude that antibodies and siRNA to IGF-1R, as well as siRNA to EWS/FLI-1, act 
via intersecting IGF/IGF-1R signals that suppress a common point in this pathway,
namely the phosphorylation of Akt.

PMCID: PMC3191161
PMID: 22022506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;118(8):2106-16. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26488. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

CAPER-a alternative splicing regulates the expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor165 in Ewing sarcoma cells.

Huang G(1), Zhou Z, Wang H, Kleinerman ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND: TC-71 Ewing sarcoma cells overexpress vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) with a shift from the 189 to the 165 isoform.
METHODS: The effect of CAPER-a on the expression of the VEGF isoforms, tumor
growth, and vessel density was analyzed after transfection of TC-71 cells with
CAPER-a cDNA or siRNA.
RESULTS: CAPER-a correlated inversely with the VEGF(165) /VEGF(189) mRNA ratio.
Up-regulation of CAPER-a resulted in decreased tumor growth, tumor vessel
density, and chemotactic activity of the cell's supernatant. CAPER-a expression
was regulated by EWS/FLI-1 through a protein-protein interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased VEGF(165) expression is secondary to the down-regulation
of CAPER-a by EWS/FLI-1. CAPER-a mediates alternative splicing and controls the
shift from VEGF(189) to VEGF(165) .

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3262942
PMID: 22009261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Dec;50(12):1054-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20923. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

A novel EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion transcript in a case of small cell osteosarcoma.

Debelenko LV(1), McGregor LM, Shivakumar BR, Dorfman HD, Raimondi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
ldebelen@med.wayne.edu.

Cellular morphology of small cell osteosarcoma, an aggressive variant of
osteosarcoma, is similar to Ewing sarcoma, but its molecular pathogenesis is
largely unknown. We report the case of a 12-year-old girl with multifocal small
cell osteosarcoma positive for the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene
rearrangement by interphase fluorescent in situ hybridization and negative for
EWSR1-FLI1, EWSR1-ERG, and EWSR1-WT1 fusion transcripts by reverse transcriptase 
PCR. Rapid amplification of cDNA ends revealed exon 6 of the cAMP-responsive
element binding protein 3-like 1 gene (CREB3L1, also known as "OASIS,"
NM_52854.2) fused in-frame to the EWSR1 exon 11, consistent with the
EWSR1-CREB3L1 fusion transcript expressed in tumor tissue. The corresponding
chimeric gene was confirmed by amplification and subsequent sequencing of the
genomic breakpoint between introns 11 and 5 of EWSR1 and CREB3L1, respectively.
An ~70 kDa product in the tumor tissue lysate reacted with the CREB3L1
carboxyterminal antibody, consistent with a 656-amino acid predicted chimeric
protein. Immunohistochemistry with the same antibody showed signal translocation 
from the physiologic perinuclear compartment observed in glia and unrelated
osteoblasts to nuclei of tumor cells, consistent with the likely function of
EWSR1-CREB3L1 as a transcriptional regulator predicted by its structure. This is 
the first report of a fusion transcript in osteogenic sarcoma; it demonstrates a 
relation between molecular mechanisms of small cell osteogenic and Ewing
sarcomas. The 3'-end partner and the inferred structure of EWSR1-CREB3L1,
however, are different from those of Ewing sarcoma, suggesting different targets 
of the new oncogene.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21987447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Pathol. 2011 Nov;225(3):353-63. doi: 10.1002/path.2966. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Notch signalling is off and is uncoupled from HES1 expression in Ewing's sarcoma.

Bennani-Baiti IM(1), Aryee DN, Ban J, Machado I, Kauer M, Mühlbacher K, Amann G, 
Llombart-Bosch A, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung,
Zimmermannplatz 10, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. idriss.bennani@ccri.at

Notch can act as an oncogene or as a tumour suppressor and thus can either
promote or inhibit tumour cell growth. To establish Notch status in Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT), we investigated the Notch pathway by gene
expression profiling meta-analysis or immunohistochemistry in samples obtained
from 96 and 24 ESFT patients, respectively. We found that although Notch
receptors were highly expressed, Notch did not appear to be active, as evidenced 
by the absence of Notch receptors in cell nuclei. In contrast, we show that Notch
receptors known to be active in colon adenocarcinoma, hepatocarcinoma, and
pancreatic carcinoma stain cell nuclei in these tumours. High expression of the
Notch effector HES1 transcription factor, usually used as a surrogate marker for 
active Notch, was also restricted to outside of the nucleus in the majority of
ESFT, and analysis of HES1 gene targets indicated HES1 to be transcriptionally
inactive. Neither forced activation nor pharmacological or genetic blocking of
Notch affected HES1 expression in ESFT cells, indicating HES1 expression to be
uncoupled from the Notch pathway. Additional functional studies in ESFT cell
lines confirmed Notch to be switched off. Finally, unlike experiments in which
HES1 expression was modulated, experimental activation of Notch in ESFT cell
lines via several means blocked cell proliferation and reduced their clonogenic
potential in soft agar. These indicate that HES1 is uncoupled from Notch in ESFT,
that EWS-FLI1-mediated inhibition of Notch contributes to ESFT aggressive cell
growth, and support a role for Notch in ESFT tumour suppression, at least partly 
through the Notch effector HEY1.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21984123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Dis Model Mech. 2012 Jan;5(1):95-106. doi: 10.1242/dmm.007401. Epub 2011 Oct 6.

A zebrafish transgenic model of Ewing's sarcoma reveals conserved mediators of
EWS-FLI1 tumorigenesis.

Leacock SW(1), Basse AN, Chandler GL, Kirk AM, Rakheja D, Amatruda JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-8534, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma, a malignant bone tumor of children and young adults, is a member
of the small-round-blue-cell tumor family. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs),
which include peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), are
characterized by chromosomal translocations that generate fusions between the EWS
gene and ETS-family transcription factors, most commonly FLI1. The EWS-FLI1
fusion oncoprotein represents an attractive therapeutic target for treatment of
Ewing's sarcoma. The cell of origin of ESFT and the molecular mechanisms by which
EWS-FLI1 mediates tumorigenesis remain unknown, and few animal models of Ewing's 
sarcoma exist. Here, we report the use of zebrafish as a vertebrate model of
EWS-FLI1 function and tumorigenesis. Mosaic expression of the human EWS-FLI1
fusion protein in zebrafish caused the development of tumors with histology
strongly resembling that of human Ewing's sarcoma. The incidence of tumors
increased in a p53 mutant background, suggesting that the p53 pathway suppresses 
EWS-FLI1-driven tumorigenesis. Gene expression profiling of the zebrafish tumors 
defined a set of genes that might be regulated by EWS-FLI1, including the
zebrafish ortholog of a crucial EWS-FLI1 target gene in humans. Stable zebrafish 
transgenic lines expressing EWS-FLI1 under the control of the heat-shock promoter
exhibit altered embryonic development and defective convergence and extension,
suggesting that EWS-FLI1 interacts with conserved developmental pathways. These
results indicate that functional targets of EWS-FLI1 that mediate tumorigenesis
are conserved from zebrafish to human and provide a novel context in which to
study the function of this fusion oncogene.

PMCID: PMC3255547
PMID: 21979944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Annu Rev Pathol. 2012;7:145-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev-pathol-011110-130237. Epub
2011 Sep 19.

Molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma: new therapeutic and transcriptional
targets.

Lessnick SL(1), Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Children's Cancer Research at Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department
of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah 84112, USA. stephen.lessnick@hci.utah.edu

Approximately one-third of sarcomas contain specific translocations. Ewing
sarcoma is the prototypical member of this group of sarcomas; it was the first to
be recognized pathologically as a singular entity and to have its signature
translocation defined cytogenetically, which led to the identification of its key
driver alteration, the EWS-FLI1 gene fusion that encodes this aberrant, chimeric 
transcription factor. We review recent progress in selected areas of Ewing
sarcoma research, including the application of genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses, to provide a comprehensive view of the EWS-FLI1
target gene repertoire, the identification of EWS-FLI1 target genes that may also
point to therapeutically targetable pathways, and data from model systems as they
relate to the elusive cell of origin of Ewing sarcoma and its possible
similarities to mesenchymal stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3555146
PMID: 21942527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Blood. 2011 Nov 17;118(20):5448-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-350173. Epub 2011 
Sep 21.

Methionine aminopeptidase 2 is required for HSC initiation and proliferation.

Ma AC(1), Fung TK, Lin RH, Chung MI, Yang D, Ekker SC, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Pok Fu
Lam Road, Hong Kong.

In a chemical screening, we tested the antiangiogenic effects of fumagillin
derivatives and identified fumagillin as an inhibitor of definitive hematopoiesis
in zebrafish embryos. Fumagillin is known to target methionine aminopeptidase II 
(MetAP2), an enzyme whose function in hematopoiesis is unknown. We investigated
the role of MetAP2 in hematopoiesis by using zebrafish embryo and human umbilical
cord blood models. Zebrafish metap2 was expressed ubiquitously during early
embryogenesis and later in the somitic region, the caudal hematopoietic tissue,
and pronephric duct. metap2 was inhibited by morpholino and fumagillin treatment,
resulting in increased mpo expression at 18 hours postfertilization and reduced
c-myb expression along the ventral wall of dorsal aorta at 36 hours
postfertilization. It also disrupted intersegmental vessels in Tg(fli1:gfp)
embryos without affecting development of major axial vasculatures. Inhibition of 
MetAP2 in CB CD34(+) cells by fumagillin had no effect on overall clonogenic
activity but significantly reduced their engraftment into immunodeficient
nonobese diabetes/severe combined immunodeficiency mice. metap2 knock-down in
zebrafish and inhibition by fumagillin in zebrafish and human CB CD34(+) cells
inhibited Calmodulin Kinase II activity and induced ERK phosphorylation. This
study demonstrated a hitherto-undescribed role of MetAP2 in definitive
hematopoiesis and a possible link to noncanonical Wnt and ERK signaling.

PMCID: PMC3342862
PMID: 21937698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 25;286(47):41095-104. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.296806. Epub
2011 Sep 20.

Angiomotin-like2 gene (amotl2) is required for migration and proliferation of
endothelial cells during angiogenesis.

Wang Y(1), Li Z, Xu P, Huang L, Tong J, Huang H, Meng A.

Author information: 
(1)State-key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Engineering, Tsinghua-Peking 
Center for Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing
100084, China.

Angiogenesis involves sprouting, migration, and proliferation of endothelial
cells. The angiomotin-like2 gene (amotl2) has been found in blood vessels in
zebrafish embryos, but its function in angiogenesis and underlying mechanisms
remain unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that knockdown of amotl2 in
zebrafish Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1) and Tg(fli1:nEGFP)(y7) transgenic embryos impairs the
intersegmental vessel growth and suppresses proliferation of endothelial cells.
Transplantation experiments indicate that function of amotl2 in intersegmental
vessel growth is cell-autonomous. AMOTL2 knockdown in cultured human umbilical
vein endothelial cells also inhibits cell proliferation and migration and
disrupts cell polarity, ultimately interrupting the formation of vascular
tube-like structures. Amotl2 promotes MAPK/ERK activation via c-Src, which is
dependent on phosphorylation of tyrosine residue at position 103 but independent 
of the C-terminal PDZ-binding domain. Taking together, our data indicate that
Amotl2 plays a pivotal role in polarity, migration and proliferation of
angiogenic endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3220490
PMID: 21937427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 1;10(19):3397-408. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.19.17734. Epub 2011
Oct 1.

Novel peptide binds EWS-FLI1 and reduces the oncogenic potential in Ewing tumors.

Erkizan HV(1), Scher LJ, Gamble SE, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Sajwan KP, Üren A,
Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC,
USA.

Ewing tumor is driven by the oncogenic EWS-FLI1 fusion protein that functions as 
an aberrant transcription factor. The identification of EWS-FLI1 protein partners
is essential to enhance its vulnerability as a therapeutic target. We utilized
phage display library screening against recombinant EWS-FLI1 protein. We
identified 27 unique Ewing sarcoma binding peptides. The cytotoxicity evaluation 
of these peptides with in EWS-FLI1 containing cell lines yielded one potent
peptide called ESAP1 (TMRGKKKRTRAN). ESAP1 binds EWS-FLI1 with 0.202 micromolar
affinity as measured in surface plasmon resonance. The minimal interaction region
of ESAP1 is characterized and found that the lysine residues are critical for
cellular cytotoxicity. ESAP1 reduces the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 as 
well as disrupts cell cycle kinetics in Ewing Tumor cells. These findings provide
both a novel experimental probe and a potential therapeutic scaffold for Ewing
Tumor.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3233630
PMID: 21926473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):4879-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr426. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Abnormal vascular development in zebrafish models for fukutin and FKRP
deficiency.

Wood AJ(1), Müller JS, Jepson CD, Laval SH, Lochmüller H, Bushby K, Barresi R,
Straub V.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Life, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.

Fukutin and fukutin-related protein (FKRP) are involved in the glycosylation of
a-dystroglycan, a key receptor for basement membrane proteins. Aberrant
a-dystroglycan glycosylation leads to a broad spectrum of disorders, ranging from
limb girdle muscular dystrophy to Walker-Warburg syndrome. This is the first
study investigating a role of fukutin and FKRP-mediated glycosylation in
angiogenesis. Transgenic zebrafish expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein 
in blood vessels were treated with morpholino antisense oligonucleotides that
blocked the expression of fukutin, FKRP and dystroglycan. All morphant fish
showed muscle damage and vascular abnormalities at day 1 post-fertilization.
Intersegmental vessels of somites failed to reach the dorsal longitudinal
anastomosis and in more severe phenotypes retracted further or were in some cases
even completely missing. In contrast, the eye vasculature was distorted in both
fukutin and FKRP morphants, but not in dystroglycan morphants or control fish.
The eye size was also smaller in the fukutin and FKRP morphants when compared
with dystroglycan knockdown fish and controls. In general, the fukutin morphant
fish had the most severe skeletal muscle and eye phenotype. Our findings suggest 
that fukutin and FKRP have functions that affect ocular development in zebrafish 
independently of dystroglycan. Despite anecdotal reports about vascular
abnormalities in patients affected by dystroglycanopathies, the clinical
relevance of such lesions remains unclear and should be subject to further review
and investigations.

PMID: 21926082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jan;29(1):95-101. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.796. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

Transcriptome network analysis reveals potential candidate genes for squamous
lung cancer.

Bai J(1), Hu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, PR
China. jingbaidoc@gmail.com

Squamous lung cancer is a common type of lung cancer; however, its mechanism of
oncogenesis is still unknown. The aim of this study was to screen candidate genes
of squamous lung cancer using a bioinformatics strategy and elucidate the
mechanism of squamous lung cancer. Published microarray data of the GSE3268
series was obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). Significance analysis of 
microarrays was performed using the software R, and differentially expressed
genes by R analysis were harvested. The relationship between transcription
factors and target genes in cancer were collected from the Transcriptional
regulatory element database. A transcriptome network analysis method was used to 
construct gene regulation networks and select the candidate genes for squamous
lung cancer. SPI1, FLI1, FOS, ETS2, EGR1 and PPARG were defined as candidate
genes for squamous lung cancer by the transcriptome network analysis method.
Among them, 5 genes had been reported to be involved in lung cancer, except SPI1 
and FLI1. Effective recall on previous knowledge conferred strong confidence in
these methods. It is demonstrated that transcriptome network analysis is useful
in the identification of candidate genes in disease.

PMID: 21922129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Blood. 2011 Nov 17;118(20):5604-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-04-348052. Epub 2011 
Sep 13.

Abnormal expression of FLI1 protein is an adverse prognostic factor in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Kornblau SM(1), Qiu YH, Zhang N, Singh N, Faderl S, Ferrajoli A, York H, Qutub
AA, Coombes KR, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. skornblau@mdanderson.org

Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI1), an Ets transcription factor family
member, is linked to acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) by chromosomal events at
the FLI1 locus, but the biologic impact of FLI1 expression on AML is unknown.
FLI1 protein expression was measured in 511 newly diagnosed AML patients.
Expression was similar in peripheral blood (PB) and BM and higher at diagnosis
than at relapse (P = .02). Compared with normal CD34(+) cells, expression in AML 
was above or below normal in 32% and 5% of patients, respectively. Levels were
negatively correlated with an antecedent hematologic disorder (P = .002) but not 
with age or cytogenetics. Mutated NPM1 (P = .0007) or FLT3-ITD (P < .02) had
higher expression. FLI1 levels were negatively correlated with 10 of 195 proteins
associated with proliferation and stromal interaction, and positively correlated 
(R > 0.3) with 19 others. The FLI1 level was not predictive of remission
attainment, but patients with low or high FLI1 expression had shorter remission
duration (22.6 and 40.3 vs 51.1 weeks, respectively; P = .01) and overall
survival (45.2 and 35.4 vs 59.4 weeks, respectively; P = .03). High FLI1 levels
were adverse in univariate and multivariate analysis. FLI1 expression is
frequently abnormal and prognostically adverse in AML. FLI1 and/or its response
genes may be therapeutically targetable to interfere with AML cell biology.

PMCID: PMC3217360
PMID: 21917756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Blood. 2011 Dec 22;118(26):6975-86. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-352658. Epub 2011 
Sep 12.

Etv2/ER71 induces vascular mesoderm from Flk1+PDGFRa+ primitive mesoderm.

Kataoka H(1), Hayashi M, Nakagawa R, Tanaka Y, Izumi N, Nishikawa S, Jakt ML,
Tarui H, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
Kobe, Japan. kataokah@cdb.riken.jp

Etv2 (Ets Variant 2) has been shown to be an indispensable gene for the
development of hematopoietic cells (HPCs)/endothelial cells (ECs). However, how
Etv2 specifies the mesoderm-generating HPCs/ECs remains incompletely understood. 
In embryonic stem cell (ESC) differentiation culture and Etv2-null embryos, we
show that Etv2 is dispensable for generating primitive Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+)
mesoderm but is required for the progression of Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) cells into
vascular/hematopoietic mesoderm. Etv2-null ESCs and embryonic cells were arrested
as Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) and failed to generate Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(-) mesoderm.
Flk-1(+)/Etv2(+) early embryonic cells showed significantly higher
hemato-endothelial potential than the Flk-1(+)/Etv2(-) population, suggesting
that Etv2 specifies a hemato-endothelial subset of Flk-1(+) mesoderm. Critical
hemato-endothelial genes were severely down-regulated in Etv2-null Flk-1(+)
cells. Among those genes Scl, Fli1, and GATA2 were expressed simultaneously with 
Etv2 in early embryos and seemed to be critical targets. Etv2 reexpression in
Etv2-null cells restored the development of CD41(+), CD45(+), and VE-cadherin(+) 
cells. Expression of Scl or Fli1 alone could also restore HPCs/ECs in the
Etv2-null background, indicating that these 2 genes are critical downstream
targets. Furthermore, VEGF induced Etv2 potently and rapidly in Flk-1(+)
mesoderm. We propose that Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(+) primitive mesoderm is committed into
Flk-1(+)/PDGFRa(-) vascular mesoderm through Etv2 and that up-regulation of Etv2 
by VEGF promotes this commitment.

PMID: 21911838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 1;141(2):721-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.052. Epub
2011 Sep 3.

Anti-angiogenic effect of furanodiene on HUVECs in vitro and on zebrafish in
vivo.

Zhong ZF(1), Hoi PM, Wu GS, Xu ZT, Tan W, Chen XP, Cui L, Wu T, Wang YT.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Macau, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Furanodiene is an active ingredient of the
traditional Chinese medicine, Rhizoma Curcumae, commonly used for the treatment
of cancer in China.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the anti-cancer property of Rhizoma Curcumae,
this study describes the anti-angiogenic activities of furanodiene in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro and in zebrafish in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HUVECs were treated with different doses of furanodiene in
the presence or absence of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). The
anti-proliferative effect of furanodiene was measured using the XTT assay. The
anti-migration and anti-invasion activities of this compound were investigated
with a wound-healing migration model and a three-dimensional cell invasion model,
respectively. The effects of furanodiene on HUVEC differentiation were assessed
by in vitro tube formation in Matrigel. The expression of related proteins was
detected by Western blot. Morphological observations of zebrafish were evaluated 
in transgenic Tg (fli1: EGFP) zebrafish embryos.
RESULTS: Our results showed that furanodiene exposure could significantly inhibit
the proliferation of HUVECs in a dose-dependent manner and inhibit VEGF-induced
proliferation at a low dose. Relative to the VEGF-induced control, the number of 
invading and migrating cells was significantly reduced in the furanodiene-treated
groups. Furanodiene also dramatically suppressed tube formation and p-Akt
(Ser473), p-Erk 1/2 (Thr202/Tyr204), ICAM-1, p-p85 (Ser428) as well as p85
protein expression. Furthermore, exposure to furanodiene inhibited angiogenesis
in the zebrafish model.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that furanodiene exposure exhibits a
potential anti-angiogenic effect through suppression of endothelial cell growth, 
invasion, migration and tube formation via regulation of the PI3K pathway. This
potential anti-angiogenic effect of furanodiene may play an important role in the
anti-tumor activity of the traditional Chinese medicine, Rhizoma Curcumae.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21911050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):4666-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324715. Epub 2011 
Aug 26.

Coordinate loss of a microRNA and protein-coding gene cooperate in the
pathogenesis of 5q- syndrome.

Kumar MS(1), Narla A, Nonami A, Mullally A, Dimitrova N, Ball B, McAuley JR,
Poveromo L, Kutok JL, Galili N, Raza A, Attar E, Gilliland DG, Jacks T, Ebert BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, USA.

Large chromosomal deletions are among the most common molecular abnormalities in 
cancer, yet the identification of relevant genes has proven difficult. The 5q-
syndrome, a subtype of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), is a chromosomal deletion 
syndrome characterized by anemia and thrombocytosis. Although we have previously 
shown that hemizygous loss of RPS14 recapitulates the failed erythroid
differentiation seen in 5q- syndrome, it does not affect thrombocytosis. Here we 
show that a microRNA located in the common deletion region of 5q- syndrome,
miR-145, affects megakaryocyte and erythroid differentiation. We find that
miR-145 functions through repression of Fli-1, a megakaryocyte and erythroid
regulatory transcription factor. Patients with del(5q) MDS have decreased
expression of miR-145 and increased expression of Fli-1. Overexpression of
miR-145 or inhibition of Fli-1 decreases the production of megakaryocytic cells
relative to erythroid cells, whereas inhibition of miR-145 or overexpression of
Fli-1 has a reciprocal effect. Moreover, combined loss of miR-145 and RPS14
cooperates to alter erythroid-megakaryocytic differentiation in a manner similar 
to the 5q- syndrome. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that coordinate
deletion of a miRNA and a protein-coding gene contributes to the phenotype of a
human malignancy, the 5q- syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3208282
PMID: 21873545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cancer Genet. 2011 Jul;204(7):351-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.008.

Promiscuous partnerships in Ewing's sarcoma.

Sankar S(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a highly aggressive bone and soft tissue tumor of children and
young adults. At the molecular genetic level Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by 
a balanced reciprocal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which encodes an
oncogenic fusion protein and transcription factor EWS/FLI. This tumor-specific
chimeric fusion retains the amino terminus of EWS, a member of the TET
(TLS/EWS/TAF15) family of RNA-binding proteins, and the carboxy terminus of FLI, 
a member of the ETS family of transcription factors. In addition to EWS/FLI,
variant translocation fusions belonging to the TET/ETS family have been
identified in Ewing's sarcoma. These studies solidified the importance of TET/ETS
fusions in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma and have since been used as
diagnostic markers for the disease. EWS fusions with non-ETS transcription factor
family members have been described in sarcomas that are clearly distinct
from Ewing's sarcoma. However, in recent years there have been reports of rare
fusions in "Ewing's-like tumors" that harbor the amino-terminus of EWS fused to
the carboxy-terminal DNA or chromatin-interacting domains contributed by non-ETS 
proteins. This review aims to summarize the growing list of fusion oncogenes that
characterize Ewing's sarcoma and Ewing's-like tumors and highlights important
questions that need to be answered to further support the existing concept that
Ewing's sarcoma is strictly a "TET/ETS" fusion-driven malignancy. Understanding
the molecular mechanisms of action of the various different fusion oncogenes will
provide better insights into the biology underlying this rare but important solid
tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164520
PMID: 21872822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023592. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Let-7a is a direct EWS-FLI-1 target implicated in Ewing's sarcoma development.

De Vito C(1), Riggi N, Suvà ML, Janiszewska M, Horlbeck J, Baumer K, Provero P,
Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology and Medicine, Institute of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are the second most common bone malignancy
in children and young adults, characterized by unique chromosomal translocations 
that in 85% of cases lead to expression of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein.
EWS-FLI-1 functions as an aberrant transcription factor that can both induce and 
suppress members of its target gene repertoire. We have recently demonstrated
that EWS-FLI-1 can alter microRNA (miRNA) expression and that miRNA145 is a
direct EWS-FLI-1 target whose suppression is implicated in ESFT development.
Here, we use miRNA arrays to compare the global miRNA expression profile of human
mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) and ESFT cell lines, and show that ESFT display a
distinct miRNA signature that includes induction of the oncogenic miRNA 17-92
cluster and repression of the tumor suppressor let-7 family. We demonstrate that 
direct repression of let-7a by EWS-FLI-1 participates in the tumorigenic
potential of ESFT cells in vivo. The mechanism whereby let-7a expression
regulates ESFT growth is shown to be mediated by its target gene HMGA2, as let-7a
overexpression and HMGA2 repression both block ESFT cell tumorigenicity.
Consistent with these observations, systemic delivery of synthetic let-7a into
ESFT-bearing mice restored its expression in tumor cells, decreased HMGA2
expression levels and resulted in ESFT growth inhibition in vivo. Our
observations provide evidence that deregulation of let-7a target gene expression 
participates in ESFT development and identify let-7a as promising new therapeutic
target for one of the most aggressive pediatric malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3154507
PMID: 21853155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011 Sep;236(9):1030-5. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2011.010315.
Epub 2011 Aug 15.

BLCAP induces apoptosis in human Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Fan DG(1), Zhao F, Ding Y, Wu MM, Fan QY, Shimizu K, Dohjima T, Nozawa S,
Wakahara K, Ohno T, Guo YS, Ma BA, Jiang JL.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Oncology Institute of Chinese PLA, Tangdu Hospital, Xi-an, China.

Bladder cancer-associated protein (BLCAP) is a novel candidate tumor suppressor
gene identified from human bladder carcinoma and highly associated with the
invasion of bladder cancer. We previously reported that it also plays a key role 
in the tumorigenesis and metastasis of human osteosarcoma. In the present study, 
we constructed a recombinant encoding BLCAP cDNA. Overexpression of BLCAP
resulted in growth inhibition and induced apoptosis of human TC-135 Ewing's
sarcoma cells in vitro. We further investigated the caspase-3/7 activity and
expressions of the fusion transcription factor Ewing's sarcoma protein-friend
leukemia virus integration 1 (EWS-FLI1) and the apoptosis regulator B-cell
lymphoma 2 (BCL-2). Cell apoptosis was accompanied by the down-regulated
expression of EWS-FLI1 and BCL-2. Our present results suggest that BLCAP may play
a role not only in regulating cell proliferation but also in coordinating
apoptosis through the down-regulation of BCL-2 and EWS-FLI1 in human Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

PMID: 21844121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Oct 11;137(3):1323-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.07.060. Epub
2011 Aug 5.

Bioassay-guided isolation of norviburtinal from the root of Rehmannia glutinosa, 
exhibited angiogenesis effect in zebrafish embryo model.

Liu CL(1), Cheng L, Kwok HF, Ko CH, Lau TW, Koon CM, Zhao M, Lau CP, Lau KM, Wong
CW, Leung PC, Fung KP, Lau CB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The root of Rehmannia glutinosa (RR) is commonly 
used as a wound-healing agent in various traditional Chinese herbal formulae;
while angiogenesis is one of the crucial aspects in wound-healing.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The objective of the present study was to investigate the
angiogenesis effects of RR aqueous crude extract and its active component(s)
using zebrafish model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The in vivo angiogenesis effect was studied using
transgenic TG(fli1:EGFP)(y1)/+(AB) zebrafish embryos by observing the capillary
sprouts formation in sub-intestinal vessel (SIV) of zebrafish embryos after 72 h 
post-fertilization under fluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: Our results indicated that RR aqueous crude extract (250 µg/ml)
exhibited significant angiogenesis effect, with an increase in capillary sprouts 
formation in SIV. Following sequential solvent partition of the RR aqueous crude 
extract with dichloromethane, ethyl acetate and n-butanol successively, the
dichloromethane fraction (DCM) was found to have the most sprouts formation in
the SIV region. Subjected to column chromatography, DCM fraction was further
fractionated into six sub-fractions and among these tested, the sub-fraction C2
exhibited the most potent angiogenesis effect. The major component, C2A, was
isolated and identified as norviburtinal using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
and mass spectrometry (MS). The compound norviburtinal (at 50 µg/ml) was shown to
possess significant angiogenesis effect in zebrafish model (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Norviburtinal was, for the first time, found in the extract of RR
and possessed novel angiogenesis effect. Bioassay-guided fractionation suggested 
that norviburtinal was not the only active component responsible for the
angiogenesis effect of RR.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21843616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Blood. 2011 Oct 6;118(14):3979-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-313296. Epub 2011
Aug 11.

Lysyl oxidase-like protein-2 regulates sprouting angiogenesis and type IV
collagen assembly in the endothelial basement membrane.

Bignon M(1), Pichol-Thievend C, Hardouin J, Malbouyres M, Bréchot N, Nasciutti L,
Barret A, Teillon J, Guillon E, Etienne E, Caron M, Joubert-Caron R, Monnot C,
Ruggiero F, Muller L, Germain S.

Author information: 
(1)College de France, Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology, Paris,
France.

Sprouting angiogenesis is associated with extensive extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling. The molecular mechanisms involved in building the vascular
microenvironment and its impact on capillary formation remain elusive. We
therefore performed a proteomic analysis of ECM from endothelial cells maintained
in hypoxia, a major stimulator of angiogenesis. Here, we report the
characterization of lysyl oxidase-like protein-2 (LOXL2) as a hypoxia-target
expressed in neovessels and accumulated in the endothelial ECM. LOXL2 belongs to 
the lysyl oxidase family of secreted enzymes involved in ECM crosslinking.
Knockdown experiments in Tg(fli1:egfp)y1 zebrafish embryos resulted in lack of
intersegmental vessel circulation and demonstrated LOXL2 involvement in proper
capillary formation. Further investigation in vitro by loss and gain of function 
experiments confirmed that LOXL2 was required for tubulogenesis in 3D fibrin gels
and demonstrated that this enzyme was required for collagen IV assembly in the
ECM. In addition, LOXL2 depletion down-regulated cell migration and
proliferation. These data suggest a major role for LOXL2 in the organization of
endothelial basal lamina and in the downstream mechanotransductive signaling.
Altogether, our study provides the first evidence for the role of LOXL2 in
regulating angiogenesis through collagen IV scaffolding.

PMID: 21835952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Sep;155A(9):2281-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34162. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Subtelomeric monosomy 11q and trisomy 16q in siblings and an unrelated child:
molecular characterization of two der(11)t(11;16).

Basinko A(1), Audebert-Bellanger S, Douet-Guilbert N, Le Franc J, Parent P,
Quemener S, La Selve P, Bovo C, Morel F, Le Bris MJ, De Braekeleer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Histologie, Cytologie et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine et
des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France.

We report here three children with a der(11)t(11;16), two sibs (patients 1 and 2)
having inherited a recombinant chromosome from a maternal t(11;16)(q24.3;q23.2)
and a third unrelated child with a de novo der(11)t(11;16)(q25;q22.1), leading to
partial monosomy 11q and trisomy 16q. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
using bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones and array-CGH were performed
to determine the breakpoints involved in the familial and the de novo
rearrangements. The partial 11 monosomy extended from 11q24.3 to 11qter and
measured 6.17-6.21<U+2009>Mb in Patients 1 and 2 while the size of the partial
11q25->qter monosomy was estimated at 1.97-2.11<U+2009>Mb for Patient 3. The partial 16 
trisomy extended from 16q23.2 to 16qter and measured 8.93-8.95<U+2009>Mb in Patients 1
and 2 while the size of the partial 16q22.1->qter trisomy was 20.82<U+2009>Mb for
Patient 3. Intraventricular hemorrhage and transitional thrombocytopenia were
found in both sibs but not in the third patient. The FLI1 gene, which is the most
relevant gene for thrombocytopenia in Jacobsen syndrome, was neither deleted in
family A nor in Patient 3. We suggest that a positional effect could affect the
FLI1 expression for these two sibs. Deafness of our three patients confirmed the 
association of this anomaly to 11q monosomy and tended to confirm the hypothetic 
role of DFNB20 in Jacobsen syndrome hearing loss. Both sibs shared most of the
features commonly observed in Jacobsen syndrome, but not the third patient. This 
confirmed that terminal 11q trisomy spanning 1 to 1.97-2.11<U+2009>Mb is not associated 
with a typical Jacobsen syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21834034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Oct;10(10):1846-56. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0100.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

An integrated chemical biology approach identifies specific vulnerability of
Ewing's sarcoma to combined inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B.

Winter GE(1), Rix U, Lissat A, Stukalov A, Müllner MK, Bennett KL, Colinge J,
Nijman SM, Kubicek S, Kovar H, Kontny U, Superti-Furga G.

Author information: 
(1)Ce-M-M-Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Lazarettgasse 14, AKH BT 25.3, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Ewing's sarcoma is a pediatric cancer of the bone that is characterized by the
expression of the chimeric transcription factor EWS-FLI1 that confers a highly
malignant phenotype and results from the chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12). Poor overall survival and pronounced long-term side effects
associated with traditional chemotherapy necessitate the development of novel,
targeted, therapeutic strategies. We therefore conducted a focused viability
screen with 200 small molecule kinase inhibitors in 2 different Ewing's sarcoma
cell lines. This resulted in the identification of several potential molecular
intervention points. Most notably, tozasertib (VX-680, MK-0457) displayed unique 
nanomolar efficacy, which extended to other cell lines, but was specific for
Ewing's sarcoma. Furthermore, tozasertib showed strong synergies with the
chemotherapeutic drugs etoposide and doxorubicin, the current standard agents for
Ewing's sarcoma. To identify the relevant targets underlying the specific
vulnerability toward tozasertib, we determined its cellular target profile by
chemical proteomics. We identified 20 known and unknown serine/threonine and
tyrosine protein kinase targets. Additional target deconvolution and functional
validation by RNAi showed simultaneous inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B to be
responsible for the observed tozasertib sensitivity, thereby revealing a new
mechanism for targeting Ewing's sarcoma. We further corroborated our cellular
observations with xenograft mouse models. In summary, the multilayered chemical
biology approach presented here identified a specific vulnerability of Ewing's
sarcoma to concomitant inhibition of Aurora kinases A and B by tozasertib and
danusertib, which has the potential to become a new therapeutic option.

PMID: 21768330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2011 Jul 19;48 Online:e43-8. doi:
10.3928/01913913-20110712-05.

Primary orbital Ewing sarcoma.

Yang Y(1), Liu Y, Yin Z.

Author information: 
(1)Southwest Hospital, Southwest Eye Hospital, Third Military Medical University,
No. 30 Gaotanyan Main Street, Shapingba District, Chongqing 400038, China.
yangyuli1979@yahoo.com.cn

The authors report the clinical manifestations, pathologic character, management,
and prognosis of primary orbital Ewing sarcoma, and review pertinent literature. 
A 6-year-old boy presented with the complaint of abruptly decreasing visual
acuity and right proptosis. Computed tomography scan revealed a mass in the
region of the right infratemporal orbit with extension into the infratemporal
fossa and masseteric space, and there was erosion of the right lateral orbital
wall. An anterior orbitotomy eyelid crease was performed to remove the tumor. The
tumor cells were positive in membranous pattern for CD99 immunostaining; all
other reactions were negative. The EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene was not detected by
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Combined radiotherapy was
applied. Primary orbital Ewing sarcoma is an extremely rare malignant tumor that 
shows a predilection for males (ratio: 1.4 to 1). Appropriate treatment consists 
of local resection, radiotherapy, and adjunctive chemotherapy.

Copyright 2011, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 21766739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021911. Epub 2011 Jul 8.

CCN2 is required for the TGF-ß induced activation of Smad1-Erk1/2 signaling
network.

Nakerakanti SS(1), Bujor AM, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthritis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

Connective tissue growth factor (CCN2) is a multifunctional matricellular
protein, which is frequently overexpressed during organ fibrosis. CCN2 is a
mediator of the pro-fibrotic effects of TGF-ß in cultured cells, but the specific
function of CCN2 in the fibrotic process has not been elucidated. In this study
we characterized the CCN2-dependent signaling pathways that are required for the 
TGF-ß induced fibrogenic response. By depleting endogenous CCN2 we show that CCN2
is indispensable for the TGF-ß-induced phosphorylation of Smad1 and Erk1/2, but
it is unnecessary for the activation of Smad3. TGF-ß stimulation triggered
formation of the CCN2/ß(3) integrin protein complexes and activation of Src
signaling. Furthermore, we demonstrated that signaling through the a(v)ß(3)
integrin receptor and Src was required for the TGF-ß induced Smad1
phosphorylation. Recombinant CCN2 activated Src and Erk1/2 signaling, and induced
phosphorylation of Fli1, but was unable to stimulate Smad1 or Smad3
phosphorylation. Additional experiments were performed to investigate the role of
CCN2 in collagen production. Consistent with the previous studies, blockade of
CCN2 abrogated TGF-ß-induced collagen mRNA and protein levels. Recombinant CCN2
potently stimulated collagen mRNA levels and upregulated activity of the COL1A2
promoter, however CCN2 was a weak inducer of collagen protein levels. CCN2
stimulation of collagen was dose-dependent with the lower doses (<50 ng/ml)
having a stimulatory effect and higher doses having an inhibitory effect on
collagen gene expression. In conclusion, our study defines a novel CCN2/a(v)ß(3) 
integrin/Src/Smad1 axis that contributes to the pro-fibrotic TGF-ß signaling and 
suggests that blockade of this pathway may be beneficial for the treatment of
fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3132735
PMID: 21760921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jul 12;108(28):11596-601. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104225108. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Dehydro-alpha-lapachone, a plant product with antivascular activity.

Garkavtsev I(1), Chauhan VP, Wong HK, Mukhopadhyay A, Glicksman MA, Peterson RT, 
Jain RK.

Author information: 
(1)Edwin L. Steele Laboratory, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
igorg@steele.mgh.harvard.edu

Antivascular agents have become a standard of treatment for many malignancies.
However, most of them target the VEGF pathway and lead to refractoriness. To
improve the diversity of options for antivascular therapy, we applied a
high-throughput screen for small molecules targeting cell adhesion. We then
assayed the resulting antiadhesion hits in a transgenic zebrafish line with
endothelial expression of EGFP (Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1)) to identify nontoxic molecules
with antivascular activity selective to neovasculature. This screen identified
dehydro-a-lapachone (DAL), a natural plant product. We found that DAL inhibits
vessel regeneration, interferes with vessel anastomosis, and limits plexus
formation in zebrafish. Furthermore, DAL induces vascular pruning and growth
delay in orthotopic mammary tumors in mice. We show that DAL targets cell
adhesion by promoting ubiquitination of the Rho-GTPase Rac1, which is frequently 
up-regulated in many different cancers.

PMCID: PMC3136298
PMID: 21709229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 5;286(31):27494-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.224089. Epub
2011 Jun 16.

Dipeptidyl peptidases as survival factors in Ewing sarcoma family of tumors:
implications for tumor biology and therapy.

Lu C(1), Tilan JU, Everhart L, Czarnecka M, Soldin SJ, Mendu DR, Jeha D, Hanafy
J, Lee CK, Sun J, Izycka-Swieszewska E, Toretsky JA, Kitlinska J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is a group of aggressive pediatric
malignancies driven by the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein, an aberrant transcription
factor up-regulating specific target genes, such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) and its 
Y1 and Y5 receptors (Y5Rs). Previously, we have shown that both exogenous NPY and
endogenous NPY stimulate ESFT cell death via its Y1 and Y5Rs. Here, we
demonstrate that this effect is prevented by dipeptidyl peptidases (DPPs), which 
cleave NPY to its shorter form, NPY(3-36), not active at Y1Rs. We have shown that
NPY-induced cell death can be abolished by overexpression of DPPs and enhanced by
their down-regulation. Both NPY treatment and DPP blockade activated the same
cell death pathway mediated by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1) and
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF). Moreover, the decrease in cell survival induced 
by DPP inhibition was blocked by Y1 and Y5R antagonists, confirming its
dependence on endogenous NPY. Interestingly, similar levels of NPY-driven cell
death were achieved by blocking membrane DPPIV and cytosolic DPP8 and DPP9. Thus,
this is the first evidence of these intracellular DPPs cleaving releasable
peptides, such as NPY, in live cells. In contrast, another membrane DPP,
fibroblast activation protein (FAP), did not affect NPY actions. In conclusion,
DPPs act as survival factors for ESFT cells and protect them from cell death
induced by endogenous NPY. This is the first demonstration that intracellular
DPPs are involved in regulation of ESFT growth and may become potential
therapeutic targets for these tumors.

PMCID: PMC3149342
PMID: 21680731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2011 Jun 22;103(12):962-78. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djr156. Epub
2011 Jun 8.

Identification of an inhibitor of the EWS-FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor by 
high-throughput screening.

Grohar PJ(1), Woldemichael GM, Griffin LB, Mendoza A, Chen QR, Yeung C, Currier
DG, Davis S, Khanna C, Khan J, McMahon JB, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, 10 Center
Dr-MSC 1104, 10 CRC 1W-3816, Bethesda, MD 20892-1104, USA. groharp@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal translocations generating oncogenic transcription factors
are the hallmark of a variety of tumors, including many sarcomas. Ewing sarcoma
family of tumors (ESFTs) are characterized by the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation
that generates the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 and Friend leukemia virus
integration 1 (EWS-FLI1) fusion transcription factor responsible for the highly
malignant phenotype of this tumor. Although continued expression of EWS-FLI1 is
believed to be critical for ESFT cell survival, a clinically effective
small-molecule inhibitor remains elusive likely because EWS-FLI1 is a
transcription factor and therefore widely felt to be "undruggable."
METHODS: We developed a high-throughput screen to evaluate more than 50 000
compounds for inhibition of EWS-FLI1 activity in TC32 ESFT cells. We used a TC32 
cell-based luciferase reporter screen using the EWS-FLI1 downstream target NR0B1 
promoter and a gene signature secondary screen to sort and prioritize the
compounds. We characterized the lead compound, mithramycin, based on its ability 
to inhibit EWS-FLI1 activity in vitro using microarray expression profiling,
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblot
analysis, and in vivo using immunohistochemistry. We studied the impact of this
inhibition on cell viability in vitro and on tumor growth in ESFT xenograft
models in vivo (n = 15-20 mice per group). All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Mithramycin inhibited expression of EWS-FLI1 downstream targets at the
mRNA and protein levels and decreased the growth of ESFT cells at half maximal
inhibitory concentrations between 10 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 8 to 13 nM) 
and 15 nM (95% CI = 13 to 19 nM). Mithramycin suppressed the growth of two
different ESFT xenograft tumors and prolonged the survival of ESFT
xenograft-bearing mice by causing a decrease in mean tumor volume. For example,
in the TC32 xenograft model, on day 15 of treatment, the mean tumor volume for
the mithramycin-treated mice was approximately 3% of the tumor volume observed in
the control mice (mithramycin vs control: 69 vs 2388 mm(3), difference = 2319
mm(3), 95% CI = 1766 to 2872 mm(3), P < .001).
CONCLUSION: Mithramycin inhibits EWS-FLI1 activity and demonstrates ESFT
antitumor activity both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3119649
PMID: 21653923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Cutan Pathol. 2011 Aug;38(8):636-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0560.2011.01705.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Superficial Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors: a clinicopathological study with
differential diagnoses.

Machado I(1), Llombart B, Calabuig-Fariñas S, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Medical School, Valencia University, Valencia, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Superficial/cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are
rare and have a relatively favorable prognosis compared with deep-seated tumors. 
The aim of the present study is to describe the clinicopathological
characteristics of six genetically confirmed ESFT presenting a superficial
location.
METHODS: Clinical data, radiology, histopathology, immunohistochemistry,
molecular study [reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR)/fluorescence in situ hybridization], treatment and follow-up data were
retrieved.
RESULTS: Locations included fingers (2), back (1), neck (1), thigh (1) and
subcutaneous breast (1). Two tumors showed conventional morphology, one consisted
of primitive neuroectodermal tumor and three tumors showed atypical vascular
morphology with hemosiderin deposition and pigmentation. All cases showed CD99,
FLI-1, HNK-1 and CAV-1 positivity. RT-PCR revealed the EWS/Fli1 gene fusion in
all cases. Treatment was by wide excision in all cases; one received chemotherapy
(CT) and one CT and radiotherapy. Available follow-up revealed the following: two
patients with metastasis and death at 5 months and 2 years and one local
recurrence at 18 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Superficial ESFT appears to have a relatively favorable prognosis
but further studies with additional series, a larger number of cases and more
extensive follow-up are necessary to confirm this statement.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21649689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Oncogene. 2011 Dec 8;30(49):4910-20. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.197. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

A novel oncogenic mechanism in Ewing sarcoma involving IGF pathway targeting by
EWS/Fli1-regulated microRNAs.

McKinsey EL(1), Parrish JK, Irwin AE, Niemeyer BF, Kern HB, Birks DK, Jedlicka P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Colorado, Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRs) are a novel class of cellular bioactive molecules with critical 
functions in the regulation of gene expression in normal biology and disease.
MiRs are frequently misexpressed in cancer, with potent biological consequences. 
However, relatively little is known about miRs in pediatric cancers, including
sarcomas. Moreover, the mechanisms behind aberrant miR expression in cancer are
poorly understood. Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive pediatric malignancy driven by 
EWS/Ets fusion oncoproteins, which are gain-of-function transcriptional
regulators. We employed stable silencing of EWS/Fli1, the most common of the
oncogenic fusions, and global miR profiling to identify EWS/Fli1-regulated miRs
with oncogenesis-modifying roles in Ewing sarcoma. In this report, we
characterize a group of miRs (100, 125b, 22, 221/222, 27a and 29a) strongly
repressed by EWS/Fli1. Strikingly, all of these miRs have predicted targets in
the insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling pathway, a pivotal driver of Ewing
sarcoma oncogenesis. We demonstrate that miRs in this group negatively regulate
the expression of multiple pro-oncogenic components of the IGF pathway, namely
IGF-1, IGF-1 receptor, mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin and ribosomal
protein S6 kinase A1. Consistent with tumor-suppressive functions, these miRs
manifest growth inhibitory properties in Ewing sarcoma cells. Our studies thus
uncover a novel oncogenic mechanism in Ewing sarcoma, involving
post-transcriptional derepression of IGF signaling by the EWS/Fli1 fusion
oncoprotein via miRs. This novel pathway may be amenable to innovative
therapeutic targeting in Ewing sarcoma and other malignancies with activated IGF 
signaling.

PMCID: PMC4696862
PMID: 21643012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Genes Immun. 2011 Oct;12(7):589-94. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.37. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

FLI1 polymorphism affects susceptibility to cutaneous leishmaniasis in Brazil.

Castellucci L(1), Jamieson SE, Miller EN, de Almeida LF, Oliveira J, Magalhães A,
Guimarães LH, Lessa M, Lago E, de Jesus AR, Carvalho EM, Blackwell JM.

Author information: 
(1)Serviço de Imunologia, Hospital Universitário Professor Edgard Santos, Federal
University of Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.

Mapping murine genes controlling cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) identified Fli1 as 
a candidate influencing resistance to L. major and enhanced wound healing. We
examine FLI1 as a gene controlling CL and mucosal leishmaniasis (ML) caused by L.
braziliensis in humans. Intron 1 single nucleotide polymorphisms tagging promoter
and enhancer elements were analysed in 168 nuclear families (250 CL; 87 ML cases)
and replicated in 157 families (402 CL; 39 ML cases). Robust case-pseudocontrol
logistic regression analysis showed association between allele C (odds ratio (OR)
1.65; 95% confidence interval 1.18-2.29; P=0.003) of FLI1_rs7930515 and CL in the
primary sample that was confirmed (OR 1.60; 95% confidence interval 1.10-2.33;
P=0.014) in the replication set (combined P=1.8 × 10(-4)). FLI1_rs7930515 is in
linkage disequilibrium with the functional GAn microsatellite in the proximal
promoter. Haplotype associations extended across the enhancer, which was not
polymorphic. ML associated with inverse haplotypes compared with CL. Wound
healing is therefore important in CL, providing potential for therapies
modulating FLI1.

PMCID: PMC3297968
PMID: 21633373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Pathol Int. 2011 Jun;61(6):382-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02681.x. Epub
2011 May 16.

Primary kaposiform hemangioendothelioma of a long bone: two cases in unusual
locations with long-term follow up.

Ma J(1), Shi QL, Jiang SJ, Zhou HB, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China. maggie-maj@163.com

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KHE) is a rare vascular neoplasm of low
malignant potential that mainly affects infants and adolescents. The tumor almost
exclusively occurs in somatic soft tissue or the retroperitoneum. We report
herein two cases of primary KHE occurring in a long bone without cutaneous
changes with long-term follow up in young patients. The patients were a
9-year-old girl and 5-year-old boy presenting with lytic lesions of the femur and
humerus, respectively, without cutaneous lesions. Histologically, the neoplasms
were comprised of nodules of spindle- to oval-shaped cells growing in an
infiltrative fashion. The neoplastic cells formed poorly canalized or slit-like
blood vessels alternating with solid spindle areas. Immunohistochemical studies
showed that the tumor cells expressed CD31, CD34 and Fli1, but not HHV8, LNA-1 or
GLUT1. D2-40 stained the neoplastic spindle cells and lymphatic channels adjacent
to vascular lobules. The girl remains well with 15 years and 6 months follow up
after a second complete excision. The boy has no signs of recurrence or
metastasis nearly 5 years after local complete excision. To our best knowledge,
this is the first report in the English literature of primary long bone
occurrences of KHE without cutaneous changes with long-term follow up.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21615616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(14):2817-26. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01305-10. Epub 2011 May 
16.

A Runx1-Smad6 rheostat controls Runx1 activity during embryonic hematopoiesis.

Knezevic K(1), Bee T, Wilson NK, Janes ME, Kinston S, Polderdijk S,
Kolb-Kokocinski A, Ottersbach K, Pencovich N, Groner Y, de Bruijn M, Göttgens B, 
Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

The oncogenic transcription factor Runx1 is required for the specification of
definitive hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in the developing embryo. The activity 
of this master regulator is tightly controlled during development. The
transcription factors that upregulate the expression of Runx1 also upregulate the
expression of Smad6, the inhibitory Smad, which controls Runx1 activity by
targeting it to the proteasome. Here we show that Runx1, in conjunction with
Fli1, Gata2, and Scl, directly regulates the expression of Smad6 in the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region in the developing embryo, where HSCs
originate. Runx1 regulates Smad6 activity via a novel upstream enhancer, and
Runx1 null embryos show reduced Smad6 transcripts in the yolk-sac and
c-Kit-positive fetal liver cells. By directly regulating the expression of Smad6,
Runx1 sets up a functional rheostat to control its own activity. The perturbation
of this rheostat, using a proteasomal inhibitor, results in an increase in Runx1 
and Smad6 levels that can be directly attributed to increased Runx1 binding to
tissue-specific regulatory elements of these genes. Taken together, we describe a
scenario in which a key hematopoietic transcription factor controls its own
expression levels by transcriptionally controlling its controller.

PMCID: PMC3133398
PMID: 21576367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Cell. 2011 May 17;20(5):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.04.008.

Genome-wide analysis of simultaneous GATA1/2, RUNX1, FLI1, and SCL binding in
megakaryocytes identifies hematopoietic regulators.

Tijssen MR(1), Cvejic A, Joshi A, Hannah RL, Ferreira R, Forrai A, Bellissimo DC,
Oram SH, Smethurst PA, Wilson NK, Wang X, Ottersbach K, Stemple DL, Green AR,
Ouwehand WH, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Hematopoietic differentiation critically depends on combinations of
transcriptional regulators controlling the development of individual lineages.
Here, we report the genome-wide binding sites for the five key hematopoietic
transcription factors--GATA1, GATA2, RUNX1, FLI1, and TAL1/SCL--in primary human 
megakaryocytes. Statistical analysis of the 17,263 regions bound by at least one 
factor demonstrated that simultaneous binding by all five factors was the most
enriched pattern and often occurred near known hematopoietic regulators. Eight
genes not previously appreciated to function in hematopoiesis that were bound by 
all five factors were shown to be essential for thrombocyte and/or erythroid
development in zebrafish. Moreover, one of these genes encoding the PDZK1IP1
protein shared transcriptional enhancer elements with the blood stem cell
regulator TAL1/SCL. Multifactor ChIP-Seq analysis in primary human cells coupled 
with a high-throughput in vivo perturbation screen therefore offers a powerful
strategy to identify essential regulators of complex mammalian differentiation
processes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3145975
PMID: 21571218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19343. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019343.

YK-4-279 inhibits ERG and ETV1 mediated prostate cancer cell invasion.

Rahim S(1), Beauchamp EM, Kong Y, Brown ML, Toretsky JA, Üren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D. C., United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Genomic rearrangements involving the ETS family of transcription
factors occur in 40-70% of prostate cancer cases. ERG and ETV1 are the most
common ETS members observed in these genetic alterations. The high prevalence of 
these rearrangements and their biological significance represents a novel
therapeutic target for the treatment of prostate cancer.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We recently reported the development of YK-4-279, a small
molecule inhibitor of EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein in Ewing's Sarcoma. Since ERG and ETV1
belong to the same class of ETS factors as FLI1, we tested the ability of
YK-4-279 to inhibit biological functions of ERG and ETV1 proteins in prostate
cancer. YK-4-279 inhibited ERG and ETV1 mediated transcriptional activity in a
luciferase assay. YK-4-279 also decreased ERG and ETV1 downstream target mRNA and
protein expression in ETV1-fusion positive LNCaP and ERG fusion positive VCaP
cells. YK-4-279 reduced the motility of LNCaP cells in a scratch assay and the
invasive phenotype of both LNCaP and VCaP cells in a HUVEC invasion assay.
Fusion-negative PC3 cells were unresponsive to YK-4-279. SiRNA mediated ERG
knockdown in VCaP cells resulted in a loss of drug responsiveness. Concurrently, 
transient ERG expression in PC-3 cells resulted in increased invasive potential, 
which was reduced by YK-4-279.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate that YK-4-279 inhibits ERG and ETV1 biological
activity in fusion-positive prostate cancer cells leading to decreased motility
and invasion. Therefore, YK-4-279 may have an impact on metastasis in prostate
cancer and it may be further evaluated for its clinical applications in prostate 
cancer in addition to Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC3084826
PMID: 21559405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19305. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019305.

Modeling initiation of Ewing sarcoma in human neural crest cells.

von Levetzow C(1), Jiang X, Gwye Y, von Levetzow G, Hung L, Cooper A, Hsu JH,
Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United 
States of America.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are aggressive bone and soft tissue tumors
that express EWS-ETS fusion genes as driver mutations. Although the histogenesis 
of ESFT is controversial, mesenchymal (MSC) and/or neural crest (NCSC) stem cells
have been implicated as cells of origin. For the current study we evaluated the
consequences of EWS-FLI1 expression in human embryonic stem cell-derived NCSC
(hNCSC). Ectopic expression of EWS-FLI1 in undifferentiated hNCSC and their
neuro-mesenchymal stem cell (hNC-MSC) progeny was readily tolerated and led to
altered expression of both well established as well as novel EWS-FLI1 target
genes. Importantly, whole genome expression profiling studies revealed that the
molecular signature of established ESFT is more similar to hNCSC than any other
normal tissue, including MSC, indicating that maintenance or reactivation of the 
NCSC program is a feature of ESFT pathogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, 
EWS-FLI1 induced hNCSC genes as well as the polycomb proteins BMI-1 and EZH2 in
hNC-MSC. In addition, up-regulation of BMI-1 was associated with avoidance of
cellular senescence and reversible silencing of p16. Together these studies
confirm that, unlike terminally differentiated cells but consistent with bone
marrow-derived MSC, NCSC tolerate expression of EWS-FLI1 and ectopic expression
of the oncogene initiates transition to an ESFT-like state. In addition, to our
knowledge this is the first demonstration that EWS-FLI1-mediated induction of
BMI-1 and epigenetic silencing of p16 might be critical early initiating events
in ESFT tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3084816
PMID: 21559395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Diagn Cytopathol. 2012 Aug;40 Suppl 2:E156-61. doi: 10.1002/dc.21717. Epub 2011
May 4.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: Report of 
a case diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology and confirmed by
immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR along with review of literature.

Kumar R(1), Gautam U, Srinivasan R, Lal A, Sharma U, Nijhawan R, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Gynecological Pathology, Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) of the kidney
is a distinct entity that can be mistaken for variety of round cell tumors. We
report a rare case of ES/PNET of the kidney in a 35-year-old female patient
diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) and confirmed by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). Ultrasound guided FNAC smears from the kidney mass showed a population 
of malignant small round cells with perivascular arrangement and focal rosette
formation. IHC performed on the cell block, showed strong immunopositivity for
CD99 (MIC2) and vimentin. Molecular analysis of the aspirate by RT-PCR confirmed 
the EWS-FLI type1 transcript. The application of RT-PCR on FNAC material for
establishing a diagnosis of renal ES/PNET is being reported for the first time.
FNAC also confirmed metastases in the right level I cervical lymph node. The
utility of IHC and molecular techniques in diagnosis of such a rare case is
stressed and relevant literature is discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21548122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 2011 Jun 30;117(26):7079-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-317990. Epub 2011 
May 2.

ERG promotes T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia and is transcriptionally regulated in
leukemic cells by a stem cell enhancer.

Thoms JA(1), Birger Y, Foster S, Knezevic K, Kirschenbaum Y, Chandrakanthan V,
Jonquieres G, Spensberger D, Wong JW, Oram SH, Kinston SJ, Groner Y, Lock R,
MacKenzie KL, Göttgens B, Izraeli S, Pimanda JE.

Author information: 
(1)Lowy Cancer Research Centre and the Prince of Wales Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The Ets-related gene (ERG) is an Ets-transcription factor required for normal
blood stem cell development. ERG expression is down-regulated during early
T-lymphopoiesis but maintained in T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), where
it is recognized as an independent risk factor for adverse outcome. However, it
is unclear whether ERG is directly involved in the pathogenesis of T-ALL and how 
its expression is regulated. Here we demonstrate that transgenic expression of
ERG causes T-ALL in mice and that its knockdown reduces the proliferation of
human MOLT4 T-ALL cells. We further demonstrate that ERG expression in primary
human T-ALL cells is mediated by the binding of other T-cell oncogenes SCL/TAL1, 
LMO2, and LYL1 in concert with ERG, FLI1, and GATA3 to the ERG +85 enhancer. This
enhancer is not active in normal T cells but in transgenic mice targets
expression to fetal liver c-kit(+) cells, adult bone marrow stem/progenitors and 
early CD4(-)CD8(-) double-negative thymic progenitors. Taken together, these data
illustrate that ERG promotes T-ALL and that failure to extinguish activity of
stem cell enhancers associated with regulatory transcription factors such as ERG 
can contribute to the development of leukemia.

PMID: 21536859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 1;286(26):22750-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.225433. Epub 2011 
Apr 28.

Oncogenic fusion protein EWS/FLI1 down-regulates gene expression by both
transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms.

France KA(1), Anderson JL, Park A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Ewing family tumors are characterized by a translocation between the RNA binding 
protein EWS and one of five ETS transcription factors, most commonly FLI1. The
fusion protein produced by the translocation has been thought to act as an
aberrant transcription factor, leading to changes in gene expression and cellular
transformation. In this study, we investigated the specific processes EWS/FLI1
utilizes to alter gene expression. Using both heterologous NIH 3T3 and human
Ewing Family Tumor cell lines, we have demonstrated by quantitative pre-mRNA
analysis that EWS/FLI1 repressed the expression of previously validated direct
target genes at the level of transcript synthesis. ChIP experiments showed that
EWS/FLI1 decreases the amount of Pol II at the promoter of down-regulated genes
in both murine and human model systems. However, in down-regulated target genes, 
there was a significant disparity between the modulation of cognate mRNA and
pre-mRNAs, suggesting that these genes could also be regulated at a
posttranscriptional level. Confirming this, we found that EWS/FLI1 decreased the 
transcript half-life of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3, a
down-regulated direct target gene in human tumor-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines. Additionally, we have shown through reexpression experiments that full
EWS/FLI1-mediated transcriptional repression requires intact EWS and ETS domains.
Together these data demonstrate that EWS/FLI1 can dictate steady-state target
gene expression by modulating both transcript synthesis and degradation.

PMCID: PMC3123042
PMID: 21531709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2011 Jul;153(7):1477-85. doi: 10.1007/s00701-011-1028-z.
Epub 2011 Apr 26.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma of cranial bones: analysis of ten patients.

Salunke PS(1), Gupta K, Malik V, Kumar N, Henke LE, Cai C, Chen WS, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India 160012.
drpravin_salunke@yahoo.co.uk

Comment in
    Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2012 Mar;154(3):565-6; author reply 567-8.

OBJECTIVE: Ewing's sarcomas are the second most common bone tumors in children
and primary involvement of the cranium is uncommon. We analyzed retrospectively
the data of ten patients with this rare subset of disease, who had been treated
at our institute since 2005. Our aim was to assess the outcomes, recurrence rates
and the selection of appropriate treatment methods.
METHODS: The patients were reviewed with respect to their clinical presentations,
treatment, and outcomes. Computed tomographic scanning of the brain was performed
for all patients. Skeletal surveys with routine radiographs and technetium-99
bone scans to detect extracranial Ewing's sarcomas were performed for all
patients. For all ten patients, radical tumor excision was achieved surgically.
Chromosomal translocation studies were carried out on paraffin blocks for nine
patients, using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). All patients were then subjected to adjuvant multidrug
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. The follow-up periods ranged from 2 months to 5
years (mean, 17.6 months).
RESULTS: The predominant presenting features were headaches, increased
intracranial pressure, scalp swelling and trigeminal nerve involvement. The
erosion of dura and intradural extension was noted in eight patients in our
series. All nine patients, in whom FSIH and reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)
was done, tested positive for EWS-FLI1(t22:12) translocation. All patients
underwent radical excision within safe limits, followed by chemoradiation. Three 
patients had local recurrences, which were detected within 12 months after
surgery. All three of them died within weeks of presentation with recurrence. One
patient experienced a recurrence after 30 months. This recurrent tumor was
completely excised, and additional chemotherapy was administered. There was a
local recurrence again after 18 months that was treated with surgery and
chemoradiation, and the patient is still surviving 5 years after the primary
surgery. One patient had metastasis at presentation and died within 2 months of
surgery. The remaining five seem to have good outcomes, though the follow-ups
were not very long.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of primary Ewing's sarcoma of the cranium still remains
to be radical surgery, aggressive multidrug chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy may not work in patients with large intracranial
extension due to raised pressure making decompression imperative. The outcome is 
usually good if there is no early recurrence. Early recurrence, presence of
metastasis and extremes of age probably bears a poor outcome. However, a larger
series is required to confirm these findings.

PMID: 21516517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Mol Diagn. 2011 May;13(3):313-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jmoldx.2011.01.004. Epub 2011 
Mar 31.

Molecular diagnosis in Ewing family tumors: the Rizzoli experience--222
consecutive cases in four years.

Gamberi G(1), Cocchi S, Benini S, Magagnoli G, Morandi L, Kreshak J, Gambarotti
M, Picci P, Zanella L, Alberghini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Section of Molecular Biology, Rizzoli Institute, Via 
di Barbiano 1/10, Bologna, Italy. gabriella.gamberi@ior.it

The Ewing's family of tumors (EFTs) are characterized by chimeric transcripts
generated by specific chromosomal rearrangements. The most common fusions are
between the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 and the ETS family of transcription
factors; rarely, FUS (on chromosome 16) substitutes for EWSR1. The detection of
specific translocations using molecular analysis is now a routine part of the
pathological examination of EFT. Here, we report our experience with molecular
diagnosis of EFT during the 4 years (2006-2009) at the Rizzoli Institute. We
analyzed 222 consecutive tumors with a presumptive diagnosis of EFT using
molecular techniques and IHC. We found five distinct types of EWSR1-FLI1 fusion
transcripts resulting from translocation t(11;22), three types of EWSR1-ERG
transcripts resulting from t(21;22), and one type of t(2;22) resulting in
EWSR1-FEV fusion. Molecular investigation validated 92% of cases ultimately
diagnosed as EFT; IHC validated 76% of the cases. Thus, despite the difficulties 
and limitations associated with both molecular and IHC analysis on fresh and
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, a combination of these techniques is
the best approach to enhancing the accuracy of EFT diagnosis. We also present our
method for choosing which molecular techniques to apply. Finally, we collected
the most prevalent breakpoints reported in the literature, indicating which exons
are involved, the sequence breakpoints, and the NCBI reference sequences.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology and the Association
for Molecular Pathology. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3077725
PMID: 21458383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Apr;63(4):884-93. doi: 10.1002/art.30235.

Genome-wide association study of rheumatoid arthritis in Koreans:
population-specific loci as well as overlap with European susceptibility loci.

Freudenberg J(1), Lee HS, Han BG, Shin HD, Kang YM, Sung YK, Shim SC, Choi CB,
Lee AT, Gregersen PK, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research and North Shore-Long Island Jewish
Health System, Manhasset, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To perform a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in Koreans in order 
to identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We generated high-quality genotypes for 441,398 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 801 RA cases and 757 controls. We then tested 79 markers 
from 46 loci for replication in an independent sample of 718 RA cases and 719
controls.
RESULTS: Genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10(-08) ) was attained by markers from
the major histocompatibility complex region and from the PADI4 gene. The
replication data showed nominal association signals (P < 5 × 10(-02) ) for
markers from 11 of the 46 replicated loci, greatly exceeding random expectation. 
Genes that were most significant in the replication stage and in the combined
analysis include the known European RA loci BLK, AFF3, and CCL21. Thus, in
addition to the previously associated STAT4 alleles, variants at these three loci
may contribute to RA not only among Europeans, but also among Asians. In
addition, we observed replication signals near the genes PTPN2, FLI1, ARHGEF3,
LCP2, GPR137B, TRHDE, and CGA1. Based on the excess of small P values in the
replication stage study, we estimate that more than half of these loci are
genuine RA susceptibility genes. Finally, we systematically analyzed the presence
of association signals in Koreans at established European RA loci, which showed a
significant enrichment of European RA loci among the Korean RA loci.
CONCLUSION: Genetic risk for RA involves both population-specific loci as well as
many shared genetic susceptibility loci in comparisons of Asian and European
populations.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21452313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Jul;131(7):1469-76. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.63. Epub 2011
Mar 31.

Fli1 is a negative regulator of estrogen receptor a in dermal fibroblasts.

Hattori T(1), Stawski L, Nakerakanti SS, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Estrogen is an important regulator of dermal fibroblast functions, including
extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis. Estrogen mediates its effects through
estrogen receptors (ERs), ERa and ERß; however, regulation of ERs in dermal
fibroblasts remains poorly understood. Friend leukemia integration factor 1
(Fli1), a member of the Ets transcription factor family, has been shown to play a
pivotal role in regulation of the ECM genes in dermal fibroblasts. The aim of
this study was to examine a possible interaction between Fli1 and estrogen
pathways, focusing on ERa. We show that treatment of human dermal fibroblasts
with transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) increases ERa protein and mRNA levels. 
Similarly, ERa expression was increased in response to small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated depletion of Fli1, suggesting that Fli1 is a mediator of the
TGF-ß effects on ERa expression. Accordingly, we showed that Fli1 binds to the
most proximal region of the ERa promoter, and dissociates from the promoter upon 
TGF-ß treatment. An inverse correlation between Fli1 and ERa expression levels
was confirmed in cultured skin fibroblasts obtained from Fli1(+/-) mice and in
the skin of Fli1(+/-) mice in vivo. This study supports a role of Fli1 as a
negative regulator of the ERa gene in dermal fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3825457
PMID: 21451544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:362173. doi: 10.1155/2011/362173. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Copy Number Alterations and Methylation in Ewing's Sarcoma.

Jahromi MS(1), Jones KB, Schiffman JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is the second most common bone malignancy affecting children and 
young adults. The prognosis is especially poor in metastatic or relapsed disease.
The cell of origin remains elusive, but the EWS-FLI1 fusion oncoprotein is
present in the majority of cases. The understanding of the molecular basis of
Ewing's sarcoma continues to progress slowly. EWS-FLI1 affects gene expression,
but other factors must also be at work such as mutations, gene copy number
alterations, and promoter methylation. This paper explores in depth two molecular
aspects of Ewing's sarcoma: copy number alterations (CNAs) and methylation. While
CNAs consistently have been reported in Ewing's sarcoma, their clinical
significance has been variable, most likely due to small sample size and tumor
heterogeneity. Methylation is thought to be important in oncogenesis and balanced
karyotype cancers such as Ewing's, yet it has received only minimal attention in 
prior studies. Future CNA and methylation studies will help to understand the
molecular basis of this disease.

PMCID: PMC3061291
PMID: 21437220  [PubMed]


423. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jan;40(1):27-31.

[Epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma: a clinicopathologic and
immunohistochemical study of 3 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Cai JN(1), Peng F, Li LX, Cheng YF, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Department of Oncology, Cancer Hospital, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features and differential diagnosis of 
epithelioid sarcoma-like hemangioendothelioma (ES-H).
METHODS: The clinical, radiologic and pathologic features of three cases of ES-H 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: All the 3 cases occurred in male adults. The age ranged from 44 to 53
years. The presentations included left neck mass, iliac pain and bilateral
shoulder masses. Histologically, ES-H was composed of a mixture of spindle and
epithelioid tumor cells. Transition between the two cell types was demonstrated. 
The tumor cells were arranged in compact sheets, vague nodules or intersecting
fascicles, amongst a collagenous stroma. Central coagulative necrosis was
identified in one case, reminiscent the morphology that seen in epithelioid
sarcoma. There was no evidence of angiogenesis, though focal presence of
intracytoplasmic vacuoles was seen in one case, as in classic examples of
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma. Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor
cells expressed both epithelial (AE1/AE3, CAM5.2 and epithelial membrane antigen)
and endothelial (CD31, Fli-1 and factor VIII-related antigen) markers. Two of the
cases were also positive for CD34. All of the patients were treated by surgical
resection. Two patients remain well at 14-month and 9-month follow up,
respectively. The remaining patient had repeated local recurrences during a
6-year period.
CONCLUSIONS: ES-H represents a rare morphologic type of hemangioendothelioma. It 
has some overlapping histologic features with epithelioid sarcoma and epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma. The endothelial nature of ES-H is difficult to be verified 
on the basis of morphologic examination alone. Confirmation of the diagnosis with
immunohistochemistry is necessary. ES-H is likely related to epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma and may represent a cellular spindle cell variant of
epithelioid hemangioendothelioma.

PMID: 21429355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Ann Saudi Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;31(2):174-82. doi: 10.4103/0256-4947.78206.

Characteristics of human Ewing/PNET sarcoma models.

Teicher BA(1), Bagley RG, Rouleau C, Kruger A, Ren Y, Kurtzberg L.

Author information: 
(1)Genzyme Corporation, 49 New York Avenue, Framingham, MA 01701, USA.
beverlyteicher@aol.com

Ewing/PNET (peripheral neuroepithelioma) tumors are rare aggressive bone sarcomas
occurring in young people. Rare-disease clinical trials can require global
collaborations and many years. In vivo models that as accurately as possible
reflect the clinical disease are helpful in selecting therapeutics with the most 
promise of positive clinical impact. Human Ewing/PNET sarcoma cell lines
developed over the past 45 years are described. Several of these have undergone
genetic analysis and have been confirmed to be those of Ewing/PNET sarcoma. The
A673 Ewing sarcoma line has proven to be particularly useful in understanding the
biology of this disease in the mouse. The chromosomal translocation producing the
EWS/FLI1 fusion transcript characterizes clinical Ewing sarcoma. Cell lines that 
express this genetic profile are confirmed to be those of Ewing sarcoma. The A673
Ewing sarcoma line grows in culture and as a xenograft in immunodeficient mice.
The A673 model has been used to study Ewing sarcoma angiogenesis and response to 
antiangiogenic agents. Many Ewing sarcoma clinical specimens express the cell
surface protein endosialin. Several Ewing sarcoma cell lines, including the A673 
line, also express cell surface endosialin when grown as subcutaneous tumor
nodules and as disseminated disease; thus the A673 is a useful model for the
study of endosialin biology and endosialin-directed therapies. With the advent of
tools that allow characterization of clinical disease to facilitate optimal
treatment, it becomes imperative, especially for rare tumors, to develop
preclinical models reflecting disease subsets. Ewing PNET sarcomas are a rare
disease where models are available.

PMCID: PMC3102479
PMID: 21422656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Neurosci Res. 2011 Jun;89(6):921-8. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22607. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Investigation of barrier characteristics in the hyaloid-retinal vessel of
zebrafish.

Hyoung Kim J(1), Suk Yu Y, Kim KW, Hun Kim J.

Author information: 
(1)Fight Against Angiogenesis-Related Blindness Laboratory, Clinical Research
Institute, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

The blood-retinal barrier (BRB) is essential for the physiological integrity of
the retinal vessels. In particular, ocular pathologies of retinal
neovascularization could be causally related to the BRB breakdown. Zebrafish have
emerged as an advantageous model for studying vascular development and
characteristics. Here we investigated for the first time the barrier
characteristics of the hyaloid-retinal vessel using fli1-EGFP transgenic
zebrafish. By 7 dpf, the hyaloid-retinal vessel was formed between lens and
retina, where intercellular junctional complexes were already present between
endothelial cells. Interestingly, NG-2 expression, but not GFAP, was colocalized 
with EGFP-positive cells of the hyaloid-retinal vessel. Among endothelial tight
junction proteins, claudin-5 was expressed on EGFP-positive cells of the
hyaloid-retinal vessel, whereas occludin and ZO-1 were not observed on the
vessel. In addition, the hyaloid-retinal vessel was so leaky that a mixture of
fluorescein tracers (2,000-kDa FITC-dextran, 10-kDa rhodamine-dextran, and 350-Da
DAPI) diffusely infiltrated into all retinal layers. Our results suggest that,
unlike retinal vessels of higher vertebrates, the hyaloid-retinal vessel of
zebrafish shows insufficient characteristics to meet a functional
endothelium-based CNS barrier. Therefore, it might be not suitable to use the
hyaloid-retinal vessel of zebrafish for studying BRB biogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21412815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Neoplasia. 2011 Feb;13(2):145-53.

Ecteinascidin 743 interferes with the activity of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma
cells.

Grohar PJ(1), Griffin LB, Yeung C, Chen QR, Pommier Y, Khanna C, Khan J, Helman
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1928, USA.
groharp@mail.nih.gov

ET-743 (trabectedin; Yondelis) is approved in Europe for the treatment of soft
tissue sarcomas. Emerging phase 1 and 2 clinical data have shown high response
rates in myxoid liposarcoma in part owing to the inhibition of the FUS-CHOP
transcription factor. In this report, we show that modulation of specific
oncogenic transcription factors by ET-743 may extend to other tumor types. We
demonstrate that, among a panel of pediatric sarcomas, Ewing sarcoma family of
tumors (ESFTs) cell lines bearing the EWS-FLI1 transcription factor are the most 
sensitive to treatment with ET-743 compared with osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, 
and synovial sarcoma. We show that ET-743 reverses a gene signature of induced
downstream targets of EWS-FLI1 in two different ESFT cell lines (P = .001). In
addition, ET-743 directly suppresses the promoter activity of a known EWS-FLI1
downstream target NR0B1 luciferase reporter construct without changing the
activity of a constitutively active control in ESFT cells. Furthermore, the
effect is specific to EWS-FLI1, as forced expression of EWS-FLI1 in a cell type
that normally lacks this fusion protein, HT1080 cells, induces the same NR0B1
promoter, but this activation is completely blocked by ET-743 treatment. Finally,
we used gene set enrichment analysis to confirm that other mechanisms of ET-743
are active in ESFT cells. These results suggest a particular role for ET-743 in
the treatment of translocation-positive tumors. In addition, the modulation of
EWS-FLI1 makes it a novel targeting agent for ESFT and suggests that further
development of this compound for the treatment of ESFT is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3033593
PMID: 21403840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Int J Cancer. 2011 Dec 15;129(12):2855-66. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25951. Epub 2011 Apr 
1.

Identification and validation of highly frequent CpG island hypermethylation in
colorectal adenomas and carcinomas.

Oster B(1), Thorsen K, Lamy P, Wojdacz TK, Hansen LL, Birkenkamp-Demtröder K,
Sørensen KD, Laurberg S, Orntoft TF, Andersen CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Denmark.

In our study, whole-genome methylation arrays were applied to identify novel
genes with tumor specific DNA methylation of promoter CpG islands in
pre-malignant and malignant colorectal lesions. Using a combination of Illumina
HumanMethylation27 beadchips, Methylation-Sensitive High Resolution Melting
(MS-HRM) analysis, and Exon arrays (Affymetrix) the DNA methylation pattern of
~14,000 genes and their transcript levels were investigated in six normal
mucosas, six adenomas and 30 MSI and MSS carcinomas. Sixty eight genes with
tumor-specific hypermethylation were identified (p < 0.005). Identified
hypermethylated sites were validated in an independent sample set of eight normal
mucosas, 12 adenomas, 40 MSS and nine MSI cancer samples. The methylation
patterns of 15 selected genes, hypermethylated in adenomas and carcinomas (FLI1, 
ST6GALNAC5, TWIST1, ADHFE1, JAM2, IRF4, CNRIP1, NRG1 and EYA4), in carcinomas
only (ABHD9, AOX1 and RERG), or in MSI but not MSS carcinomas (RAMP2, DSC3 and
MLH1) were validated using MS-HRM. Four of these genes (MLH1, AOX1, EYA4 and
TWIST1) had previously been reported to be hypermethylated in CRC. Eleven genes, 
not previously known to be affected by CRC specific hypermethylation, were
identified and validated. Inverse correlation to gene expression was observed for
six of the 15 genes with Spearman correlation coefficients ranging from -0.39 to 
-0.60. For six of these genes the altered methylation patterns had a profound
transcriptional association, indicating that methylation of these genes may play 
a direct regulatory role. The hypermethylation changes often occurred already in 
adenomas, indicating that they may be used as biomarkers for early detection of
CRC.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21400501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2011 Jul 15;57(1):69-75. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22813. Epub 2011 
Mar 7.

Treatment of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors with a modified P6 protocol in
children and adolescents.

Mora J(1), de Torres C, Parareda A, Torner F, Galván P, Rodríguez E, Cardesa T,
Salvador H, Suñol M, Huguet R, Cruz O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
jmora@hsjdbcn.org

BACKGROUND: Reported overall survival (OS) rates of patients with localized Ewing
sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are >80% when treated with the MSKCC P6 protocol.
However, it has been associated with a 5.8% incidence of secondary leukemias. A
modified P6 (mP6) protocol with reduced exposure to chemotherapy is presented.
PROCEDURE: Thirty-one newly diagnosed ESFT patients were enrolled onto this phase
II, single-arm, non-randomized protocol. Courses 1, 2 and 4 consisted of
cyclophosphamide 4.2 g/m², doxorubicin 75 mg/m², and vincristine 2 mg/m² (CDV).
Cycles 3 and 5 consisted of ifosfamide 9 g/m² and etoposide 500 mg/m² (IE).
Course 5 ifosfamide was 14 g/m² if necrosis was <90%.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients had loco-regional disease and seven had metastases.
The 4-year event-free survival (EFS) rate for patients with localized tumors is
83% and overall survival (OS) is 92%. The 3-year EFS rate for patients with
distant metastases is 28% and OS rate is 42%. EWS-FLI1 fusion genes were detected
in 17 cases (74%) and EWS-ERG in six cases (26%). Type 1 EWS-FLI1 variant was
present in 6/7 metastatic patients and 3/16 loco-regional cases (P = 0.001). None
of the patients experienced tumor progression before remission. All relapses
occurred within 2 years from the end of treatment and local relapses (n = 3)
happened in patients who did not receive radiation therapy. No secondary
malignancies have been observed, median follow-up of 4.3 years for surviving
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study, the mP6 protocol produced a complete remission 
rate of 83% at 4 years in non-metastatic ESFT reducing the risk of secondary
malignancies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21384537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 25;6(2):e14732. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014732.

Fli+ etsrp+ hemato-vascular progenitor cells proliferate at the lateral plate
mesoderm during vasculogenesis in zebrafish.

Chun CZ(1), Remadevi I, Schupp MO, Samant GV, Pramanik K, Wilkinson GA,
Ramchandran R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, CRI Developmental Vascular Biology Program,
Translational and Biomedical Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, United States of America. cchun@mcw.edu

BACKGROUND: Vasculogenesis, the de novo formation of blood vessels from precursor
cells is critical for a developing embryo. However, the signals and events that
dictate the formation of primary axial vessels remain poorly understood.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we use ets-related protein-1
(etsrp), which is essential for vascular development, to analyze the early stages
of vasculogenesis in zebrafish. We found etsrp(+) cells of the head, trunk and
tail follow distinct developmental sequences. Using a combination of genetic,
molecular and chemical approaches, we demonstrate that fli(+)etsrp(+)
hemato-vascular progenitors (FEVPs) are proliferating at the lateral plate
mesoderm (LPM). The Shh-VEGF-Notch-Hey2 signaling pathway controls the
proliferation process, and experimental modulation of single components of this
pathway alters etsrp(+) cell numbers at the LPM.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study for the first time defines factors
controlling proliferation, and cell numbers of pre-migratory FEVPs in zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC3045372
PMID: 21364913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Oncol Lett. 2011 Mar;2(2):207-210. Epub 2011 Jan 20.

Gastric Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor: A case report.

Inoue M(1), Wakai T, Korita PV, Sakata J, Kurosaki R, Ogose A, Kawashima H,
Shirai Y, Ajioka Y, Hatakeyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive and General Surgery, Niigata University Graduate School 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, Chuo-ku, Niigata 951-8510, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNETs) may arise in bone or
soft tissue; however, these tumors rarely originate in the stomach. To the best
of our knowledge, only four cases have previously been reported in the
English-language literature. A 41-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with
abdominal pain and underwent gastrectomy to remove the primary tumor.
Immunohistochemistry, chromosomal karyotype and molecular analysis using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were performed in the tumor specimens
obtained. Tumor cells showed positive immunoreactivity for CD99, vimentin, CD117 
(c-kit), S100, chromogranin A and synaptophysin. The tumor was a gastric ES/PNET 
with the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). Multiple repeat
metastasectomies, as well as multi-agent chemotherapy and radiotherapy were
performed for recurrent disease. Despite treatment, the patient succumbed due to 
progressive disease 110 months after the initial surgery for gastric ES/PNET. A
review of the reported cases suggests that patients with gastric ES/PNETs have an
unfavorable prognosis following resection due to the high propensity of these
tumors to metastasize. Thus, multimodal treatment approaches including surgery,
as well as multi-agent chemotherapy and radiotherapy may provide a survival
benefit for patients with gastric ES/PNETs.

PMCID: PMC3410573
PMID: 22866065  [PubMed]


431. Ann Pathol. 2011 Feb;31(1):28-31. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2010.07.043. Epub 2011
Feb 3.

[An unusual adrenal tumor: Ewing tumor].

[Article in French]

Gonin J(1), Larousserie F, Dousset B, Rousseau J, Delattre O, Waintrop C,
Tsatsaris V, Pierga JY, Vacher-Lavenu MC, Tissier F.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'anatomie et cytologie pathologiques, hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.

We report the case of a voluminous tumor of the adrenal diagnosed in a young
pregnant woman at 26(th) week of amenorrhea. Morphologically, a soft white tumor 
with haemorragic areas was observed, made of sheets of monomorphous, medium
sized, spindle-shaped to polygonal, with high mitotic activity. Tumorous cells
expressed cytokeratins AE1/AE3, EMA, and CD99 (expression of vimentin is not
relevant). Contemplated diagnoses included poorly differentiated
synovialosarcoma, sarcomatoid carcinoma and Ewing tumor. Thanks to molecular
biology, showing the specific transcript of Ewing/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) EWS/FLI1, the diagnosis of this atypical tumor in
an unusual location was performed. Indeed, 75% of Ewing tumors involve bones
(especially, the diaphysis of long bones) and 20 to 25% soft tissues. Primitive
visceral involvement is rare; less than 10 cases of adrenal involvement have been
reported. The hypothesis that Ewing cell's origin is a mesenchymal stem cell,
which may derive from neural crest cell, could explain the uncommon adrenal
involvement. Diagnosis of Ewing tumor is based on pathologic and molecular
findings, especially in atypical cases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Orthop Sci. 2011 Mar;16(2):250-2. doi: 10.1007/s00776-011-0024-8. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma in a 67-year-old man.

Hanaoka N(1), Goto T, Kasai T, Matsuura T, Nishisho T, Enishi T, Yasui N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of 
Tokushima Graduate School, 2-50-1 Kuramotocyo, Tokushima, 770-8503, Japan.
ubucya@hotmail.com

PMID: 21327980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Feb 3;7(2):e1001269. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001269.

Whole-body analysis of a viral infection: vascular endothelium is a primary
target of infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus in zebrafish larvae.

Ludwig M(1), Palha N, Torhy C, Briolat V, Colucci-Guyon E, Brémont M, Herbomel P,
Boudinot P, Levraud JP.

Author information: 
(1)Macrophages et Développement de l'Immunité, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The progression of viral infections is notoriously difficult to follow in whole
organisms. The small, transparent zebrafish larva constitutes a valuable system
to study how pathogens spread. We describe here the course of infection of
zebrafish early larvae with a heat-adapted variant of the Infectious
Hematopoietic Necrosis Virus (IHNV), a rhabdovirus that represents an important
threat to the salmonid culture industry. When incubated at 24 °C, a permissive
temperature for virus replication, larvae infected by intravenous injection died 
within three to four days. Macroscopic signs of infection followed a highly
predictable course, with a slowdown then arrest of blood flow despite continuing 
heartbeat, followed by a loss of reactivity to touch and ultimately by death.
Using whole-mount in situ hybridization, patterns of infection were imaged in
whole larvae. The first infected cells were detectable as early as 6 hours post
infection, and a steady increase in infected cell number and staining intensity
occurred with time. Venous endothelium appeared as a primary target of infection,
as could be confirmed in fli1:GFP transgenic larvae by live imaging and
immunohistochemistry. Disruption of the first vessels took place before arrest of
blood circulation, and hemorrhages could be observed in various places. Our data 
suggest that infection spread from the damaged vessels to underlying tissue. By
shifting infected fish to a temperature of 28 °C that is non-permissive for viral
propagation, it was possible to establish when virus-generated damage became
irreversible. This stage was reached many hours before any detectable induction
of the host response. Zebrafish larvae infected with IHNV constitute a vertebrate
model of an hemorrhagic viral disease. This tractable system will allow the in
vivo dissection of host-virus interactions at the whole organism scale, a feature
unrivalled by other vertebrate models.

PMCID: PMC3033377
PMID: 21304884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Jun;164(6):1393-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10243.x.

A case of taxane-induced scleroderma: a different expression profile of Fli1
proteins in dermal fibroblasts and microvascular endothelial cells compared with 
systemic sclerosis.

Takahashi T, Asano Y, Ichimura Y, Taniguchi T, Kogure A, Tamaki Z, Takekoshi T,
Sugaya M, Sato S.

PMID: 21299546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Pathol Oncol Res. 2011 Sep;17(3):619-25. doi: 10.1007/s12253-010-9358-3. Epub
2011 Jan 26.

The evaluation of CD99 immunoreactivity and EWS/FLI1 translocation by
fluorescence in situ hybridization in central PNETs and Ewing's sarcoma family of
tumors.

Vural C(1), Uluoglu O, Akyürek N, Oguz A, Karadeniz C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baskent University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. dr.cvural@gmail.com

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFTs) are indicated by malignant, small, round
and blue cell tumors of the bone and soft tissue. Gene rearrangements between EWS
gene on chromosome 22q12 and members of the ETS gene family are common in and
specific to ESFTs. Another defining characteristic of ESFTs is their membranous
expression of the CD99. In contrast, such translocations and immunoreactivity are
not found in central primitive neuroectodermal tumors (cPNETs). The aim of this
study was to investigate the detection of EWS/FLI1 translocations and CD99
immunoreactivity in order to evaluate their clinicopathological features and
their roles in the differential diagnosis of these tumors. In this study, we
investigated CD99 immunoreactivity using immunohistochemistry and Ewing's sarcoma
/ Friend leukaemia virus integration 1 (EWS/FLI1) translocation using the
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method in 23 cases. CD99 expression was
detected in 10/11 (90%) ESFT cases and 2/7 cPNET cases. In 18 cases EWS/FLI1
translocation was examined using the FISH method. The EWS/FLI1 translocations
were detected in 7/8 (87.5%) ESFTs cases, whereas non of 8 cPNET cases were
detected with this translocation. One case could not be classified as either
central or peripheral, showed EWS/FLI1 translocation. There was a statistically
significant difference in CD99 expression (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0013) and EWS/FLI1 translocation
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0,002) between cPNETs and ESFTs cases. In conclusion, CD99 expression and
EWS/FLI1 translocation are specific and sensitive markers in the diagnosis of
ESFTs. However, these were often not found in cases of cPNET. Therefore, in the
diagnosis of ESFTs, clinical, radiological, histopathological and
immunohistochemical parameters should always be evaluated together.

PMID: 21267687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Feb;35(2):190-201. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ff0901.

Pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma: a distinctive, often multicentric tumor with
indolent behavior.

Hornick JL(1), Fletcher CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jul;35(7):1088; author reply 1088-9.

A 1992 report described 5 keratin-positive spindle cell neoplasms with multifocal
presentation in a single limb, which were proposed at that time to be a variant
of epithelioid sarcoma. This tumor type is not widely recognized and is
incompletely characterized. We examined 50 cases of this distinctive tumor to
evaluate histologic, immunophenotypic, and clinical features. There was a 4.6:1
male predominance (mean age, 31 y; 82% =40 y). Half of the patients presented
with painful nodules and the other half with painless nodules. Mean tumor size
was 1.9 cm (range, 0.3 to 5.5 cm). Tumors arose in the lower limb (54%), the
upper limb (24%), trunk (18%), or head and neck (4%). Thirty-three (66%) were
multifocal lesions (ranging from 2 to 15 lesions), including 32 cases with
involvement of multiple tissue planes. Of 205 total lesions, 64 (31%) involved
the dermis, 42 (20%) involved the subcutis, 70 (34%) lesions involved muscle, and
29 (14%) lesions involved bone; all the lesions had infiltrative margins. The
tumors were composed of loose fascicles and sheets of plump spindle cells with
vesicular nuclei, variably prominent nucleoli, and abundant brightly eosinophilic
cytoplasm, some with a strikingly rhabdomyoblast-like appearance. In all cases, a
minority of cells were epithelioid. Twenty-seven tumors contained a prominent
neutrophilic inflammatory infiltrate. Most tumors showed only mild nuclear
atypia; 6 tumors contained foci of notably pleomorphic cells. The median mitotic 
rate was 1 per 10 HPF (range, 1 to 10). Seven tumors showed vascular invasion; 7 
tumors had areas of necrosis. By immunohistochemistry, all tumors were diffusely 
positive for AE1/AE3 and FLI1; 22 of 47 tumors were variably positive for CD31.
Focal positivity was seen for CAM5.2 (21 of 35), smooth muscle actin (14 of 42), 
epithelial membrane antigen (7 of 49 weak), and PAN-K (MNF116) (1 of 47). All
were negative for CD34, desmin, and S100 protein and showed intact INI1
expression. Follow-up was available for 31 patients and ranged from 9 months to
17 years (mean, 4 y). Most lesions were treated by local excision. Eighteen (58%)
patients had local recurrence or developed additional nodules in the same region,
all but one, within 1 year of first presentation. Eight patients had
postoperative radiation therapy and 6 patients had chemotherapy. Four patients
had amputations for multifocal disease. One patient had a regional lymph node
metastasis, and, thus far, only 1 patient has developed distant metastases
(disseminated), 16 years after primary tumor excision. At the time of the last
follow-up, 27 patients were alive with no evidence of the disease, 1 patient was 
alive with unknown disease status, 2 patients were alive with recurrent disease, 
and 1 patient died of the disease. In summary, we describe a distinctive type of 
rarely metastasizing ("intermediate") tumor affecting mainly young men and
usually characterized by multifocality in different tissue planes of a limb.
Although sharing some features with epithelioid sarcoma (skin/soft tissue of
distal extremities, young adults, keratin positive), it differs by having
predominantly myoid-appearing spindle cell morphology, expression of FLI1, common
reactivity for CD31, lack of epithelial membrane antigen, CD34, and PAN-K
expression, and intact INI1. The overall immunophenotypic findings favor
endothelial differentiation. Despite the ominous presentation, follow-up thus far
suggests an indolent clinical course with a small risk of distant metastasis.
Although the precise nosologic status of this tumor type is uncertain, we propose
the interim designation "pseudomyogenic hemangioendothelioma."

PMID: 21263239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Thromb Haemost. 2011 May;105(5):811-9. doi: 10.1160/TH10-08-0525. Epub 2011 Jan
12.

Simultaneous intravital imaging of macrophage and neutrophil behaviour during
inflammation using a novel transgenic zebrafish.

Gray C(1), Loynes CA, Whyte MK, Crossman DC, Renshaw SA, Chico TJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield, UK.

The zebrafish is an outstanding model for intravital imaging of inflammation due 
to its optical clarity and the ability to express fluorescently labelled specific
cell types by transgenesis. However, although several transgenic labelling
myeloid cells exist, none allow distinction of macrophages from neutrophils. This
prevents simultaneous imaging and examination of the individual contributions of 
these important leukocyte subtypes during inflammation. We therefore used
Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) recombineering to generate a transgenic
Tg(fms:GAL4.VP16)i186 , in which expression of the hybrid transcription factor
Gal4-VP16 is driven by the fms (CSF1R) promoter. This was then crossed to a
second transgenic expressing a mCherry-nitroreductase fusion protein under the
control of the Gal4 binding site (the UAS promoter), allowing intravital imaging 
of mCherry-labelled macrophages. Further crossing this compound transgenic with
the neutrophil transgenic Tg(mpx:GFP)i114 allowed clear distinction between
macrophages and neutrophils and simultaneous imaging of their recruitment and
behaviour during inflammation. Compared with neutrophils, macrophages migrate
significantly more slowly to an inflammatory stimulus. Neutrophil number at a
site of tissue injury peaked around 6 hours post injury before resolving, while
macrophage recruitment increased until at least 48 hours. We show that
macrophages were effectively ablated by addition of the prodrug metronidazole,
with no effect on neutrophil number. Crossing with Tg(Fli1:GFP)y1 transgenic fish
enabled intravital imaging of macrophage interaction with endothelium for the
first time, revealing that endothelial contact is associated with faster
macrophage migration. Tg(fms:GAL4.VP16)i186 thus provides a powerful tool for
intravital imaging and functional manipulation of macrophage behaviour during
inflammation.

PMID: 21225092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;32(12):917-20.

[Expression of FLI-1 and analysis of prognostic factors in primitive
neuroectodermal tumor].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen LJ(1), Jia YX, Fan FF, Li XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou 450052, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the expression of FLI-1 in primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(PNET), explore the value of immunohistochemical staining of FLI-1 in combination
with other neural markers in diagnosis of PNET, and analyze the prognostic
factors in PNET patients.
METHODS: 35 cases of PNET, of which 33 cases with complete clinical data, were
included in this study. Immmunohistochemistry (The En Vision method) was applied 
to detect the expression of FLI-1, CD99, Syn, NSE, S-100, NF, Vim in the tumor
tissues. The clinicopathological data of 33 cases were analyzed by Cox
regression.
RESULTS: The positive expression rate of FLI-1 were 51.4% and that of CD99 was
88.6%. The sensitivity of FLI-1 combined with CD99 was up to 100%. The positive
rates of Vim, Syn, NSE, s-100 and NF were 91.4%, 48.6%, 45.7%, 22.9% and 0,
respectively. Cox regression analysis showed that the impact of primary location 
and treatment modality were of statistical significance (P < 0.05), but the age, 
sex, stage or size of tumors did not (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Immunohistochemical detection of FLI-1 and neural markers is a
preferred method for clinical diagnosis of PNET. The main factors affecting the
prognosis are the primary location of PNET and treatment modality.

PMID: 21223800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Oncogene. 2011 May 5;30(18):2173-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.581. Epub 2011 Jan 10.

Hsa-mir-145 is the top EWS-FLI1-repressed microRNA involved in a positive
feedback loop in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ban J(1), Jug G, Mestdagh P, Schwentner R, Kauer M, Aryee DN, Schaefer KL,
Nakatani F, Scotlandi K, Reiter M, Strunk D, Speleman F, Vandesompele J, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

EWS-FLI1 is a chromosome translocation-derived chimeric transcription factor that
has a central and rate-limiting role in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.
Although the EWS-FLI1 transcriptomic signature has been extensively characterized
on the mRNA level, information on its impact on non-coding RNA expression is
lacking. We have performed a genome-wide analysis of microRNAs affected by
RNAi-mediated silencing of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma cell lines, and
differentially expressed between primary Ewing's sarcoma and mesenchymal
progenitor cells. Here, we report on the identification of hsa-mir-145 as the top
EWS-FLI1-repressed microRNA. Upon knockdown of EWS-FLI1, hsa-mir-145 expression
dramatically increases in all Ewing's sarcoma cell lines tested. Vice versa,
ectopic expression of the microRNA in Ewing's sarcoma cell lines strongly reduced
EWS-FLI1 protein, whereas transfection of an anti-mir to hsa-mir-145 increased
the EWS-FLI1 levels. Reporter gene assays revealed that this modulation of
EWS-FLI1 protein was mediated by the microRNA targeting the FLI1 3'-untranslated 
region. Mutual regulations of EWS-FLI1 and hsa-mir-145 were mirrored by an
inverse correlation between their expression levels in four of the Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines tested. Consistent with the role of EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's
sarcoma growth regulation, forced hsa-mir-145 expression halted Ewing's sarcoma
cell line growth. These results identify feedback regulation between EWS-FLI1 and
hsa-mir-145 as an important component of the EWS-FLI1-mediated Ewing's
sarcomagenesis that may open a new avenue to future microRNA-mediated therapy of 
this devastating malignant disease.

PMID: 21217773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:746939. doi: 10.1155/2011/746939. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Targeting the p53 Pathway in Ewing Sarcoma.

Neilsen PM(1), Pishas KI, Callen DF, Thomas DM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarcoma Research Group, Discipline of Medicine, University of Adelaide and
Hanson Institute, Frome Road, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia.

The p53 tumour suppressor plays a pivotal role in the prevention of oncogenic
transformation. Cancers frequently evade the potent antitumour surveillance
mechanisms of p53 through mutation of the TP53 gene, with approximately 50% of
all human malignancies expressing dysfunctional, mutated p53 proteins.
Interestingly, genetic lesions in the TP53 gene are only observed in 10% of Ewing
Sarcomas, with the majority of these sarcomas expressing a functional wild-type
p53. In addition, the p53 downstream signaling pathways and DNA-damage cell cycle
checkpoints remain functionally intact in these sarcomas. This paper summarizes
recent insights into the functional capabilities and regulation of p53 in Ewing
Sarcoma, with a particular focus on the cross-talk between p53 and the EWS-FLI1
gene rearrangement frequently associated with this disease. The development of
several activators of p53 is discussed, with recent evidence demonstrating the
potential of small molecule p53 activators as a promising systemic therapeutic
approach for the treatment of Ewing Sarcomas with wild-type p53.

PMCID: PMC3005944
PMID: 21197471  [PubMed]


441. Virchows Arch. 2011 Mar;458(3):281-90. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-1023-4. Epub 2010 
Dec 23.

The many faces of atypical Ewing's sarcoma. A true entity mimicking sarcomas,
carcinomas and lymphomas.

Machado I(1), Noguera R, Mateos EA, Calabuig-Fariñas S, López FI, Martínez A,
Navarro S, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Medical School, Valencia University, Avda Blasco Ibáñez,
15, Valencia, 46010, Spain.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT) comprises a group of small round cell
tumours (SRCT) genetically defined by specific chromosomal translocations
resulting in a fusion of the EWSR1 gene with a member of the ETS family of
transcription factors. Atypical ESFT are the most challenging of the ESFT
subtypes, and the differential diagnosis with other SRCT of bone and soft tissue 
is difficult since these subtypes can resemble other neoplasms. The present
article describes nine cases of genetically confirmed, atypical ESFT, having
unusual alterations at morphological and immunohistochemical (IHC) levels
associated with atypical clinical presentation mimicking sarcomas, carcinomas and
lymphomas. Present results demonstrate that ESFT showing overlapping
morphological and immunohistochemical features with other SRCT of soft tissue and
bone, or even with carcinomas or lymphoma, can be differentiated using molecular 
techniques. In SRCT with EWSR1 translocation demonstrated by FISH, the RT-PCR
analysis of specific sarcoma-related gene fusion can offer important clues for
the diagnosis of specific entities, especially in tumours with unusual
histopathology and/or IHC findings. Thus, we confirm that the integration of
clinical, histopathological, IHC and genetic data becomes decisive in the
diagnosis of bone and soft tissue sarcomas.

PMID: 21181413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):722-32. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002105. Epub 2010
Dec 13.

Expression of the SLAM family of receptors adapter EAT-2 as a novel strategy for 
enhancing beneficial immune responses to vaccine antigens.

Aldhamen YA(1), Appledorn DM, Seregin SS, Liu CJ, Schuldt NJ, Godbehere S,
Amalfitano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Recent studies have shown that activation of the signaling lymphocytic activation
molecule (SLAM) family of receptors plays an important role in several aspects of
immune regulation. However, translation of this knowledge into a useful clinical 
application has not been undertaken. One important area where SLAM-mediated
immune regulation may have keen importance is in the field of vaccinology.
Because SLAM signaling plays such a critical role in the innate and adaptive
immunity, we endeavored to develop a strategy to improve the efficacy of vaccines
by incorporation of proteins known to be important in SLAM-mediated signaling. In
this study, we hypothesized that coexpression of the SLAM adapter
EWS-FLI1-activated transcript 2 (EAT-2) along with a pathogen-derived Ag would
facilitate induction of beneficial innate immune responses, resulting in improved
induction of Ag-specific adaptive immune responses. To test this hypothesis, we
used rAd5 vector-based vaccines expressing murine EAT-2, or the HIV-1-derived Ag 
Gag. Compared with appropriate controls, rAd5 vectors expressing EAT-2
facilitated bystander activation of NK, NKT, B, and T cells early after their
administration into animals. EAT-2 overexpression also augments the expression of
APC (macrophages and dendritic cells) surface markers. Indeed, this multitiered
activation of the innate immune system by vaccine-mediated EAT-2 expression
enhanced the induction of Ag-specific cellular immune responses. Because both
mice and humans express highly conserved EAT-2 adapters, our results suggest that
human vaccination strategies that specifically facilitate SLAM signaling may
improve vaccine potency when targeting HIV Ags specifically, as well as numerous 
other vaccine targets in general.

PMID: 21149608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5578-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.166181. Epub 2010 
Dec 9.

Homocysteine suppresses the expression of the collagen cross-linker lysyl oxidase
involving IL-6, Fli1, and epigenetic DNA methylation.

Thaler R(1), Agsten M, Spitzer S, Paschalis EP, Karlic H, Klaushofer K, Varga F.

Author information: 
(1)1st Medical Department, Hanusch Hospital, Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of
Osteology, Hanusch Hospital, Wiener Gebietskrankenkasse and AUVA Trauma Center
Meidling, 1140 Vienna, Austria.

Elevated homocysteine (Hcys) serum levels represent a risk factor for several
chronic pathologies, including cardiovascular disease, atherosclerosis, and
chronic renal failure, and affect bone development, quality, and homeostasis.
Hcys influences the formation of a stable bone matrix directly through the
inhibition of the collagen cross-linking enzyme lysyl oxidase (Lox) and, as we
have shown recently, by repressing its mRNA expression. The aim of this study was
to investigate the mechanisms involved in this process. Through evaluation of
gene arrays, quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblots, and ELISA, we identified a
Hcys-dependent stimulation of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and genes involved in
IL-6/Janus kinase 2 (JAK2)-dependent signal transduction pathways in
pre-osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Moreover, up-regulation of genes essential for
epigenetic DNA methylation (DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferases and helicase
lymphoid-specific (Hells) was observed. Further investigations demonstrated that 
Hcys increased via IL-6/JAK2 the expression of Fli1 (Friend leukemia virus
integration 1), a transcription factor, which we found essential for
IL-6-dependent Dnmt1 stimulation. CpG methylation analysis of CpG-rich Lox
proximal promoter revealed an increased CpG methylation status after treatment of
the cells with Hcys indicating an epigenetic origin for Hcys-dependent Lox
repression. Inhibition of the IL-6/JAK2 pathway or of CpG methylation reversed
the repressive effect of Hcys on Lox expression. In conclusion, we demonstrate
that Hcys stimulates IL-6 synthesis in osteoblasts, which is known to affect bone
metabolism via osteoclasts. Furthermore, IL-6 stimulation results via JAK2, Fli1,
and Dnmt1 in down-regulation of Lox expression by epigenetic CpG methylation
revealing a new mechanism negatively affecting bone matrix formation.

PMCID: PMC3037671
PMID: 21148317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 1;129(7):1599-610. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25837. Epub 2011 Mar
8.

GC-binding factor 2 interacts with dishevelled and regulates Wnt signaling
pathways in human carcinoma cell lines.

Ohtsuka H(1), Oikawa M, Ariake K, Rikiyama T, Motoi F, Katayose Y, Unno M,
Johnson AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
ohtsuka@surg1.med.tohoku.ac.jp

GC-binding factor 2 (GCF2), a transcriptional repressor that decreases the
activity of several genes is capable of binding directly to the GC-rich sequence 
of the EGFR promoter and repressing the transcriptional activity of EGFR. In
addition to its function as a transcriptional repressor, GCF2 can directly
interact with other proteins such as flightless-1 (Fli-1). Many previous findings
pertaining to the function of Fli-1 have suggested a role for fli-1 in providing 
a direct link between molecules involved in signal transduction pathways and the 
actin cytoskeleton. We hypothesized that GCF2, together with Fli-1, plays a role 
in regulating cytoskeleton function, cell migration, and/or morphology. In our
study, we observed that GCF2 is crucial for the activation of RhoA, a small
GTPase that plays a key role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. RhoA
was markedly inactivated as a result of the decreased expression of GCF2.
Co-immunoprecipitations were subsequently performed to further investigate the
mechanism for the repressive function. We identified dishevelled (Dvl), which is 
the key mediator for the Wnt pathway, as a binding partner with GCF2. These
results strongly suggest that GCF2 plays a role in the Wnt-noncanonical planar
cell polarity (PCP) signaling pathway. Consequently, GCF2 may regulate the
cytoskeleton or migration via Dvls and RhoA.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 21140450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nat Protoc. 2010 Dec;5(12):1903-10. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2010.149. Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Hypoxia-induced retinopathy model in adult zebrafish.

Cao Z(1), Jensen LD, Rouhi P, Hosaka K, Länne T, Steffensen JF, Wahlberg E, Cao
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine and Health, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden.

Hypoxia-induced vascular responses, including angiogenesis, vascular remodeling
and vascular leakage, significantly contribute to the onset, development and
progression of retinopathy. However, until recently there were no appropriate
animal disease models recapitulating adult retinopathy available. In this
article, we describe protocols that create hypoxia-induced retinopathy in adult
zebrafish. Adult fli1:EGFP zebrafish are placed in hypoxic water for 3-10 d and
retinal neovascularization is analyzed using confocal microscopy. It usually
takes 11 d to obtain conclusive results using the hypoxia-induced retinopathy
model in adult zebrafish. This model provides a unique opportunity to study
kinetically the development of retinopathy in adult animals using noninvasive
protocols and to assess therapeutic efficacy of orally active antiangiogenic
drugs.

PMID: 21127484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mod Pathol. 2011 Mar;24(3):333-42. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.201. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

A novel t(4;22)(q31;q12) produces an EWSR1-SMARCA5 fusion in extraskeletal Ewing 
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Sumegi J(1), Nishio J, Nelson M, Frayer RW, Perry D, Bridge JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immunodeficiency, Cincinnati
Childern's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH,
USA.

Over 90% of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) feature an
11;22 translocation leading to an EWSR1-FLI1 fusion. Less commonly, a member of
the ETS-transcription factor family other than FLI1 is fused with EWSR1. In this 
study, cytogenetic analysis of an extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma/PNET revealed a
novel chromosomal translocation t(4;22)(q31;q12) as the sole anomaly. Following
confirmation of an EWSR1 rearrangement by the use of EWSR1 breakpoint flanking
probes, a fluorescence in situ hybridization positional cloning strategy was used
to further narrow the 4q31 breakpoint. These analyses identified the breakpoint
within RP11-481K16, a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone containing two 
gene candidates FREM and SMARCA5. Subsequent RACE, RT-PCR, and sequencing studies
were conducted to further characterize the fusion transcript. An in-frame fusion 
of the first 7 exons of EWSR1 to the last 19 exons of SMARCA5 was identified.
SMARCA5 encodes for hSNF2H, a chromatin-remodeling protein. Analogous to
EWSR1-ETS-expressing NIH3T3 cells, NIH3T3 cells expressing EWSR1-hSNF2H exhibited
anchorage-independent growth and formed colonies in soft agar, indicating
chimeric protein tumorigenic potential. Conversely, expression of EWSR1-hSNF2H in
NIH3T3 cells, unlike EWSR1-ETS fusions, did not induce EAT-2 expression. Mapping 
analysis demonstrated that deletion of the C-terminus (SLIDE or SANT motives) of 
hSNF2H impaired, and deletion of the SNF2_N domain fully abrogated NIH3T3 cell
transformation by EWSR1-SMARCA5. It is proposed that EWSR1-hSNF2H may act as an
oncogenic chromatin-remodeling factor and that its expression contributes to
Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumorigenesis. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first description of a fusion between EWSR1 and a
chromatin-reorganizing gene in Ewing sarcoma/PNET and thus expands the EWSR1
functional partnership beyond transcription factor and zinc-finger gene families.

PMID: 21113140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(6):R212. doi: 10.1186/ar3189. Epub 2010 Nov 18.

A GA microsatellite in the Fli1 promoter modulates gene expression and is
associated with systemic lupus erythematosus patients without nephritis.

Morris EE(1), Amria MY, Kistner-Griffin E, Svenson JL, Kamen DL, Gilkeson GS,
Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 96 Jonathon Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The transcription factor Fli1 is implicated in the pathogenesis of 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Recently, a GA(n) polymorphic microsatellite 
was characterized in the mouse Fli1 promoter that modulates promoter activity and
is truncated in two lupus mouse models compared to non-autoimmune prone mice. In 
this work, we characterize a homologous GA(n) microsatellite in the human Fli1
promoter. The purpose of this study is to determine the effect of the
microsatellite length on Fli1 promoter activity in vitro and to determine if the 
length of the GA(n) microsatellite is associated with SLE and/or specific disease
characteristics.
METHODS: Constructs with variable lengths of the GA(n) microsatellite in the Fli1
promoter were generated and analyzed in promoter/reporter (P/R) assays in a human
T cell line. Using three SLE patient cohorts and matched controls, microsatellite
length was measured and association with the presence of disease and the
occurrence of specific disease manifestations was assessed.
RESULTS: P/R assays demonstrated that the presence of a shorter microsatellite
resulted in higher Fli1 promoter activity. A significant association was observed
in the lupus cohort SLE in Gullah Health (SLEIGH) between the GA(26) base pair
allele and absence of nephritis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that a GA(n) microsatellite in the human
Fli1 promoter is highly polymorphic. The length of the microsatellite is
inversely correlated to Fli1 promoter activity in a human T cell line. Although
no association between microsatellite length and lupus was observed, an
association between a specific microsatellite length and patients without
nephritis in the SLEIGH cohort was observed.

PMCID: PMC3046520
PMID: 21087477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 11;5(11):e13943. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013943.

High ALDH activity identifies chemotherapy-resistant Ewing's sarcoma stem cells
that retain sensitivity to EWS-FLI1 inhibition.

Awad O(1), Yustein JT, Shah P, Gul N, Katuri V, O'Neill A, Kong Y, Brown ML,
Toretsky JA, Loeb DM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells are a chemotherapy-resistant population capable of 
self-renewal and of regenerating the bulk tumor, thereby causing relapse and
patient death. Ewing's sarcoma, the second most common form of bone tumor in
adolescents and young adults, follows a clinical pattern consistent with the
Cancer Stem Cell model - remission is easily achieved, even for patients with
metastatic disease, but relapse remains frequent and is usually fatal.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have isolated a subpopulation of Ewing's
sarcoma cells, from both human cell lines and human xenografts grown in immune
deficient mice, which express high aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH(high)) activity
and are enriched for clonogenicity, sphere-formation, and tumor initiation. The
ALDH(high) cells are resistant to chemotherapy in vitro, but this can be overcome
by the ATP binding cassette transport protein inhibitor, verapamil. Importantly, 
these cells are not resistant to YK-4-279, a small molecule inhibitor of EWS-FLI1
that is selectively toxic to Ewing's sarcoma cells both in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Ewing's sarcoma contains an ALDH(high) stem-like
population of chemotherapy-resistant cells that retain sensitivity to EWS-FLI1
inhibition. Inhibiting the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein may prove to be an effective
means of improving patient outcomes by targeting Ewing's sarcoma stem cells that 
survive standard chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2978678
PMID: 21085683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 May;19(3):233-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181fd6697.

FLI-1 distinguishes Ewing sarcoma from small cell osteosarcoma and mesenchymal
chondrosarcoma.

Lee AF(1), Hayes MM, Lebrun D, Espinosa I, Nielsen GP, Rosenberg AE, Lee CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Small cell osteosarcoma and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma are 2 primary bone tumors 
with a small round blue cell component, which can mimic the appearance of Ewing
sarcoma. Distinguishing these tumors from each other on biopsy material is
important clinically, as optimal therapy differs according to the tumor type.
However, separating these entities on morphology alone can be challenging. FLI-1 
has been described to be a useful marker for Ewing sarcoma, particularly when
hematolymphoid markers are negative. In small cell osteosarcoma and mesenchymal
chondrosarcoma, the FLI-1 staining pattern has not been adequately characterized.
Using a monoclonal FLI-1 antibody, nuclear immunoreactivity in tumor cells was
evaluated in 10 small cell osteosarcomas, 10 mesenchymal chondrosarcomas, and 8
Ewing sarcomas, together with a number of other small, round, blue cell tumors.
None of the small cell osteosarcomas or mesenchymal chondrosarcomas exhibited
FLI-1 staining in the tumor cells, in contrast to the positive nuclear FLI-1
staining in the stromal endothelial cells. In comparison, 6 of the 8 Ewing
sarcomas showed moderate-to-strong nuclear FLI-1 staining of the tumor cells in
addition to strong staining of the stromal endothelial cell nuclei. With the
exception of lymphoblastic lymphomas, FLI-1 positivity was not seen in the other 
small round blue cell tumors examined. These findings show that, in contrast to
Ewing sarcoma, small cell osteosarcoma and mesenchymal chondrosarcoma lack FLI-1 
immunoreactivity. FLI-1 is therefore useful in the differential diagnosis of
small round blue cell tumors of the bone.

PMID: 21084965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Clin Neuropathol. 2010 Nov-Dec;29(6):372-7.

PNET/ESFT of the cranial vault: a case report.

Mellai M(1), Caldera V, Comino A, Fortunato M, Bernucci C, Schiffer D.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-bio-oncology Center, Policlinico di Monza Foundation, University of
Turin (Vercelli), U.O. Neurochirurgia, Cuneo, Italy.

A case of peripheral PNET (PNET/ESFT) of the cranial vault is described. A
56-year-old woman showed a mass with a large cyst in the right temporal region,
adherent to the meninges, which caused a left hemiparesis with headache and
confusion. The mass was totally removed. The histological examination showed a
dense proliferation of small elements, organized in lobules separated by
reticulin septa. Many circumscribed necroses, vessels with a thick handcuff of
reticulin, a diffuse mucous degeneration and abundant mitoses were present. The
cells were positive for Vimentin and CD99. RT-PCR revealed the EWS/FLI1 fusion
transcript of the t(11,22) (q24;q12) translocation. The patient presented is the 
oldest one of the rare cases of dura-based meningioma-mimicking pPNETs till now
described. In line with the possible origin from peripheral nerves or roots of
cauda equina of non-intracranial tumors, those of the vault may derive from
peripheral sensory nerves of the dura. The differential diagnosis must be made
with cPNETs which show a worse prognosis and both can benefit from a different
chemotherapy.

PMID: 21073841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Int J Clin Oncol. 2011 Aug;16(4):435-8. doi: 10.1007/s10147-010-0144-8. Epub 2010
Nov 10.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma of the urinary bladder: a case
report and its molecular diagnosis.

Okada Y(1), Kamata S, Akashi T, Kurata M, Nakamura T, Kihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tokyo Medical and Dental University Graduate School,
1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan. y-okada.uro@tmd.ac.jp

We report a rare case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma
(PNET/ES) arising from the urinary bladder. A 65-year-old man presented with
hematuria and dysuria. Computed tomography revealed an enlarged invasive tumor at
the base of the bladder. No additional abnormal findings were disclosed by other 
diagnostic imaging methods. The surgical specimens showed small round cell tumor 
with positive staining for MIC2 gene product (CD99). EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts 
were detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and direct
sequencing, confirming the diagnosis of PNET/ES. The patient developed swollen
pelvic lymph nodes as well as multiple lung metastases at 8 months
postoperatively. No effective results could be obtained even with systemic
chemotherapy consisting of vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin and etoposide
(VIDE) based on the EUROpean Ewing tumour Working Initiative of National Groups
1999 (EURO-E.W.I.N.G. 99) multinational trial. The patient died of acute superior
mesenteric artery thrombosis at 22 months postoperatively. PNET/ES could have
been included in past cases of small cell carcinoma because of the difficulty in 
its differential diagnosis. Exact diagnosis is crucial for deciding the treatment
strategy for rare bladder tumors consisting of small round cells.

PMID: 21063743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Sarcoma. 2011;2011:686985. doi: 10.1155/2011/686985. Epub 2010 Oct 31.

Targeted Therapy of Ewing's Sarcoma.

Subbiah V(1), Anderson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Refractory and/or recurrent Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) remains a clinical challenge
because the disease's resistance to therapy makes it difficult to achieve durable
results with standard treatments that include chemotherapy, radiation, and
surgery. Recently, insulin-like-growth-factor-1-receptor (IGF1R) antibodies have 
been shown to have a modest single-agent activity in EWS. Patient selection using
biomarkers and understanding response and resistance mechanisms in relation to
IGF1R and mammalian target of rapamycin pathways are areas of active research.
Since EWS has a unique tumor-specific EWS-FLI1 t(11;22) translocation and
oncogenic fusion protein, inhibition of EWS-FLI1 transcription, translation,
and/or protein function may be key to eradicating EWS at the stem-cell level.
Recently, a small molecule that blocks the protein-protein interaction of
EWS-FLI1 with RNA helicase A has been shown in preclinical models to inhibit EWS 
growth. The successful application of this first-in-class protein-protein
inhibitor in the clinic could become a model system for translocation-associated 
cancers such as EWS.

PMCID: PMC2968715
PMID: 21052545  [PubMed]


453. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Nov 2;4:146. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-146.

Localizing potentially active post-transcriptional regulations in the Ewing's
sarcoma gene regulatory network.

Baumuratova T(1), Surdez D, Delyon B, Stoll G, Delattre O, Radulescu O, Siegel A.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Group, Life Science Research Unit, University of
Luxembourg,162A Avenue de la Faiencerie, Luxembourg, L-1511, Luxembourg.
tatiana.baumuratova@uni.lu

BACKGROUND: A wide range of techniques is now available for analyzing regulatory 
networks. Nonetheless, most of these techniques fail to interpret large-scale
transcriptional data at the post-translational level.
RESULTS: We address the question of using large-scale transcriptomic observation 
of a system perturbation to analyze a regulatory network which contained several 
types of interactions - transcriptional and post-translational. Our method
consisted of post-processing the outputs of an open-source tool named BioQuali - 
an automatic constraint-based analysis mimicking biologist's local reasoning on a
large scale. The post-processing relied on differences in the behavior of the
transcriptional and post-translational levels in the network. As a case study, we
analyzed a network representation of the genes and proteins controlled by an
oncogene in the context of Ewing's sarcoma. The analysis allowed us to pinpoint
active interactions specific to this cancer. We also identified the parts of the 
network which were incomplete and should be submitted for further investigation.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed approach is effective for the qualitative analysis of
cancer networks. It allows the integrative use of experimental data of various
types in order to identify the specific information that should be considered a
priority in the initial - and possibly very large - experimental dataset.
Iteratively, new dataset can be introduced into the analysis to improve the
network representation and make it more specific.

PMCID: PMC2987883
PMID: 21044309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1224-6. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22355.

Evaluation of cytarabine against Ewing sarcoma xenografts by the pediatric
preclinical testing program.

Houghton PJ(1), Morton CL, Kang M, Reynolds CP, Billups CA, Favours E,
Payne-Turner D, Tucker C, Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA. peter.houghton@stjude.org

Treatment with the nucleoside analog cytarabine has been shown to mimic changes
in gene expression associated with downregulation of the EWS-FLI1 oncogene in
Ewing sarcoma cell lines, selectively inhibit their growth in vitro, and cause
tumor regression in athymic nude mice. For this report cytarabine was studied in 
vitro against a panel of 23 pediatric cancer cell lines and in vivo against 6
Ewing sarcoma xenografts. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines were the most
sensitive to cytarabine in vitro (median IC(50) 9 nM), while Ewing sarcoma cell
lines showed intermediate sensitivity (median IC(50) 232 nM). Cytarabine at a
dose of 150 mg/kg administered daily 5× failed to significantly inhibit growth of
five xenograft models, but reduced growth rate of the A673 xenograft by 50%.
Cytarabine shows no differential in vitro activity against Ewing sarcoma cell
lines and is ineffective in vivo against Ewing sarcoma xenografts at the dose and
schedule studied.

PMCID: PMC4675330
PMID: 20979180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 18;5(10):e13170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013170.

prox1b Activity is essential in zebrafish lymphangiogenesis.

Del Giacco L(1), Pistocchi A, Ghilardi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
luca.delgiacco@unimi.it

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2010;5(11). doi:
10.1371/annotation/6c1f2c4a-7da6-43cd-a934-78b7550dfbaf.

BACKGROUND: The lymphatic vascular system, draining interstitial fluids from most
tissues and organs, exerts crucial functions in several physiological and
pathological processes. Lymphatic system development depends on Prox1, the first 
marker to be expressed in the endothelial cells of the cardinal vein from where
lymph vessels originate. Prox1 ortholog in the optically clear, easily
manipulated zebrafish model has been previously isolated and its contribution to 
lymphangiogenesis has been clarified. Because of a round of genome duplication
occurred at the base of teleosts radiation, several zebrafish genes have been
retained in duplicate through evolution. We investigated for the presence of
additional prox1 genes and determined their role in zebrafish lymphangiogenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We isolated a second ortholog, named prox1b, and 
analyzed its expression during development by whole mount in situ hybridization
(WISH). We detected strong prox1b expression in the endothelium of the posterior 
cardinal vein (PCV) from where lymphatic precursors originate. To analyze prox1b 
involvement in lymphangiogenesis we utilized the fli1:GFP transgenics and
followed the formation of the toracic duct (TD), the primary lymph vessel in
fish, after prox1b knockdown. Our findings clearly demonstrated that the absence 
of prox1b activity severely hampers the formation of the TD.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This work provides substantial progress toward the
understanding of zebrafish lymphangiogenesis. In light of the features shared by 
the lymphatic systems of zebrafish and higher vertebrates, the establishment of
such lymphatic model will provide a powerful tool to study, for instance,
disorders of body fluid homeostasis, inflammation and cancer metastasis, and may 
ultimately contribute to novel therapies.

PMCID: PMC2956630
PMID: 20976189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010 Nov;32(8):e331-7. doi:
10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181ee4d16.

Establishment, characterization, and drug sensitivity of a new Ewing sarcoma cell
line (SS-ES-1).

Rajabalian S(1), Hajializadeh Z, Pooraboli I, Jangi-Aghdam H, Badinloo M.

Author information: 
(1)Kerman Neuroscience Research Center, Medical Science University of Kerman,
Kerman, Iran. Srajabalian@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2011 Apr;33(3):247. Badinloo, Marziyeh [added].

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant tumors in children and young
adults. We present here a new ES cell line, SS-ES-1, established from the left
thoracic tumor of a 16-year-old female patient. The SS-ES-1 cells retained
genotype, morphology, and growth rate for over 150 passages. Immunocytochemical
staining showed the strong immunoreactivity for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane 
antigen, neurofilament, CD99, P53, Ki-67, platelet-derived growth factor
receptor-ß, estrogen receptor-a (ER-a), and Bcl-2, but no reactivity for glial
fibrillary acidic protein, epidermal growth factor receptor, and HER-2/neu. The
presence of the type 1 EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts was confirmed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. On the basis of the MTT assay results,
GW2974, a dual inhibitor of epidermal growth factor receptor and HER-2/neu,
exhibited only a weak cytotoxic response in SS-ES-1 cells. In contrast,
tyrphostin A9, a specific inhibitor of platelet-derived growth factor receptor,
had a high cytotoxic effect against these cells. Surprisingly, it was found that 
SS-ES-1 cells displayed a high sensitivity to 4OH-tamoxifen. In conclusion, the
SS-ES-1 cell line shows unique cellular properties, which makes it a useful model
for studying various aspects of the biology of ES. In addition, the results
suggest that ER can be a good therapeutic target for ER + ES.

PMID: 20962673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):5683-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001974. Epub 2010
Oct 20.

Cutting edge: The adapters EAT-2A and -2B are positive regulators of CD244- and
CD84-dependent NK cell functions in the C57BL/6 mouse.

Wang N(1), Calpe S, Westcott J, Castro W, Ma C, Engel P, Schatzle JD, Terhorst C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. nwang@bidmc.harvard.edu

EWS/FLI1-activated transcript 2 (EAT-2)A and EAT-2B are single SH2-domain
proteins, which bind to phosphorylated tyrosines of signaling lymphocyte
activation molecule family receptors in murine NK cells. While EAT-2 is a
positive regulator in human cells, a negative regulatory role was attributed to
the adapter in NK cells derived from EAT-2A-deficient 129Sv mice. To evaluate
whether the genetic background or the presence of a selection marker in the
mutant mice could influence the regulatory mode of these adapters, we generated
EAT-2A-, EAT-2B-, and EAT-2A/B-deficient mice using C57BL/6 embryonic stem cells.
We found that NK cells from EAT-2A- and EAT-2A/B-deficient mice were unable to
kill tumor cells in a CD244- or CD84-dependent manner. Furthermore, EAT-2A/B
positively regulate phosphorylation of Vav-1, which is known to be implicated in 
NK cell killing. Thus, as in humans, the EAT-2 adapters act as positive
regulators of signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family receptor-specific
NK cell functions in C57BL/6 mice.

PMCID: PMC3255554
PMID: 20962259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Sarcoma. 2011;2011. pii: 276463. doi: 10.1155/2011/276463. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Mesenchymal Stem Cells and the Origin of Ewing's Sarcoma.

Lin PP(1), Wang Y, Lozano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology (Unit 1448), University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The origin of Ewing's sarcoma is a subject of much debate. Once thought to be
derived from primitive neuroectodermal cells, many now believe it to arise from a
mesenchymal stem cell (MSC). Expression of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene in MSCs
changes cell morphology to resemble Ewing's sarcoma and induces expression of
neuroectodermal markers. In murine cells, transformation to sarcomas can occur.
In knockdown experiments, Ewing's sarcoma cells develop characteristics of MSCs
and the ability to differentiate into mesodermal lineages. However, it cannot be 
concluded that MSCs are the cell of origin. The concept of an MSC still needs to 
be rigorously defined, and there may be different subpopulations of mesenchymal
pluripotential cells. Furthermore, EWS-FLI1 by itself does not transform human
cells, and cooperating mutations appear to be necessary. Therefore, while it is
possible that Ewing's sarcoma may originate from a primitive mesenchymal cell,
the idea needs to be refined further.

PMCID: PMC2952797
PMID: 20953407  [PubMed]


459. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Nov 5;402(1):129-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.129. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

FOXO1 is a direct target of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion protein in Ewing's sarcoma 
cells.

Yang L(1), Hu HM, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, United
States. lyang@u.washington.edu

Ewing's family tumors are characterized by a specific t(11;22) chromosomal
translocation that results in the formation of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion protein.
To investigate the effects of EWS-Fli1 on gene expression, we carried out DNA
microarray analysis after specific knockdown of EWS-Fli1 through transfection of 
synthetic siRNAs. EWS-Fli1 knockdown increased expression of genes such as DKK1
and p57 that are known to be repressed by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein. Among other
potential EWS-Fli1 targets identified by our microarray analysis, we have focused
on the FOXO1 gene since it encodes a potential tumor suppressor and has not been 
previously reported in Ewing's cells. To better understand how EWS-Fli1 affects
FOXO1 expression, we have established a doxycycline-inducible siRNA system to
achieve stable and reversible knockdown of EWS-Fli1 in Ewing's sarcoma cells.
Here we show that FOXO1 expression in Ewing's cells has an inverse relationship
with EWS-Fli1 protein level, and FOXO1 promoter activity is increased after
doxycycline-induced EWS-Fli1 knockdown. In addition, we have found that direct
binding of EWS-Fli1 to FOXO1 promoter is attenuated after doxycycline-induced
siRNA knockdown of the fusion protein. Together, these results suggest that
suppression of FOXO1 function by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein may contribute to
cellular transformation in Ewing's family tumors.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2981438
PMID: 20933505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Indian J Orthop. 2010 Oct;44(4):363-8. doi: 10.4103/0019-5413.69304.

Pathology of Ewing's sarcoma/PNET: Current opinion and emerging concepts.

Desai SS(1), Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Dr. Ernest Borges Road,
Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Ewing's sarcoma/PNET are small round cell tumors showing a varying degree of
neuroectodermal differentiation. They are one of the commonest tumors of
childhood and occur in bone and within soft tissues. Traditionally, light
microscopy with the aid of immunohistochemical stains was suitable for diagnosis.
But now translocation analyses are being used not only for the diagnosis and
classification of small round cell tumors, but to ascertain their prognostic
significance, detect micrometastasis, and monitor minimal residual disease, with 
potential for targeted therapy. This article analyzes the pathology, biology, and
molecular aspects of Ewing's sarcoma/PNET and discusses their clinical and
therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC2947721
PMID: 20924475  [PubMed]


461. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;10(6):782-8. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.09.005.

Drugs for 'protein clouds': targeting intrinsically disordered transcription
factors.

Dunker AK(1), Uversky VN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Intrinsically Disordered Protein Research, The Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. kedunker@iupui.edu

Transcription factors (TFs) are very attractive but difficult drug targets. The
difficulties come from several directions including the binding promiscuity of
TFs and the intrinsically disordered nature of their binding sites, which often
resemble 'protein clouds'. For a long time the targeting of proteins without
defined structures was considered infeasible. Data have now emerged showing that 
selective blocking of specific interactions of intrinsically disordered TFs with 
their protein binding partners is possible. Initial hits have been optimized to
increase their specificity and affinity. Several strategies have been elaborated 
for elucidating the mechanisms of blocking of intrinsic disorder-based
protein-protein interactions. However, challenges remain in the field of drug
development for 'protein clouds'; such development is still in its earliest
stage.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20889377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2010 Dec;30(12):893-900. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0046.
Epub 2010 Sep 29.

Downregulation of Friend leukemia virus integration 1 as a feedback mechanism
that restrains lipopolysaccharide induction of matrix metalloproteases and
interleukin-10 in human macrophages.

Ho HH(1), Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Department of Medicine, Hospital
for Special Surgery, New York, New York, USA.

The E26 transformation-specific (Ets) proteins are a family of transcription
factors with important roles in a variety of cellular processes ranging from
proliferation and differentiation to transformation and metastasis.
Tissue-specific expression of Ets proteins and their ability to interact with
other families of transcription factors contribute to their versatility. In this 
study, we investigated the regulation of Ets factors in primary human monocytes
and macrophages, and their role in matrix metalloprotease (MMP) and cytokine
production. The macrophage-activating Toll-like receptor ligand,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), induced the expression of Ets family members
epithelium-specific Ets factor 3 (ESE-3) and TEL-2 but rapidly suppressed Friend 
leukemia virus integration 1 (FLI-1) expression. Modulation of FLI-1 expression
using either RNA interference or forced expression identified a positive role for
FLI-1 in contributing to LPS-induced expression of MMP-1, MMP-3, MMP-10, and
interleukin-10 (IL-10). Thus, the rapid downregulation of FLI-1 expression after 
LPS stimulation attenuates the induction of various MMPs and IL-10 under
inflammatory conditions. In contrast, the expression of IL-6 and TNFa and the
effects of interferon (IFN)<U+03B3> on LPS responses were not dependent on FLI-1. Our
results define a novel FLI-1-mediated self-regulatory feedback loop that limits
MMP expression and thus may attenuate extent of tissue destruction associated
with inflammatory responses.

PMCID: PMC3004135
PMID: 20879862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;30(21):5194-206. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01112-09. Epub 2010 Sep
7.

Thrombocytopenia in mice lacking the carboxy-terminal regulatory domain of the
Ets transcription factor Fli1.

Moussa O(1), LaRue AC, Abangan RS Jr, Williams CR, Zhang XK, Masuya M, Gong YZ,
Spyropoulos DD, Ogawa M, Gilkeson G, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Targeted disruption of the Fli1 gene results in embryonic lethality. To dissect
the roles of functional domains in Fli1, we recently generated mutant Fli1 mice
that express a truncated Fli1 protein (Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)) that lacks the
carboxy-terminal regulatory (CTA) domain. Heterozygous Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice are
viable, while homozygous mice have reduced viability. Early postnatal lethality
accounts for 30% survival of homozygotes to adulthood. The peripheral blood of
these viable Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) homozygous mice has reduced platelet numbers. 
Platelet aggregation and activation were also impaired and bleeding times
significantly prolonged in these mutant mice. Analysis of mRNA from total bone
marrow and purified megakaryocytes from Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice revealed
downregulation of genes associated with megakaroyctic development, including
c-mpl, gpIIb, gpIV, gpIX, PF4, NF-E2, MafG, and Rab27B. While Fli1 and GATA-1
synergistically regulate the expression of multiple megakaryocytic genes, the
level of GATA-1 present on a subset of these promoters is reduced in vivo in the 
Fli1(<U+0394>CTA)/Fli1(<U+0394>CTA) mice, providing a possible mechanism for the impared
transcription observed. Collectively, these data showed for the first time a
hemostatic defect associated with the loss of a specific functional domain of the
transcription factor Fli1 and suggest previously unknown in vivo roles in
megakaryocytic cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2953061
PMID: 20823267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 16;5(8):e12156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012156.

VE-statin/egfl7 expression in endothelial cells is regulated by a distal enhancer
and a proximal promoter under the direct control of Erg and GATA-2.

Le Bras A(1), Samson C, Trentini M, Caetano B, Lelievre E, Mattot V, Beermann F, 
Soncin F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Institut de Biologie de Lille, UMR 8161, Equipe labellisée La Ligue,
Lille, France.

Angiogenesis is the process by which new blood vessels arise from existing ones
by the budding out of endothelial cell capillaries from the luminal side of blood
vessels. Blood vessel formation is essential for organ development during
embryogenesis and is associated with several physiological and pathological
processes, such as wound healing and tumor development. The VE-statin/egfl7 gene 
is specifically expressed in endothelial cells during embryonic development and
in the adult. We studied here the regulatory mechanisms that control this
tissue-specific expression. RT-qPCR analyses showed that the specificity of
expression of VE-statin/egfl7 in endothelial cells is not shared with its closest
neighbor genes notch1 and agpat2 on the mouse chromosome 2.
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis of histone modifications at the
VE-statin/egfl7 locus showed that the chromatin is specifically opened in
endothelial cells, but not in fibroblasts at the transcription start sites. A 13 
kb genomic fragment of promoter was cloned and analyzed by gene reporter assays
which showed that two conserved regions are important for the specific expression
of VE-statin/egfl7 in endothelial cells; a -8409/-7563 enhancer and the -252/+38 
region encompassing the exon-1b transcription start site. The latter contains
essential GATA and ETS-binding sites, as assessed by linker-scanning analysis and
site-directed mutagenesis. An analysis of expression of the ETS and GATA
transcription factors showed that Erg, Fli-1 and GATA-2 are the most highly
expressed factors in endothelial cells. Erg and GATA-2 directly control the
expression of the endogenous VE-statin/egfl7 while Fli-1 probably exerts an
indirect control, as assessed by RNA interference and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. This first detailed analysis of the mechanisms that govern
the expression of the VE-statin/egfl7 gene in endothelial cells pinpoints the
specific importance of ETS and GATA factors in the specific regulation of genes
in this cell lineage.

PMCID: PMC2922337
PMID: 20808444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;117(1):86-95. doi: 10.1002/cncr.25522. Epub 2010 Aug 24.

Putative tumor suppressor miR-145 inhibits colon cancer cell growth by targeting 
oncogene Friend leukemia virus integration 1 gene.

Zhang J(1), Guo H, Zhang H, Wang H, Qian G, Fan X, Hoffman AR, Hu JF, Ge S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Tumor suppressor microRNA miR-145 is commonly down-regulated in colon
carcinoma tissues, but its specific role in tumors remains unknown.
METHODS: In this study, the authors identified the Friend leukemia virus
integration 1 gene (FLI1) as a novel target of miR-145. FLI1 is involved in
t(11;22)(q24:q12) reciprocal chromosomal translocation in Ewing sarcoma, and its 
expression appears to be associated with biologically more aggressive tumors.
RESULTS: The authors demonstrated that miR-145 targets a putative microRNA
regulatory element in the 3'-untranslated region (UTR) of FLI1, and its abundance
is reversely associated with FLI1 expression in colon cancer tissues and cell
lines. By using a luciferase/FLI1 3'-UTR reporter system, they found that miR-145
down-regulated the reporter activity, and this down-regulation was reversed by
anti-miR-145. Mutation of the miR-145 microRNA regulatory element sequence in the
FLI1 3'-UTR abolished the activity of miR-145. miR-145 decreased FLI1 protein but
not FLI1 mRNA, suggesting a mechanism of translational regulation. Furthermore,
the authors demonstrated that miR-145 inhibited cell proliferation and sensitized
LS174T cells to 5-fluorouracil-induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results suggest that miR-145 functions as a
tumor suppressor by down-regulating oncogenic FLI1 in colon cancer.

© 2010 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC2995010
PMID: 20737575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Blood. 2010 Dec 2;116(23):4795-805. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-02-270405. Epub 2010 
Aug 23.

Inducible Fli-1 gene deletion in adult mice modifies several myeloid lineage
commitment decisions and accelerates proliferation arrest and terminal
erythrocytic differentiation.

Starck J(1), Weiss-Gayet M, Gonnet C, Guyot B, Vicat JM, Morlé F.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

This study investigated the role of the ETS transcription factor Fli-1 in adult
myelopoiesis using new transgenic mice allowing inducible Fli-1 gene deletion.
Fli-1 deletion in adult induced mild thrombocytopenia associated with a drastic
decrease in large mature megakaryocytes number. Bone marrow bipotent
megakaryocytic-erythrocytic progenitors (MEPs) increased by 50% without increase 
in erythrocytic and megakaryocytic common myeloid progenitor progeny, suggesting 
increased production from upstream stem cells. These MEPs were almost unable to
generate pure colonies containing large mature megakaryocytes, but generated the 
same total number of colonies mainly identifiable as erythroid colonies
containing a reduced number of more differentiated cells. Cytological and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting analyses of MEP progeny in semisolid and
liquid cultures confirmed the drastic decrease in large mature megakaryocytes but
revealed a surprisingly modest (50%) reduction of CD41-positive cells indicating 
the persistence of a megakaryocytic commitment potential. Symmetrical increase
and decrease of monocytic and granulocytic progenitors were also observed in the 
progeny of purified granulocytic-monocytic progenitors and common myeloid
progenitors. In summary, this study indicates that Fli-1 controls several
lineages commitment decisions at the stem cell, MEP, and granulocytic-monocytic
progenitor levels, stimulates the proliferation of committed erythrocytic
progenitors at the expense of their differentiation, and is a major regulator of 
late stages of megakaryocytic differentiation.

PMID: 20733157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010 Nov;162(2):362-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04245.x. 
Epub 2010 Aug 20.

Impact of Fli-1 transcription factor on autoantibody and lupus nephritis in
NZM2410 mice.

Mathenia J(1), Reyes-Cortes E, Williams S, Molano I, Ruiz P, Watson DK, Gilkeson 
GS, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, USA.

The transcription factor Fli-1 is implicated in the pathogenesis of both murine
and human lupus. Increased levels of Fli-1 mRNA were present in the peripheral
blood lymphocytes from lupus patients; furthermore, transgenic overexpression of 
Fli-1 in normal mice resulted in the development of a lupus-like disease. Lupus
nephritis is a major cause of death in both lupus patients as well as in animal
models. In this study, we generated Fli-1 heterozygous knockout (Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> )
NZM2410 mice (of which the wild-type is a widely used lupus murine model) that
expressed decreased levels of Fli-1 and investigated the impact of Fli-1
expression on lupus nephritis development and survival. Ninety-three per cent of 
the Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> NZM2410 mice survived to the age of 52 weeks compared to only 35% 
of wild-type NZM2410 mice. Autoantibodies, including anti-dsDNA and
anti-glomerular basement antigen, in Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> NZM2410 mice were statistically
significantly lower when compared to wild-type NZM2410 mice at the ages of 30 and
34 weeks. Total B cell and activated B cell populations in the spleens from
Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> NZM2410 mice were decreased significantly compared to wild-type
NZM2410 mice. Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> NZM2410 mice also had remarkably diminished proteinuria 
and decreased renal pathological scores when compared with wild-type NZM2410
mice. Expression of early growth response 1 (Egr-1) was decreased significantly
in the kidneys from Fli-1(+/)<U+207B> NZM2410 mice when compared to wild-type
littermates. Our data indicate that expression of Fli-1 plays an important role
in lupus disease development in NZM2410 mice.

© 2010 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC2996603
PMID: 20731671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Nov;22(6):677-82. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833e307b.

Animal models of scleroderma: fresh insights.

Artlett CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, 2900 Queen Lane, Philadelphia, PA 19129, USA.
carol.artlett@drexelmed.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recent years have seen the advent and progress in our
understanding of fibrosis and vasculopathy in systemic sclerosis, scleroderma
(SSc) largely mediated through the development and study of novel animal models. 
The most well studied animal models of SSc involve the bleomycin model of induced
fibrosis and the Tsk/+ model. However, even though these models provide useful
insights into the pathogenesis of fibrosis and vasculopathy, they do not mimic
the disease accurately.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several mouse models have been developed that have specifically 
focused on the vasculopathy of SSc and have yielded relevant insights into this
disorder further highlighting the novel mechanisms that may be responsible for
this pathological feature. Furthermore, the contribution of the innate immune
system mediated by the inflammasome in the induction of fibrosis has also
demonstrated significant insights, possibly implicating an etiological mechanism 
of SSc. And recent transgenic or knockout animal models have emphasized the
relevance of macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), alpha-melanocyte
stimulating hormone (a-MSH), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
(PPAR<U+03B3>) in fibrosis.
SUMMARY: Recent advances in animal models of SSc have elucidated the involvement 
of relevant proteins that appear to mediate vasculopathy and also implicated the 
involvement of the innate immune system in fibrosis. These models have identified
novel therapeutic targets that may lead to more effective treatments for this
incurable disease.

PMID: 20720495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2010 Nov;39(11):1115-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2010.02.027. Epub 2010 Aug 14.

Friend leukaemia insertion (Fli)-1 is a prediction marker candidate for
radiotherapy resistant oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Shintani S(1), Hamakawa H, Nakashiro K, Shirota T, Hatori M, Tanaka M, Kuroshita 
Y, Kurokawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, Showa University School of
Dentistry, Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan. shintani@dent.showa-u.ac.jp

Radiotherapy is commonly used to treat oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), but
its therapeutic effects are unpredictable. To determine which genes correlate
with radiation resistance in oral cancer, the authors evaluated radiation
sensitivity using a standard colony formation assay with a gene microarray system
for seven OSCC cell lines. They found significant associations between dozens of 
gene-expression levels and radiation resistance of OSCC cell lines. Following
analysis of the different radiosensitive cancer cell lines, the friend leukaemia 
insertion (Fli)-1 gene was selected as a prediction marker gene for OSCC
radiotherapy resistance. Fli-1 expression was associated with radiation
resistance in OSCC patients. These data help to predict the effects radiation
therapy has on OSCC, in turn contributing to the development of alternative
radiation therapies.

Copyright © 2010 International Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20709497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 3;399(4):705-10. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.004. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

EWS-FLI1 inhibits TNFalpha-induced NFkappaB-dependent transcription in Ewing
sarcoma cells.

Lagirand-Cantaloube J(1), Laud K, Lilienbaum A, Tirode F, Delattre O, Auclair C, 
Kryszke MH.

Author information: 
(1)UMR8113 CNRS, LBPA, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Cachan, France.
julie.cantaloube@crbm.cnrs.fr

Ewing sarcoma is primarily caused by a t(11;22) chromosomal translocation
encoding the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. To exert its oncogenic function, EWS-FLI1
acts as an aberrant transcription factor, broadly altering the gene expression
profile of tumor cells. Nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkappaB) is a tightly regulated
transcription factor controlling cell survival, proliferation and
differentiation, as well as tumorigenesis. NFkappaB activity is very low in
unstimulated Ewing sarcoma cells, but can be induced in response to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). We wondered whether NFkappaB activity could be modulated
by EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma. Using a knockdown approach in Ewing sarcoma cells, 
we demonstrated that EWS-FLI1 has no influence on NFkappaB basal activity, but
impairs TNF-induced NFkappaB-driven transcription, at least in part through
inhibition of NFkappaB binding to DNA. We detected an in vivo physical
interaction between the fusion protein and NFkappaB p65, which could mediate
these effects. Our findings suggest that, besides directly controlling the
activity of its primary target promoters, EWS-FLI1 can also indirectly influence 
gene expression in tumor cells by modulating the activity of key transcription
factors such as NFkappaB.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 29;5(7):e11822. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011822.

Calycosin promotes angiogenesis involving estrogen receptor and mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway in zebrafish and HUVEC.

Tang JY(1), Li S, Li ZH, Zhang ZJ, Hu G, Cheang LC, Alex D, Hoi MP, Kwan YW, Chan
SW, Leung GP, Lee SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao, China.

BACKGROUND: Angiogenesis plays an important role in a wide range of physiological
processes, and many diseases are associated with the dysregulation of
angiogenesis. Radix Astragali is a Chinese medicinal herb commonly used for
treating cardiovascular disorders and has been shown to possess angiogenic effect
in previous studies but its active constituent and underlying mechanism remain
unclear. The present study investigates the angiogenic effects of calycosin, a
major isoflavonoid isolated from Radix Astragali, in vitro and in vivo.
METHODOLOGY: Tg(fli1:EGFP) and Tg(fli1:nEGFP) transgenic zebrafish embryos were
treated with different concentrations of calycosin (10, 30, 100 microM) from 72
hpf to 96 hpf prior morphological observation and angiogenesis phenotypes
assessment. Zebrafish embryos were exposed to calycosin (10, 100 microM) from 72 
hpf to 78 hpf before gene-expression analysis. The effects of VEGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor on calycosin-induced angiogenesis were studied using 72 hpf
Tg(fli1:EGFP) and Tg(fli1:nEGFP) zebrafish embryos. The pro-angiogenic effects of
calycosin were compared with raloxifene and tamoxifen in 72 hpf Tg(fli1:EGFP)
zebrafish embryos. The binding affinities of calycosin to estrogen receptors
(ERs) were evaluated by cell-free and cell-based estrogen receptor binding
assays. Human umbilical vein endothelial cell cultures (HUVEC) were pretreated
with different concentrations of calycosin (3, 10, 30, 100 microM) for 48 h then 
tested for cell viability and tube formation. The role of MAPK signaling in
calycosin-induced angiogenesis was evaluated using western blotting.
CONCLUSION: Calycosin was shown to induce angiogenesis in human umbilical vein
endothelial cell cultures (HUVEC) in vitro and zebrafish embryos in vivo via the 
up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), VEGFR1 and VEGFR2
mRNA expression. It was demonstrated that calycosin acted similar to other
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), such as raloxifene and tamoxifen,
by displaying selective potency and affinity to estrogen receptors ERalpha and
ERbeta. Our results further indicated that calycosin promotes angiogenesis via
activation of MAPK with the involvement of ERK1/2 and ER. Together, this study
revealed, for the first time, that calycosin acts as a selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM) to promote angiogenesis, at least in part through
VEGF-VEGFR2 and MAPK signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2912279
PMID: 20686605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncogene. 2010 Oct 28;29(43):5796-808. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.320. Epub 2010 Aug
2.

A previously unrecognized promoter of LMO2 forms part of a transcriptional
regulatory circuit mediating LMO2 expression in a subset of T-acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia patients.

Oram SH(1), Thoms JA, Pridans C, Janes ME, Kinston SJ, Anand S, Landry JR, Lock
RB, Jayaraman PS, Huntly BJ, Pimanda JE, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

The T-cell oncogene Lim-only 2 (LMO2) critically influences both normal and
malignant haematopoiesis. LMO2 is not normally expressed in T cells, yet ectopic 
expression is seen in the majority of T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL)
patients with specific translocations involving LMO2 in only a subset of these
patients. Ectopic lmo2 expression in thymocytes of transgenic mice causes T-ALL, 
and retroviral vector integration into the LMO2 locus was implicated in the
development of clonal T-cell disease in patients undergoing gene therapy. Using
array-based chromatin immunoprecipitation, we now demonstrate that in contrast to
B-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, human T-ALL samples largely use promoter
elements with little influence from distal enhancers. Active LMO2 promoter
elements in T-ALL included a previously unrecognized third promoter, which we
demonstrate to be active in cell lines, primary T-ALL patients and transgenic
mice. The ETS factors ERG and FLI1 previously implicated in lmo2-dependent mouse 
models of T-ALL bind to the novel LMO2 promoter in human T-ALL samples, while in 
return LMO2 binds to blood stem/progenitor enhancers in the FLI1 and ERG gene
loci. Moreover, LMO2, ERG and FLI1 all regulate the +1 enhancer of HHEX/PRH,
which was recently implicated as a key mediator of early progenitor expansion in 
LMO2-driven T-ALL. Our data therefore suggest that a self-sustaining triad of
LMO2/ERG/FLI1 stabilizes the expression of important mediators of the leukaemic
phenotype such as HHEX/PRH.

PMID: 20676125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Nov 1;111(4):933-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22782.

The Ewing's sarcoma fusion protein, EWS-FLI, binds Runx2 and blocks osteoblast
differentiation.

Li X(1), McGee-Lawrence ME, Decker M, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas are highly aggressive round cell tumors of bone and soft tissues
that afflict children and young adults. The majority of these tumors harbor the
t(11;22) translocation and express the fusion protein EWS-FLI. Modern molecular
profiling experiments indicate that Ewing's tumors originate from mesenchymal
precursors in young individuals. EWS-FLI alters the morphology of mesenchymal
cells and prevents lineage specification; however, the molecular mechanisms for
differentiation arrest are unclear. We recently showed that EWS-FLI binds Runx2, 
a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation. In this report, we demonstrate 
that FLI sequences within EWS-FLI are responsible for interactions with Runx2.
EWS-FLI blocks the expression of osteoblastic genes in a multipotent progenitor
cell line that requires Runx2 to integrate bone morphogenic protein (Bmp)2
signaling while increasing proliferation and altering cell morphology. These
results demonstrate that EWS-FLI blocks the ability of Runx2 to induce osteoblast
specification of a mesenchymal progenitor cell. Disrupting interactions between
Runx2 and EWS-FLI1 may promote differentiation of the tumor cell.

PMCID: PMC3877924
PMID: 20665663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Int J Oncol. 2010 Sep;37(3):569-81.

Expression of ADAMTS4 in Ewing's sarcoma.

Minobe K(1), Ono R, Matsumine A, Shibata-Minoshima F, Izawa K, Oki T, Kitaura J, 
Iino T, Takita J, Iwamoto S, Hori H, Komada Y, Uchida A, Hayashi Y, Kitamura T,
Nosaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) is a malignant bone tumor that frequently occurs in
teenagers. Genetic mutations which cause EWS have been investigated, and the most
frequent one proved to be a fusion gene between EWS gene of chromosome 22 and the
FLI1 gene of chromosome 11. However, a limited numbers of useful biological
markers for diagnosis of EWS are available. In this study, we identified ADAMTS4 
(a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) as a possible
tumor marker for EWS using the retrovirus-mediated signal sequence trap method.
ADAMTS4 is a secreted protein of 837 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass 
of 98-100 kDa. It is a member of metalloprotease family, is expressed mainly in
cartilage and brain, and regulates the degradation of aggrecans. ADAMTS4 has been
suggested to be involved in arthritic diseases and gliomas. Herein, we show that 
ADAMTS4 mRNA was expressed in all primary EWS samples and all EWS-derived cell
lines examined, while its expression was detected only in small subpopulations of
other solid tumors. Furthermore, ADAMTS4 expression was found to be regulated by 
EWS-FLI1 fusion gene-dependent manner. We also demonstrated that ADAMTS4 protein 
was highly expressed in tumor samples of the patients with EWS by using
immunohistochemistry. These results suggest that ADAMTS4 is a novel tumor marker 
for EWS.

PMID: 20664926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Dermatol Sci. 2010 Sep;59(3):153-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2010.06.008. Epub 
2010 Jul 3.

The impact of Fli1 deficiency on the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis.

Asano Y(1), Bujor AM, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune inflammatory disease with unknown
etiology characterized by microvascular injury and fibrosis of the skin and
internal organs. A growing body of evidence suggests that deficiency of the
transcription factor Fli1 (Friend leukemia integration-1) has a pivotal role in
the pathogenesis of SSc. Fli1 is expressed in fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and
immune cells, and has important roles in the activation, differentiation,
development, and survival of these cells. Previous studies demonstrated that Fli1
is downregulated in SSc fibroblasts by an epigenetic mechanism and a series of
experiments with Fli1-deficient animal models revealed that Fli1 deficiency in
fibroblasts and endothelial cells reproduces the histopathologic features of
fibrosis and vasculopathy in SSc, respectively. In this article, we review the
impact of Fli1 deficiency on the pathogenesis of SSc and discuss a new
therapeutic strategy for SSc by targeting the transcription factor Fli1.

Copyright 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3826615
PMID: 20663647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jan 1;128(1):216-26. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25564.

Synthetic siRNA targeting the breakpoint of EWS/Fli-1 inhibits growth of Ewing
sarcoma xenografts in a mouse model.

Takigami I(1), Ohno T, Kitade Y, Hara A, Nagano A, Kawai G, Saitou M, Matsuhashi 
A, Yamada K, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene, a product of the translocation t(11;22, q24;q12), is
detected in 85% of Ewing sarcomas and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. It is
thought to be a transcriptional activator that plays a significant role in
tumorigenesis. In this study, we developed a novel EWS/Fli-1 blockade system
using RNA interference and tested its application for inhibiting the
proliferation of Ewing sarcoma cells in vitro and the treatment of mouse tumor
xenografts in vivo. We designed and synthesized a small interfering RNA (siRNA)
possessing an aromatic compound at the 3'-end targeting the breakpoint of
EWS/Fli-1. As this sequence is present only in tumor cells, it is a potentially
relevant target. We found that the siRNA targeting EWS/Fli-1 significantly
suppressed the expression of EWS/Fli-1 protein sequence specifically and also
reduced the expression of c-Myc protein in Ewing sarcoma cells. We further
demonstrated that inhibition of EWS/Fli-1 expression efficiently inhibited the
proliferation of the transfected cells but did not induce apoptotic cell death.
In addition, the siRNA possessing the aromatic compound at the 3'-end was more
resistant to nucleolytic degradation than the unmodified siRNA. Administration of
the siRNA with atelocollagen significantly inhibited the tumor growth of TC-135, 
a Ewing sarcoma cell line, which had been subcutaneously xenografted into mice.
Moreover, modification of the 3'-end with an aromatic compound improved its
efficiency in vivo. Our data suggest that specific downregulation of EWS/Fli-1 by
RNA interference is a possible approach for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20648560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):42-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.021.

Complex rearrangement of chromosomes 1, 7, 21, 22 in Ewing sarcoma.

Jinawath N(1), Morsberger L, Norris-Kirby A, Williams LM, Yonescu R, Argani P,
Griffin CA, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 North
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

The Ewing sarcoma (ES) family of tumors is characterized by nonrandom chromosomal
translocations involving the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22 with one of the members 
of the ETS family of transcription factors. The majority of ES tumors are
characterized by a balanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12), which results in the
fusion of the 5' portion of EWSR1 gene with the 3'end of the FLI1 gene. Fusions
with ERG, another member of the ETS family, occur in less than 10% of ES tumors, 
and can arise through complex chromosomal rearrangements. Here, we report a case 
of a 5-year-old female with an ES tumor in the thoracic region. G-banding and
spectral karyotyping analysis demonstrated 46,XX,t(1;21;7)(q25;q22.3;q22).
Metaphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the EWSR1 break-apart
probe demonstrated a normal signal on both apparently normal chromosomes 22, and 
an additional EWSR1-5' signal on the derivative chromosome 21.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis of RNA isolated from the
tumor demonstrated a EWSR1-ERG fusion transcript, fusing exon 7 of EWSR1 and exon
11 of ERG. These results are consistent with an additional copy of the 5' portion
of EWSR1, which inverted and then inserted on chromosome 21 and fused to the 3'
end of ERG. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a EWSR1-ERG fusion in
an ES tumor with an apparently duplicated 5' portion of EWSR1, and with a complex
translocation involving chromosomes 1, 7, and 21. This case adds to the spectrum 
of genetic rearrangements identified in ES tumors.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Aug;201(1):1-5. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.04.012.

Newly described translocation (18;19)(q23;q13.2) in abdominal wall soft-tissue
tumor resembling Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Riccardi GF(1), Stein C, de la Roza G, Damron TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams Street, 
Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

From a morphologic standpoint, Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is one of a number of
pediatric malignancies that are characterized by sheets of small, round, blue
cells. Ewing sarcoma can usually be differentiated from other small round blue
cell tumors by the presence of a gene rearrangement having a consistent
breakpoint within the Ewing sarcoma gene (EWSR1) at 22q12. Although the most
common translocation partner is FLI1, located at 11q24, there is a growing list
of alternate rearrangements involving different loci. We describe the first
example of a soft-tissue sarcoma morphologically and immunohistochemically
similar to Ewing sarcoma, but with a novel t(18;19)(q23;q13.2).

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Eur J Neurosci. 2010 Jun;31(11):2043-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07242.x.

Immediate-early gene response to repeated immobilization: Fos protein and arc
mRNA levels appear to be less sensitive than c-fos mRNA to adaptation.

Ons S(1), Rotllant D, Marín-Blasco IJ, Armario A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Institute of
Neuroscience and Animal Physiology Unit, School of Biosciences, Autonomous
University of Barcelona, Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.

Stress exposure resulted in brain induction of immediate-early genes (IEGs),
considered as markers of neuronal activation. Upon repeated exposure to the same 
stressor, reduction of IEG response (adaptation) has been often observed, but
there are important discrepancies in literature that may be in part related to
the particular IEG and methodology used. We studied the differential pattern of
adaptation of the IEGs c-fos and arc (activity-regulated cytoskeleton-associated 
protein) after repeated exposure to a severe stressor: immobilization on wooden
boards (IMO). Rats repeatedly exposed to IMO showed reduced c-fos mRNA levels in 
response to acute IMO in most brain areas studied: the medial prefrontal cortex
(mPFC), lateral septum (LS), medial amygdala (MeA), paraventricular nucleus of
the hypothalamus (PVN) and locus coeruleus. In contrast, the number of neurons
showing Fos-like immunoreactivity was only reduced in the MeA and the various
subregions of the PVN. IMO-induced increases in arc gene expression were
restricted to telencephalic regions and reduced by repeated IMO only in the mPFC.
Double-labelling in the LS of IMO-exposed rats revealed that arc was expressed in
only one-third of Fos+ neurons, suggesting two populations of Fos+ neurons. These
data suggest that c-fos mRNA levels are more affected by repeated IMO than
corresponding protein, and that arc gene expression does not reflect adaptation
in most brain regions, which may be related to its constitutive expression.
Therefore, the choice of a particular IEG and the method of measurement are
important for proper interpretation of the impact of chronic repeated stress on
brain activation.

PMID: 20608965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 30;398(3):377-82. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.06.075. Epub 2010 Jun 22.

Effect of increased HoxB4 on human megakaryocytic development.

Zhong Y(1), Sullenbarger B, Lasky LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

In order to produce clinically useful quantities of platelets ex vivo we may need
to firstly enhance early self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and/or
megakaryocyte (Mk) progenitors. The homeodomain transcription factor HoxB4 has
been shown to be an important regulator of stem cell renewal and hematopoiesis;
however, its effect on megakaryopoiesis is unclear. In this study, we
investigated the effect of HoxB4 overexpression or RNA silencing on
megakaryocytic development in the human TF1 progenitor cell line; we then used
recombinant tPTD-HoxB4 fusion protein to study the effect of exogenous HoxB4 on
megakaryocytic development of human CD34 positively-selected cord blood cells. We
found that ectopic HoxB4 in TF1 cells increased the antigen expression of CD61and
CD41a, increased the gene expression of thrombopoietin receptor (TpoR), Scl-1,
Cyclin D1, Fog-1 and Fli-1 while it decreased c-Myb expression. HoxB4 RNA
silencing in TF1 cells decreased the expression of CD61 and CD41a and decreased
Fli-1 expression while it increased the expression of c-Myb. Recombinant
tPTD-HoxB4 fusion protein increased the percentages and absolute numbers of CD41a
and CD61 positive cells during megakaryocytic differentiation of CD34
positively-selected cord blood cells and increased the numbers of colony-forming 
unit-megakaryocyte (CFU-Mk). Adding tPTD-HoxB4 fusion protein increased the gene 
expression of TpoR, Cyclin D1, Fog-1 and Fli-1 while it inhibited c-Myb
expression. Our data suggest that increased HoxB4 enhanced early megakaryocytic
development in human TF1 cells and CD34 positively-selected cord blood cells
primarily by upregulating TpoR and Fli-1 expression and downregulating c-Myb
expression. Increasing HoxB4 expression or adding recombinant HoxB4 protein might
be a way to expand Mks for the production of platelets for use in transfusion
medicine.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2921174
PMID: 20599537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 2010 Aug;14(4):481-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2010.06.169. Epub 
2010 Jul 2.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are potential drug targets.

Metallo SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Georgetown University, 37th & O Streets, NW,
Washington, DC 20057, United States. sjm24@georgetown.edu

Intrinsically disordered (ID) proteins that lack stable secondary and tertiary
structure in substantial regions (or throughout) are prevalent in eukaryotes.
They exist as ensembles of rapidly fluctuating structures and many undergo
coupled folding and binding reactions. Because ID proteins are overrepresented in
major disease pathways they are desirable targets for inhibition; however, the
feasibility of targeting proteins without defined structures was unclear.
Recently, small molecules have been found that bind to the disordered regions of 
c-Myc, Abeta, EWS-Fli1, and various peptides. As with structured targets, initial
hits were further optimized to increase specificity and affinity. Given the
number and biological importance of ID proteins, the ability to inhibit their
interactions opens tremendous potential in chemical biology and drug discovery.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2918680
PMID: 20598937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;6(8):453-60. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.102. Epub 2010
Jun 29.

Cellular and molecular aspects of vascular dysfunction in systemic sclerosis.

Trojanowska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Arthritis Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
trojanme@bu.edu

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by vascular alterations, activation of 
the immune system and tissue fibrosis. Vascular insufficiency manifests early in 
the disease, and although there is evidence of an active repair process,
capillaries deteriorate and regress. Factors that contribute to the failure of
vascular regeneration might include persistent injury, an imbalance between
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic mediators, intrinsic abnormal properties of the 
cellular components of the vessels, and the presence of fibroblast-derived
antiangiogenic factors. In addition, circulating dysfunctional endothelial
progenitor cells might further exacerbate vessel deterioration. Abnormal
expression of transcription factors, including Fra2 and Fli1, has been proposed
to contribute to SSc vasculopathy. Fli1 regulates genes that are involved in
vessel maturation and stabilization, suggesting that reduced levels of Fli1 in
SSc vasculature could contribute to the development of unstable vessels that are 
prone to regression. Conversely, proliferating endothelial cells and pericytes,
in the presence of an appropriate stimulus, might transdifferentiate into
collagen-producing cells, and thus contribute to the initiation of fibrosis.
Despite progress in treating the symptoms of vascular disease in SSc, the
underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. An improved knowledge of the
molecular and cellular pathways that contribute to SSc vasculopathy could help in
the design of effective therapies in the future.

PMCID: PMC3824624
PMID: 20585340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Aug 15;16(16):4077-83. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-2261. 
Epub 2010 Jun 14.

Oncogenic partnerships: EWS-FLI1 protein interactions initiate key pathways of
Ewing's sarcoma.

Erkizan HV(1), Uversky VN, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pediatrics, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.

Targeted therapy for cancer, which is specifically directed toward the cancer
without any potential for effects outside of controlling the tumor, is a gold
standard for treatment. Ewing's sarcoma contains the potential target EWS-FLI1,
as a result of a pathognomonic chromosomal translocation. The EWS-FLI1 fusion
protein includes the EWS domain, a potent transcriptional activator alongside the
highly conserved FLI1 ets DNA-binding domain. Because of the combination of these
domains, the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein acts as an aberrant transcription factor
whose expression results in cellular transformation. EWS-FLI1 functions by
binding to normal cellular protein partners in transcription and splicing,
similar to how a virus would corrupt normal cellular machinery for virion
production. Therefore, understanding the protein-protein interactions of EWS-FLI1
and the pathways that are regulated by these partnerships will inform both
oncogenesis and therapeutics. This review describes the known protein partners
and transcriptional targets of EWS-FLI1, while proposing strategies for
exploiting these partnerships with targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC3682924
PMID: 20547696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. EMBO J. 2010 Jul 7;29(13):2147-60. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.106. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

Genome-wide analysis of ETS-family DNA-binding in vitro and in vivo.

Wei GH(1), Badis G, Berger MF, Kivioja T, Palin K, Enge M, Bonke M, Jolma A,
Varjosalo M, Gehrke AR, Yan J, Talukder S, Turunen M, Taipale M, Stunnenberg HG, 
Ukkonen E, Hughes TR, Bulyk ML, Taipale J.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL)
and Genome-Scale Biology Program, Institute of Biomedicine and High Throughput
Center, University of Helsinki, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland.

Members of the large ETS family of transcription factors (TFs) have highly
similar DNA-binding domains (DBDs)-yet they have diverse functions and activities
in physiology and oncogenesis. Some differences in DNA-binding preferences within
this family have been described, but they have not been analysed systematically, 
and their contributions to targeting remain largely uncharacterized. We report
here the DNA-binding profiles for all human and mouse ETS factors, which we
generated using two different methods: a high-throughput microwell-based TF
DNA-binding specificity assay, and protein-binding microarrays (PBMs). Both
approaches reveal that the ETS-binding profiles cluster into four distinct
classes, and that all ETS factors linked to cancer, ERG, ETV1, ETV4 and FLI1,
fall into just one of these classes. We identify amino-acid residues that are
critical for the differences in specificity between all the classes, and confirm 
the specificities in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
sequencing (ChIP-seq) for a member of each class. The results indicate that even 
relatively small differences in in vitro binding specificity of a TF contribute
to site selectivity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2905244
PMID: 20517297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Jul 1;200(1):60-4. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2010.03.005.

Cryptic EWSR1-FLI1 fusions in Ewing sarcoma: potential pitfalls in the diagnostic
use of fluorescence in situ hybridization probes.

Newby R(1), Rowe D, Paterson L, Farquharson MA, MacDuff E, Coupe A, Hale J,
Dildey P, Bown N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, Central Parkway, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom.

Detection of EWSR1 translocations - particularly t(11;22)(q24;q12) - is of great 
value in the differential diagnosis of the Ewing family of tumors. We report two 
cases that highlight the problems and pitfalls of identifying Ewing tumors using 
conventional chromosome analysis and a commercial EWSR1 fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) probe. In both cases, the tumor karyotype was abnormal, but 
a visible t(11;22)(q24;q12) was not present. The commercial EWSR1 "break-apart"
probe was not split in either case. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis, however, identified EWSR1-FLI1 fusion transcripts in 
both tumors, and the gene fusions were corroborated by FISH analysis with "in
house" probes and confirmed by sequencing RT-PCR products. The occurrence of
cryptic EWSR1-FLI1 fusions mandates that RT-PCR should be performed, particularly
in those cases in which the genetic findings are not in agreement with the
histologic picture.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Surg Pathol. 2010 Jul;34(7):1002-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181e03b81.

Unusual myogenic and melanocytic differentiation of soft tissue pPNETs: an
immunohistochemical and molecular study of 3 cases.

Barisella M(1), Collini P, Orsenigo M, Aiello A, Paties CT, Dileo P, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomic Pathology B Unit, Department of Pathology, IRCCS Istituto Nazionale
Tumori of Milan, Milan, Italy. marta.barisella@istitutotumori.mi.it

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Mar;35(3):464; author reply 464-5.

All of the members of the peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor family
(Ewing sarcomas, neuroectodermal tumors of bone, peripheral neuroepitheliomas,
and Askin tumors) have similar morphologic and immunophenotypical features (ie,
the proliferation of small and medium-sized round cells in a fibrous background
showing strong and diffuse immunohistochemical positivity for CD99), and the
common cytogenetic abnormality of a nonrandom translocation involving the EWS
gene and one of several members of the erythroblastosis virus transforming
sequence family of transcription factors. The combination of clinical information
and morphologic/immunophenotypical characteristics is usually sufficient for a
correct diagnosis, but there are rare cases in which an unusual predominant or
multidirectional immunophenotypical differentiation makes diagnosis a challenge
and requires the use of molecular cytogenetic or molecular techniques. We
describe 3 such cases in which we employed fluorescence in-situ hybridization
analysis to detect translocation involving the EWS gene and reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction followed by sequencing to detect the fusion transcript 
EWS-FLI1.

PMID: 20495444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2010 Apr 23;3(4):416-28.

Molecular classification of soft tissue sarcomas and its clinical applications.

Jain S(1), Xu R, Prieto VG, Lee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY,
USA.

Sarcomas are a heterogeneous group of tumors that are traditionally classified
according to the morphology and type of tissue that they resemble, such as
rhabdomyosarcoma, which resembles skeletal muscle. However, the cell of origin is
unclear in numerous sarcomas. Molecular genetics analyses have not only assisted 
in understanding the molecular mechanism in sarcoma pathogenesis but also
demonstrated new relationships within different types of sarcomas leading to a
more proper classification of sarcomas. Molecular classification based on the
genetic alteration divides sarcomas into two main categories: (i) sarcomas with
specific genetic alterations; which can further be subclassified based on a)
reciprocal translocations resulting in oncogenic fusion transcripts (e.g.
EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma) and b) specific oncogenic mutations (e.g. KIT and
PDGFRA mutations in gastrointestinal stromal tumors) and (ii) sarcomas displaying
multiple, complex karyotypic abnormalities with no specific pattern, including
leiomyo-sarcoma, and pleomorphic liposarcoma. These specific genetic alterations 
are an important adjunct to standard morphological and immunohistochemical
diagnoses, and in some cases have a prognostic value, e. g., Ewing family tumors,
synovial sarcoma, and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. In addition, these studies may
also serve as markers to detect minimal residual disease and can aid in staging
or monitor the efficacy of therapy. Furthermore, sarcoma-specific fusion genes
and other emerging molecular events may also represent potential targets for
novel therapeutic approaches such as Gleevec for dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans.
Therefore, increased understanding of the molecular biology of sarcomas is
leading towards development of newer and more effective treatment regimens. The
review focuses on recent advances in molecular genetic alterations having an
impact on diagnostics, prognostication and clinical management of selected
sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC2872748
PMID: 20490332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Tumour Biol. 2010 Oct;31(5):381-90. doi: 10.1007/s13277-010-0046-4. Epub 2010 May
18.

CD133+ cells from medulloblastoma and PNET cell lines are more resistant to
cyclopamine inhibition of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway than CD133- cells.

Enguita-Germán M(1), Schiapparelli P, Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit, University of Navarra School of Sciences, Pamplona, 
Spain.

CD133 has recently been used as a reliable marker for brain tumor stem cells
isolation. Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is implicated in medulloblastoma and central
primitive neuroectodermal tumor (cPNET) formation. It has recently been suggested
a role for the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein--typical of pPNET--in the upregulation of 
GLI1 and PTCH1 genes. Cyclopamine inhibits the SHH pathway in medulloblastoma
cell lines, but its effect on cPNET and pPNET cell lines has not been well
established yet. Our purpose was to study the effect of cyclopamine on
medulloblastoma and PNET cell lines and to analyze whether CD133 expression might
be able to modify this effect. We analyzed gene expression, cell viability,
apoptosis, and tumorigenic capability before and after cyclopamine treatment in
CD133 high-expressing and CD133 low-expressing cell lines. All medulloblastoma
and PNET cell lines displayed an inhibitory effect on the expression of SHH
pathway genes, on viability, and on tumorigenic potential after treatment.
Nevertheless, CD133 expression made the cells more resistant to cyclopamine
inhibition. These results open new doors to the understanding of CD133+ cancer
stem cells as residual cells that might be responsible for treatment resistance.

PMID: 20480407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jul;25(7):1708-12. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deq121. Epub 2010 May 15.

Occasional involvement of the ovary in Ewing sarcoma.

Abir R(1), Feinmesser M, Yaniv I, Fisch B, Cohen IJ, Ben-Haroush A, Meirow D,
Felz C, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Infertility and IVF Unit, Helen Schneider Hospital for Women, Rabin Medical
Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel. ronita@clalit.org.il

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is a highly metastatic malignancy in young
patients. Ovarian cryopreservation is often an option for fertility preservation 
in cancer patients of reproductive age, specifically in minors. Thus, the
possibility of ovarian involvement in EWS needs to be elucidated.
METHODS: Eight patients aged 13-20 years with EWS participated in the study.
Ovarian samples were fixed and prepared for light microscopy, and frozen in
liquid nitrogen for RNA extraction followed by RT-PCR. Histological studies,
including immunostaining for the adhesion receptor CD99, were used to detect
histopathological features. Sensitive molecular methods were used to detect
translocations causing the formation of tumor-specific EWS-Friend leukemia virus 
integration site 1 fusion gene (EWS-FLI1).
RESULTS: In seven patients, there was no evidence of EWS in the ovaries from
pathological/molecular studies. However, in one patient, the RT-PCR showed the
EWS translocation, although there was no pathological evidence.
CONCLUSIONS: Ovarian involvement is possible in EWS. Therefore, in patients with 
EWS ovarian tissue should be examined for traces of malignancy at both the
pathological and molecular levels prior to the grafting of cryopreserved tissue
in order to minimize the risk of reseeding the cancer.

PMID: 20472912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Circ Res. 2010 Jul 9;107(1):45-55. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.213983. Epub 2010 
May 13.

The Rac1 regulator ELMO1 controls vascular morphogenesis in zebrafish.

Epting D(1), Wendik B, Bennewitz K, Dietz CT, Driever W, Kroll J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedicine and Medical Technology Mannheim, Research Division
Vascular Biology of the Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University and the
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance) Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

RATIONALE: Angiogenesis is regulated by the small GTPase Rac1. The ELMO1/DOCK180 
complex forms a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rac1, regulating its
activation during cell migration in different biological systems.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the function of ELMO1/DOCK180 in vascular development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In situ hybridization studies for elmo1 identified a
vascular and neuronal expression in zebrafish. Morpholino-based expression
silencing of elmo1 severely impaired the formation of the vasculature, including 
intersomitic vessels, the dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessel, the parachordal
vessel, and the development of the thoracic duct in tg(fli1:EGFP) embryos.
Mechanistically, we identified Netrin-1 and its receptor Unc5B as upstream
activators of the ELMO1/DOCK180 complex, regulating its functional interaction
and leading to Rac1 activation in endothelial cells and vessel formation in
zebrafish.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data have identified a novel signaling cascade regulating
vasculature formation in zebrafish.

PMID: 20466982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 May 6;6(5):e1000771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000771.

Modeling reveals bistability and low-pass filtering in the network module
determining blood stem cell fate.

Narula J(1), Smith AM, Gottgens B, Igoshin OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, USA.

Combinatorial regulation of gene expression is ubiquitous in eukaryotes with
multiple inputs converging on regulatory control elements. The dynamic properties
of these elements determine the functionality of genetic networks regulating
differentiation and development. Here we propose a method to quantitatively
characterize the regulatory output of distant enhancers with a biophysical
approach that recursively determines free energies of protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions from experimental analysis of transcriptional reporter
libraries. We apply this method to model the Scl-Gata2-Fli1 triad-a network
module important for cell fate specification of hematopoietic stem cells. We show
that this triad module is inherently bistable with irreversible transitions in
response to physiologically relevant signals such as Notch, Bmp4 and Gata1 and we
use the model to predict the sensitivity of the network to mutations. We also
show that the triad acts as a low-pass filter by switching between steady states 
only in response to signals that persist for longer than a minimum duration
threshold. We have found that the auto-regulation loops connecting the
slow-degrading Scl to Gata2 and Fli1 are crucial for this low-pass filtering
property. Taken together our analysis not only reveals new insights into
hematopoietic stem cell regulatory network functionality but also provides a
novel and widely applicable strategy to incorporate experimental measurements
into dynamical network models.

PMCID: PMC2865510
PMID: 20463872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Blood. 2010 Jul 22;116(3):428-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-250217. Epub 2010
May 5.

The inositol phosphatase SHIP-1 is negatively regulated by Fli-1 and its loss
accelerates leukemogenesis.

Lakhanpal GK(1), Vecchiarelli-Federico LM, Li YJ, Cui JW, Bailey ML, Spaner DE,
Dumont DJ, Barber DL, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The activation of Fli-1, an Ets transcription factor, is the critical genetic
event in Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV)-induced erythroleukemia. Fli-1
overexpression leads to erythropoietin-dependent erythroblast proliferation,
enhanced survival, and inhibition of terminal differentiation, through activation
of the Ras pathway. However, the mechanism by which Fli-1 activates this signal
transduction pathway has yet to be identified. Down-regulation of the Src
homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase-1 (SHIP-1) is
associated with erythropoietin-stimulated erythroleukemic cells and correlates
with increased proliferation of transformed cells. In this study, we have shown
that F-MuLV-infected SHIP-1 knockout mice display accelerated erythroleukemia
progression. In addition, RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated suppression of SHIP-1 
in erythroleukemia cells activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-K) and
extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK/MAPK)
pathways, blocks erythroid differentiation, accelerates erythropoietin-induced
proliferation, and leads to PI 3-K-dependent Fli-1 up-regulation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and luciferase assays confirmed that Fli-1 binds directly to 
an Ets DNA binding site within the SHIP-1 promoter and suppresses SHIP-1
transcription. These data provide evidence to suggest that SHIP-1 is a direct
Fli-1 target, SHIP-1 and Fli-1 regulate each other in a negative feedback loop,
and the suppression of SHIP-1 by Fli-1 plays an important role in the
transformation of erythroid progenitors by F-MuLV.

PMID: 20445019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):4015-23. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4333. Epub 
2010 May 4.

Hypoxia modulates EWS-FLI1 transcriptional signature and enhances the malignant
properties of Ewing's sarcoma cells in vitro.

Aryee DN(1), Niedan S, Kauer M, Schwentner R, Bennani-Baiti IM, Ban J,
Muehlbacher K, Kreppel M, Walker RL, Meltzer P, Poremba C, Kofler R, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria. dave.aryee@ccri.at

Hypoxia is an important condition in the tumor cell microenvironment and
approximately 1% to 1.5% of the genome is transcriptionally responsive to hypoxia
with hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) as a major mediator of transcriptional
activation. Tumor hypoxia is associated with a more aggressive phenotype of many 
cancers in adults, but data on pediatric tumors are scarce. Because, by
immunohistochemistry, HIF-1alpha expression was readily detectable in 18 of 28
primary Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), a group of highly malignant
bone-associated tumors in children and young adults, we studied the effect of
hypoxia on ESFT cell lines in vitro. Intriguingly, we found that EWS-FLI1 protein
expression, which characterizes ESFT, is upregulated by hypoxia in a
HIF-1alpha-dependent manner. Hypoxia modulated the EWS-FLI1 transcriptional
signature relative to normoxic conditions. Both synergistic as well as
antagonistic transcriptional effects of EWS-FLI1 and of hypoxia were observed.
Consistent with alterations in the expression of metastasis-related genes,
hypoxia stimulated the invasiveness and soft agar colony formation of ESFT cells 
in vitro. Our data represent the first transcriptome analysis of hypoxic ESFT
cells and identify hypoxia as an important microenvironmental factor modulating
EWS-FLI1 expression and target gene activity with far-reaching consequences for
the malignant properties of ESFT.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2884367
PMID: 20442286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Adv Anat Pathol. 2010 May;17(3):162-81. doi: 10.1097/PAP.0b013e3181d98cbf.

The clinical relevance of molecular genetics in soft tissue sarcomas.

Ordóñez JL(1), Osuna D, García-Domínguez DJ, Amaral AT, Otero-Motta AP,
Mackintosh C, Sevillano MV, Barbado MV, Hernández T, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC,
Spain.

Bone and soft tissue sarcomas are an infrequent and heterogeneous group of
mesenchymal tumors including more than a hundred different entities attending to 
histologic patterns. Research into the molecular aspects of sarcomas has
increased greatly in the last few years. This enormous amount of knowledge has
allowed, for instance, to refine the classification of sarcomas, improve the
diagnosis, and increase the number of therapeutical targets available, most of
them under preclinical evaluation. However, other important key issues, such as
sarcomagenesis and the cell of origin of sarcomas, remain unresolved. From a
molecular point of view, these neoplasias are grouped into 2 main types: (a)
sarcomas showing relatively simple karyotypes and translocations, which originate
gene fusions (eg, EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma) or point mutations (eg, c-kit in the
gastrointestinal tumors) and (b) sarcomas showing unspecific gene alterations,
very complex karyotypes, and no translocations. The discovery of the early
mechanisms involved in the genesis of sarcomas, the more relevant signaling
pathways, and the development of genetically engineered mouse models could also
provide a new individualized therapeutic strategy against these tumors. This
review describes the clinical application of some of the molecular alterations
found in sarcomas, some advances in the field of sarcomagenesis, and the
development of animal models.

PMID: 20418671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Blood. 2010 Jul 15;116(2):201-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-249557. Epub 2010 Apr
21.

Interaction of retinoic acid and scl controls primitive blood development.

de Jong JL(1), Davidson AJ, Wang Y, Palis J, Opara P, Pugach E, Daley GQ, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program and Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital
Boston and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Hematopoietic development during embryogenesis involves the interaction of
extrinsic signaling pathways coupled to an intrinsic cell fate that is regulated 
by cell-specific transcription factors. Retinoic acid (RA) has been linked to
stem cell self-renewal in adults and also participates in yolk sac blood island
formation. Here, we demonstrate that RA decreases gata1 expression and blocks
primitive hematopoiesis in zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos, while increasing
expression of the vascular marker, fli1. Treatment with an inhibitor of RA
biosynthesis or a retinoic acid receptor antagonist increases gata1(+) erythroid 
progenitors in the posterior mesoderm of wild-type embryos and anemic cdx4(-/-)
mutants, indicating a link between the cdx-hox signaling pathway and RA.
Overexpression of scl, a DNA binding protein necessary for hematopoietic
development, rescues the block of hematopoiesis induced by RA. We show that these
effects of RA and RA pathway inhibitors are conserved during primitive
hematopoiesis in murine yolk sac explant cultures and embryonic stem cell assays.
Taken together, these data indicate that RA inhibits the commitment of mesodermal
cells to hematopoietic fates, functioning downstream of cdx4 and upstream of scl.
Our studies establish a new connection between RA and scl during development that
may participate in stem cell self-renewal and hematopoietic differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2910607
PMID: 20410509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 11;285(24):18586-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106468. Epub
2010 Apr 16.

Nucleoredoxin negatively regulates Toll-like receptor 4 signaling via recruitment
of flightless-I to myeloid differentiation primary response gene (88).

Hayashi T(1), Funato Y, Terabayashi T, Morinaka A, Sakamoto R, Ichise H, Fukuda
H, Yoshida N, Miki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Intracellular Signaling, Institute for Protein Research, Osaka
University, 3-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

We previously characterized nucleoredoxin (NRX) as a negative regulator of the
Wnt signaling pathway through Dishevelled (Dvl). We perform a comprehensive
search for other NRX-interacting proteins and identify Flightless-I (Fli-I) as a 
novel NRX-binding partner. Fli-I binds to NRX and other related proteins, such as
Rod-derived cone viability factor (RdCVF), whereas Dvl binds only to NRX.
Endogenous NRX and Fli-I in vivo interactions are confirmed. Both NRX and RdCVF
link Fli-I with myeloid differentiation primary response gene (88) (MyD88), an
important adaptor protein for innate immune response. NRX and RdCVF also
potentiate the negative effect of Fli-I upon lipopolysaccharide-induced
activation of NF-kappaB through the Toll-like receptor 4/MyD88 pathway. Embryonic
fibroblasts derived from NRX gene-targeted mice show aberrant NF-kappaB
activation upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation. These results suggest that the
NRX subfamily of proteins forms a link between MyD88 and Fli-I to mediate
negative regulation of the Toll-like receptor 4/MyD88 pathway.

PMCID: PMC2881784
PMID: 20400501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Genes Dev. 2010 May;24(9):916-32. doi: 10.1101/gad.1899710. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

EWS-FLI-1 modulates miRNA145 and SOX2 expression to initiate mesenchymal stem
cell reprogramming toward Ewing sarcoma cancer stem cells.

Riggi N(1), Suvà ML, De Vito C, Provero P, Stehle JC, Baumer K, Cironi L,
Janiszewska M, Petricevic T, Suvà D, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Guillou L, Stamenkovic
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne CH-1011, Switzerland.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) display plasticity and self-renewal properties
reminiscent of normal tissue stem cells, but the events responsible for their
emergence remain obscure. We recently identified CSCs in Ewing sarcoma family
tumors (ESFTs) and showed that they retain mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
plasticity. In the present study, we addressed the mechanisms that underlie ESFT 
CSC development. We show that the EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene, associated with 85%-90% 
of ESFTs and believed to initiate their pathogenesis, induces expression of the
embryonic stem cell (ESC) genes OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG in human pediatric MSCs
(hpMSCs) but not in their adult counterparts. Moreover, under appropriate culture
conditions, hpMSCs expressing EWS-FLI-1 generate a cell subpopulation displaying 
ESFT CSC features in vitro. We further demonstrate that induction of the ESFT CSC
phenotype is the result of the combined effect of EWS-FLI-1 on its target gene
expression and repression of microRNA-145 (miRNA145) promoter activity. Finally, 
we provide evidence that EWS-FLI-1 and miRNA-145 function in a mutually
repressive feedback loop and identify their common target gene, SOX2, in addition
to miRNA145 itself, as key players in ESFT cell differentiation and
tumorigenicity. Our observations provide insight for the first time into the
mechanisms whereby a single oncogene can reprogram primary cells to display a CSC
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2861191
PMID: 20382729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e126. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq217. Epub 2010 Apr
7.

De novo motif identification improves the accuracy of predicting transcription
factor binding sites in ChIP-Seq data analysis.

Boeva V(1), Surdez D, Guillon N, Tirode F, Fejes AP, Delattre O, Barillot E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, Paris, France.

Dramatic progress in the development of next-generation sequencing technologies
has enabled accurate genome-wide characterization of the binding sites of
DNA-associated proteins. This technique, baptized as ChIP-Seq, uses a combination
of chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel DNA sequencing. Other
published tools that predict binding sites from ChIP-Seq data use only positional
information of mapped reads. In contrast, our algorithm MICSA (Motif
Identification for ChIP-Seq Analysis) combines this source of positional
information with information on motif occurrences to better predict binding sites
of transcription factors (TFs). We proved the greater accuracy of MICSA with
respect to several other tools by running them on datasets for the TFs NRSF,
GABP, STAT1 and CTCF. We also applied MICSA on a dataset for the oncogenic TF
EWS-FLI1. We discovered >2000 binding sites and two functionally different
binding motifs. We observed that EWS-FLI1 can activate gene transcription when
(i) its binding site is located in close proximity to the gene transcription
start site (up to approximately 150 kb), and (ii) it contains a microsatellite
sequence. Furthermore, we observed that sites without microsatellites can also
induce regulation of gene expression--positively as often as negatively--and at
much larger distances (up to approximately 1 Mb).

PMCID: PMC2887977
PMID: 20375099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Infect Immun. 2010 Jun;78(6):2734-44. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00126-10. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Fine mapping of Leishmania major susceptibility Locus lmr2 and evidence of a role
for Fli1 in disease and wound healing.

Sakthianandeswaren A(1), Curtis JM, Elso C, Kumar B, Baldwin TM, Lopaticki S,
Kedzierski L, Smyth GK, Foote SJ, Handman E.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, PO Box 2008, Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. Anu.Sakthianandeswaren@ludwig.edu.au

Genetic linkage studies of the host response to Leishmania major, the causative
agent of cutaneous leishmaniasis, have identified significant genetic complexity 
in humans and mice. In the mouse model, multiple loci have been implicated in
susceptibility to infection, but to date, the genes underlying these loci have
not been identified. We now describe the contribution of a novel candidate gene, 
Fli1, to both L. major resistance and enhanced wound healing. We have previously 
mapped the L. major response locus, lmr2, to proximal chromosome 9 in a genetic
cross between the resistant C57BL/6 strain and the susceptible BALB/c strain. We 
now show that the presence of the resistant C57BL/6 lmr2 allele in susceptible
BALB/c mice confers an enhanced L. major resistance and wound healing phenotype. 
Fine mapping of the lmr2 locus permitted the localization of the lmr2
quantitative trait locus to a 5-Mb interval comprising 21 genes, of which
microarray analysis was able to identify differential expression in 1 gene-Fli1. 
Analysis of Fli1 expression in wounded and L. major-infected skin and naïve and
infected lymph nodes validated the importance of Fli1 in lesion resolution and
wound healing and identified 3 polymorphisms in the Fli1 promoter, among which a 
GA repeat element may be the important contributor.

PMCID: PMC2876540
PMID: 20368343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Jun 15;45(1):82-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2010.03.002.
Epub 2010 Apr 1.

TEThered to Runx: novel binding partners for runx factors.

Li X(1), Decker M, Westendorf JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

RUNX transcription factors reside in the nuclear matrix where they integrate
numerous signaling pathways to regulate gene expression and affect tissue
development, regeneration, and tumorigenesis. An affinity purification and
proteomic experiment was performed to identify novel Runx2 binding partners. The 
interactions between Runx2 and two nuclear factors (Ddx5 and CoAA) identified in 
this screen were previously described. Coactivator activator (CoAA) bound the DNA
binding domain of Runx2 and prevented Runx-driven gene expression. The YxxQ motif
in CoAA was required for Runx2 interactions. Members of the FET/TET family of
proteins, including FUS/TLS and EWSR1, contain a similar motif and were
hypothesized to interact with Runx2. Here, we provide evidence that FUS/TLS,
EWSR1, and the Ewing's sarcoma t(12;21) fusion protein EWS-FLI bind Runx2 and
alter its transcriptional activity. Potential roles of protein complexes
containing FET/TET and RUNX family members during tumor formation and mesenchymal
progenitor cell differentiation are discussed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2878890
PMID: 20362478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1982-8. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.23.3585. Epub 2010
Mar 22.

Impact of EWS-ETS fusion type on disease progression in Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor: prospective results from the 
cooperative Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99 trial.

Le Deley MC(1), Delattre O, Schaefer KL, Burchill SA, Koehler G, Hogendoorn PC,
Lion T, Poremba C, Marandet J, Ballet S, Pierron G, Brownhill SC, Nesslböck M,
Ranft A, Dirksen U, Oberlin O, Lewis IJ, Craft AW, Jürgens H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung,
Zimmermannplatz 10, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4.

PURPOSE EWS-ETS fusion genes are the driving force in Ewing's sarcoma
pathogenesis. Because of the variable breakpoint locations in the involved genes,
there is heterogeneity in fusion RNA and protein architecture. Since previous
retrospective studies suggested prognostic differences among patients expressing 
different EWS-FLI1 fusion types, the impact of fusion RNA architecture on disease
progression and relapse was studied prospectively within the Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99
clinical trial. PATIENTS AND METHODS Among 1,957 patients who registered before
January 1, 2007, 703 primary tumors were accessible for the molecular biology
study. Fusion type was assessed by polymerase chain reaction on frozen (n = 578) 
or paraffin-embedded materials (n = 125). The primary end point was the time to
disease progression or relapse. Results After exclusion of noninformative
patients, 565 patients were entered into the prognostic factor analysis comparing
type 1 (n = 296), type 2 (n = 133), nontype 1/nontype 2 EWS-FLI1 (n = 91) and
EWS-ERG fusions (n = 45). Median follow-up time was 4.5 years. The distribution
of sex, age, tumor volume, tumor site, disease extension, or histologic response 
did not differ between the four fusion type groups. We did not observe any
significant prognostic value of the fusion type on the risk of progression or
relapse. The only slight difference was that the risk of progression or relapse
associated with nontype 1/nontype 2 EWS-FLI1 fusions was 1.38 (95% CI, 0.96 to
2.0) times higher than risk associated with other fusion types, but it was not
significant (P = .10). CONCLUSION In contrast to retrospective studies, the
prospective evaluation did not confirm a prognostic benefit for type 1 EWS-FLI1
fusions.

PMID: 20308673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1989-94. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.24.5845. Epub
2010 Mar 22.

Current treatment protocols have eliminated the prognostic advantage of type 1
fusions in Ewing sarcoma: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

van Doorninck JA(1), Ji L, Schaub B, Shimada H, Wing MR, Krailo MD, Lessnick SL, 
Marina N, Triche TJ, Sposto R, Womer RB, Lawlor ER.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, 4650 Sunset Blvd, MS#57, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4.

PURPOSE Ewing sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) exhibit chromosomal translocations
that lead to the creation of chimeric fusion oncogenes. Combinatorial diversity
among chromosomal breakpoints produces varying fusions. The type 1 EWS-FLI1
transcript is created as a result of fusion between exons 7 of EWS and 6 of FLI1,
and retrospective studies have reported that type 1 tumors are associated with an
improved outcome. We have re-examined this association in a prospective cohort of
patients with ESFT treated according to current Children's Oncology Group (COG)
treatment protocols. METHODS Frozen tumor tissue was prospectively obtained from 
patients diagnosed with ESFT, and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used to determine translocation status. Analysis was confined to
patients with localized tumors who were diagnosed after 1994 and treated
according to COG protocols. Translocation status was correlated with disease
characteristics, event-free survival (EFS), and overall survival (OS). Results
RT-PCR identified chimeric fusion oncogenes in 119 of 132 ESFTs. Eighty-nine
percent of identified transcripts were EWS-FLI1, and of these, 58.8% were type 1.
Five-year EFS and OS rates for patients with type 1 and non-type 1 fusions
diagnosed between 2001 and 2005 were equivalent (type 1: EFS, 63% +/- 7%; OS, 83%
+/- 6%; non-type 1: EFS, 71% +/- 9%; OS, 79% +/- 8%). CONCLUSION Current
intensive treatment protocols for localized ESFT have erased the clinical
disadvantage that was formerly observed in patients with non-type 1 EWS-FLI1
fusions.

PMCID: PMC2860404
PMID: 20308669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1973-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.27.2161. Epub 2010
Mar 22.

Role of fusion subtype in Ewing sarcoma.

Barr FG, Meyer WH.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1989-94.
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Apr 20;28(12):1982-8.

PMID: 20308653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Med Case Rep. 2010 Mar 17;4:88. doi: 10.1186/1752-1947-4-88.

Primary vaginal Ewing's sarcoma or primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a
17-year-old woman: a case report.

Rekhi B(1), Qureshi S, Basak R, Desai SB, Medhi S, Kurkure P, Menon S, Maheshwari
A, Jambhekar NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Centre, Dr EB Road, Parel, Mumbai,
400012, India. rekhi.bharat@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Primary Ewing's sarcoma or primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the
genital tract of women is uncommon. Rarer still is its occurrence in the vagina, 
with only five cases described so far. Out of these, only one case was confirmed 
using molecular analysis.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present an extremely rare case of Ewing's sarcoma or
primitive neuroectodermal tumor in a 17-year-old Indian girl. She presented with 
a vaginal mass that was initially diagnosed as a malignant round cell tumor.
Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse positivity for vimentin, membranous
positivity for MIC2, and positivity for BCL2 and FLI-1. On the other hand, she
was negative for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, Myo D-1,
myogenin and smooth muscle actin. A diagnosis of primitive neuroectodermal tumor 
was thus offered. Furthermore, a molecular analysis of our patient using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction technique showed positivity for t(11; 22)
(q24; q12) (EWSR1-FLI1), thus confirming the diagnosis of a Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor. Our patient was offered chemotherapy on 
Institutional protocol EFT 2001.
CONCLUSION: This is a rare case of primary vaginal Ewing's sarcoma or primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, which was confirmed with molecular analysis, in the
youngest patient known so far. This study reinforces the value of integrating
morphological features with membranous MIC2 positivity, along with application of
molecular techniques in objective identification of an Ewing's sarcoma or
primitive neuroectodermal tumor at uncommon sites.

PMCID: PMC2848680
PMID: 20233457  [PubMed]


5. Am J Clin Pathol. 2010 Apr;133(4):633-45. doi: 10.1309/AJCPPJJ0PY4XZOEC.

Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction as an ancillary molecular
technique in the diagnosis of small blue round cell tumors by fine-needle
aspiration cytology.

Gautam U(1), Srinivasan R, Rajwanshi A, Bansal D, Marwaha RK, Vasishtha RK.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Cytology and Gynecological Pathology, Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India.

We evaluated the feasibility and usefulness of reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) on fine-needle aspirates for categorization of small blue
round cell tumors (SBRCTs). A total of 51 cases, including 25 Ewing
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs), 11
rhabdomyosarcomas, 13 neuroblastomas, and 2 desmoplastic small round cell tumors 
(DSRCTs) were analyzed. The detection of the EWS-FLI1 (20/25) and EWS-ERG (4/25) 
fusion transcripts resolved 24 of 25 cases of Ewing sarcoma/PNET. The PAX3/7-FKHR
fusion transcript was detected in 2 of 4 cases of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma and
the EWS-WT1 transcript in both cases of DSRCT. Tyrosine hydroxylase and
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (dopa) decarboxylase transcripts were demonstrated in 
10 of 13 cases of neuroblastoma. In comparison, immunocytochemical analysis
resolved 19 (76%) of 25 Ewing sarcomas, 9 (82%) of 11 rhabdomyosarcomas, 6 (46%) 
of 13 neuroblastomas, and 1 (50%) of 2 DSRCTs. Overall, RT-PCR resolved 38 (86%) 
of 44 vs 35 (69%) of 51 cases by immunocytochemical analysis. RT-PCR is easily
applied to fine-needle aspirates of SBRCT and greatly facilitates accurate tumor 
typing.

PMID: 20231617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Am J Pathol. 2010 Apr;176(4):1983-98. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090593. Epub 2010 
Mar 12.

Endothelial Fli1 deficiency impairs vascular homeostasis: a role in scleroderma
vasculopathy.

Asano Y(1), Stawski L, Hant F, Highland K, Silver R, Szalai G, Watson DK,
Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center, Boston University Medical Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Systemic sclerosis or scleroderma (SSc) is a complex autoimmune connective tissue
disease characterized by obliterative vasculopathy and tissue fibrosis. The
molecular mechanisms underlying SSc vasculopathy are largely unknown. Friend
leukemia integration factor 1 (Fli1), an important regulator of immune function
and collagen fibrillogenesis, is expressed at reduced levels in endothelial cells
in affected skin of patients with SSc. To develop a disease model and to
investigate the function of Fli1 in the vasculature, we generated mice with a
conditional deletion of Fli1 in endothelial cells (Fli1 CKO). Fli1 CKO mice
showed a disorganized dermal vascular network with greatly compromised vessel
integrity and markedly increased vessel permeability. We show that Fli1 regulates
expression of genes involved in maintaining vascular homeostasis including
VE-cadherin, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1, type IV collagen,
matrix metalloproteinase 9, platelet-derived growth factor B, and S1P(1)
receptor. Accordingly, Fli1 CKO mice are characterized by down-regulation of
VE-cadherin and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1, impaired
development of basement membrane, and a decreased presence of alpha-smooth muscle
actin-positive cells in dermal microvessels. This phenotype is consistent with a 
role of Fli1 as a regulator of vessel maturation and stabilization. Importantly, 
vascular characteristics of Fli1 CKO mice are recapitulated by SSc
microvasculature. Thus, persistently reduced levels of Fli1 in endothelial cells 
may play a critical role in the development of SSc vasculopathy.

PMCID: PMC2843486
PMID: 20228226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cell. 2010 Mar 5;140(5):744-52. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.01.044.

An atlas of combinatorial transcriptional regulation in mouse and man.

Ravasi T(1), Suzuki H, Cannistraci CV, Katayama S, Bajic VB, Tan K, Akalin A,
Schmeier S, Kanamori-Katayama M, Bertin N, Carninci P, Daub CO, Forrest AR, Gough
J, Grimmond S, Han JH, Hashimoto T, Hide W, Hofmann O, Kamburov A, Kaur M, Kawaji
H, Kubosaki A, Lassmann T, van Nimwegen E, MacPherson CR, Ogawa C, Radovanovic A,
Schwartz A, Teasdale RD, Tegnér J, Lenhard B, Teichmann SA, Arakawa T, Ninomiya
N, Murakami K, Tagami M, Fukuda S, Imamura K, Kai C, Ishihara R, Kitazume Y,
Kawai J, Hume DA, Ideker T, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)The FANTOM Consortium, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive,
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2010 Apr 16;141(2):369. Kamburov, Atanas [added]; Kaur, Mandeep [added];
MacPherson, Cameron Ross [added]; Radovanovic, Aleksandar [added]; Schwartz,
Ariel [added].

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2010 May;7(5):344-5.

Combinatorial interactions among transcription factors are critical to directing 
tissue-specific gene expression. To build a global atlas of these combinations,
we have screened for physical interactions among the majority of human and mouse 
DNA-binding transcription factors (TFs). The complete networks contain 762 human 
and 877 mouse interactions. Analysis of the networks reveals that highly
connected TFs are broadly expressed across tissues, and that roughly half of the 
measured interactions are conserved between mouse and human. The data highlight
the importance of TF combinations for determining cell fate, and they lead to the
identification of a SMAD3/FLI1 complex expressed during development of immunity. 
The availability of large TF combinatorial networks in both human and mouse will 
provide many opportunities to study gene regulation, tissue differentiation, and 
mammalian evolution.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2836267
PMID: 20211142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Blood. 2010 Jul 1;115(26):5338-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-09-244640. Epub 2010
Feb 25.

Scl isoforms act downstream of etsrp to specify angioblasts and definitive
hematopoietic stem cells.

Ren X(1), Gomez GA, Zhang B, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, Center of
Developmental Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, 
Ministry of Education, China.

Recent lineage studies suggest that hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) may be
derived from endothelial cells. However, the genetic hierarchy governing the
emergence of HSCs remains elusive. We report here that zebrafish ets1-related
protein (etsrp), which is essential for vascular endothelial development, also
plays a critical role in the initiation of definitive hematopoiesis by
controlling the expression of 2 stem cell leukemia (scl) isoforms (scl-alpha and 
scl-beta) in angioblasts. In etsrp morphants, which are deficient in endothelial 
and HSC development, scl-alpha alone partially rescues angioblast specification, 
arterial-venous differentiation, and the expression of HSC markers, runx1 and
c-myb, whereas scl-beta requires angioblast rescue by fli1a to restore runx1
expression. Interestingly, when vascular endothelial growth factor (Vegf)
signaling is inhibited, HSC marker expression can still be restored by scl-alpha 
in etsrp morphants, whereas the rescue of arterial ephrinb2a expression is
blocked. Furthermore, both scl isoforms partially rescue runx1 but not ephrinb2a 
expression in embryos deficient in Vegf signaling. Our data suggest that
downstream of etsrp, scl-alpha and fli1a specify the angioblasts, whereas
scl-beta further initiates HSC specification from this angioblast population, and
that Vegf signaling acts upstream of scl-beta during definitive hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC2902133
PMID: 20185582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Dermatol. 2010 Jan;37(1):54-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2009.00758.x.

Future treatments in systemic sclerosis.

Asano Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo
113-8655, Japan. yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disorder with clinical manifestations
resulting from immune activation, fibrosis development and damage of small blood 
vessels. Although there have been no established treatments for SSc, lots of new 
treatments targeting organ and pathogenesis are in the process of development.
Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta is a major cytokine involved in the
pathogenesis of fibrosis in SSc. The blockade of cell surface molecules capable
of activating latent TGF-beta, blockade of ligand by the pan-isoform-specific
antibody, soluble TGF-beta receptors and a recombinant latency associated
peptide, as well as inhibitors for ALK5 and Smad3 are the potential strategies to
abolish the pathological activation of TGF-beta signaling in SSc fibroblasts.
Besides TGF-beta, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF)/CCN2, platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) and endothelin-1 are the candidates for the new therapeutic 
targets. As for immune dysfunction in SSc, i.v. immunoglobulin infusion, stem
cell transplantation and B-cell depletion are potential new therapies under or
awaiting a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, although their
efficacies are still controversial. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, endothelin
receptor antagonists and inhibitors for serotonin signaling are the new
therapeutic targets for Raynaud's phenomenon, digital ulceration and pulmonary
arterial hypertension in SSc. Imatinib mesylate may be a novel new therapy for
fibrosis and vasculopathy in SSc because it reverses the expression levels of
Fli1, which is a transcription factor downregulated in SSc through an epigenetic 
mechanism and is likely to be involved in the development of fibrosis and
vasculopathy in this disease. Potential therapeutic targets other than those
described above are also reviewed.

PMID: 20175840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):855-6. Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Deregulation of innate immune signaling in myelodysplastic syndromes is
associated with deletion of chromosome arm 5q.

Starczynowski DT(1), Karsan A.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Sciences Centre and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, BC
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

PMID: 20160505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genome Med. 2010 Jan 28;2(1):8. doi: 10.1186/gm129.

Downstream EWS/FLI1 - upstream Ewing's sarcoma.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung,
Zimmermannplatz 10, 1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.at.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors are a good example of how genome research has
advanced our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of an otherwise
enigmatic disease. This group of embryonal bone tumors is characterized by the
expression of a chimeric ETS-family oncogene, predominantly EWS/FLI1. There is
now convincing evidence for a mesenchymal descent from an early pluripotent
progenitor. EWS/FLI1 has been shown to drive proliferation of Ewing's sarcoma
cells and block most of the differentiation potential except for a partial neural
gene expression program. The EWS/FLI1 fusion protein acts mainly as a gene
activator, directly interacting with chromatin at two kinds of binding site:
distant enhancers enriched in GGAA microsatellites, and proximal promoters
containing classical ETS-binding motifs and recognition motifs for other
transcription factors. EWS/FLI1 also represses a large number of genes, mainly
indirectly, presumably by altering microRNA expression and epigenetic mechanisms,
and potentially affecting post-transcriptional gene regulation. Modulation of
EWS/FLI1 expression is not only a desirable therapeutic goal, but may also occur 
under physiological conditions and influence the course of the disease.

PMCID: PMC2829933
PMID: 20156317  [PubMed]


12. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 2;107(9):4299-304. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909299107. Epub 2010 Feb 12.

Disruption of angiogenesis and tumor growth with an orally active drug that
stabilizes the inactive state of PDGFRbeta/B-RAF.

Murphy EA(1), Shields DJ, Stoletov K, Dneprovskaia E, McElroy M, Greenberg JI,
Lindquist J, Acevedo LM, Anand S, Majeti BK, Tsigelny I, Saldanha A, Walsh B,
Hoffman RM, Bouvet M, Klemke RL, Vogt PK, Arnold L, Wrasidlo W, Cheresh DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Moores Cancer Center, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2010 Apr;9(4):270.

Kinases are known to regulate fundamental processes in cancer including tumor
proliferation, metastasis, neovascularization, and chemoresistance. Accordingly, 
kinase inhibitors have been a major focus of drug development, and several kinase
inhibitors are now approved for various cancer indications. Typically, kinase
inhibitors are selected via high-throughput screening using catalytic kinase
domains at low ATP concentration, and this process often yields ATP mimetics that
lack specificity and/or function poorly in cells where ATP levels are high.
Molecules targeting the allosteric site in the inactive kinase conformation (type
II inhibitors) provide an alternative for developing selective inhibitors that
are physiologically active. By applying a rational design approach using a
constrained amino-triazole scaffold predicted to stabilize kinases in the
inactive state, we generated a series of selective type II inhibitors of
PDGFRbeta and B-RAF, important targets for pericyte recruitment and endothelial
cell survival, respectively. These molecules were designed in silico and screened
for antivascular activity in both cell-based models and a Tg(fli1-EGFP) zebrafish
embryogenesis model. Dual inhibition of PDGFRbeta and B-RAF cellular signaling
demonstrated synergistic antiangiogenic activity in both zebrafish and murine
models of angiogenesis, and a combination of previously characterized PDGFRbeta
and RAF inhibitors validated the synergy. Our lead compound was selected as an
orally active molecule with favorable pharmacokinetic properties which
demonstrated target inhibition in vivo leading to suppression of murine
orthotopic tumors in both the kidney and pancreas.

PMCID: PMC2840076
PMID: 20154271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Cancer Lett. 2010 Aug 1;294(1):57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2010.01.022. Epub
2010 Feb 12.

Inhibition of the transcriptional function of p53 by EWS-Fli1 chimeric protein in
Ewing Family Tumors.

Li Y(1), Tanaka K, Fan X, Nakatani F, Li X, Nakamura T, Takasaki M, Yamamoto S,
Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) generates the EWS-Fli1 fusion
gene, which contributes to the development of Ewing Family Tumors (EFTs).
Although p53 mutations are found only in 5-20% of EFTs, the p53 pathway is
thought to be abrogated in EFTs. The role of EWS-Fli1 in the p53 pathway in the
tumor is still poorly understood. In this study, using immunoprecipitation and
co-localization, we show that EWS-Fli1 interacts with p53 within the nucleus in
vivo. The introduction of EWS-Fli1 resulted in significant reduction of promoter 
activities and mRNA levels of p21 and mdm2, meanwhile it canceled p53-dependent
growth suppression. In contrast, knockdown of EWS-Fli1 expression mediated by
small interfering RNAs (siRNA) also augmented the induction of p21 and mdm2 in
response to DNA damage. Furthermore, using serial deletion constructs of the
EWS-Fli1 fusion protein, we determined that EWS-Fli1 binding to p53 as well as
inhibition of p21 and mdm2 promoter activities was mediated by its N-terminal
domain (amino acid residues 65-109). These observations suggest that the
N-terminal region of EWS-Fli1 might associate with p53 and impair its
transcriptional activity, subsequently inhibiting the expression of its
downstream genes. These results might provide new insight into the oncogenesis of
EFTs by EWS-Fli1 via the inhibition of p53 function.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Feb 9;107(6):2610-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0913873107.
Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Basal epithelial stem cells are efficient targets for prostate cancer initiation.

Lawson DA(1), Zong Y, Memarzadeh S, Xin L, Huang J, Witte ON.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Prevailing theories suggest that luminal cells are the origin of prostate cancer 
because it is histologically defined by basal cell loss and malignant luminal
cell expansion. We introduced a series of genetic alterations into prospectively 
identified populations of murine basal/stem and luminal cells in an in vivo
prostate regeneration assay. Stromal induction of FGF signaling, increased
expression of the ETS family transcription factor ERG1, and constitutive
activation of PI3K signaling were evaluated. Combination of activated PI3K
signaling and heightened androgen receptor signaling, which is associated with
disease progression to androgen independence, was also performed. Even though
luminal cells fail to respond, basal/stem cells demonstrate efficient capacity
for cancer initiation and can produce luminal-like disease characteristic of
human prostate cancer in multiple models. This finding provides evidence in
support of basal epithelial stem cells as one target cell for prostate cancer
initiation and demonstrates the propensity of primitive cells for tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2823887
PMID: 20133806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Arkh Patol. 2009 Nov-Dec;71(6):41-3.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney in children; its differential
diagnosis with Wilms tumor].

[Article in Russian]

Popov SD, Sebire NJ, Popova ED, Vujanic GM.

There may be a number of tumors made up by small round blue cells in the kidneys 
of children. One of them is primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). The
differences in therapeutic approaches determine the need to establish an accurate
diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of PNET and the blastemal component of
Wilms tumor can be difficult due to the similar histological pattern. There is a 
need for a close analysis of morphological manifestations, by keeping in mind the
age of patients, and supplementary studies. A strong CD99 membrane expression and
nuclear FLI1 expression in tumor cells are the signs of PNET. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ hybridization
can determine PNET-specific translocations [t(11;22)(q24;q12), by involving the
EWS gene.

PMID: 20131507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2010 Mar 15;44(3):175-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2009.12.012.
Epub 2010 Jan 27.

Loss of GATA1 and gain of FLI1 expression during thrombocyte maturation.

Jagadeeswaran P(1), Lin S, Weinstein B, Hutson A, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of North Texas, Denton, 76203,
USA. jag@unt.edu

In this paper, we characterized expression of GATA1 and FLI1 gene promoters in
thrombocytes of zebrafish transgenic lines, G1-GM2 and TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 that carry
transgenes of GATA1 and FLI1 gene promoters driving GFP. We found two discrete
populations of thrombocytes verified by morphology, labeled with GFP in both
G1-GM2 and TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 lines: (1) the more intensely labeled GFP+
thrombocyte, and (2) the less intensely labeled GFP+ thrombocytes. The more
intensely labeled GFP+ thrombocyte in G1-GM2 line and the less intensely labeled 
GFP+ thrombocytes in the TG(fli1:EGFP)y1 line corresponded to young thrombocytes.
These results showed that young thrombocytes have higher GATA1 promoter activity,
while mature thrombocytes have more FLI1 gene promoter transcription. This
finding suggests that there is a gradual loss of GATA1 and gain of FLI1
expression as the thrombocytes mature, and this overexpression of FLI1 may help
maintain the thrombocyte lineage. Furthermore, the presence of transcriptional
factors similar to those found in megakaryocytes raises the possibility that
vertebrate thrombocytes may be the forerunners of mammalian megakaryocytes and,
therefore, could serve as a model to study megakaryocyte maturation.

2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2829368
PMID: 20110178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 1;70(3):1154-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1993. Epub
2010 Jan 26.

EWS/FLI1 oncogene activates caspase 3 transcription and triggers apoptosis in
vivo.

Sohn EJ(1), Li H, Reidy K, Beers LF, Christensen BL, Lee SB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

EWS/FLI1 is a fusion gene product generated by a chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12) found in Ewing sarcoma. EWS/FLI1 encodes an aberrant
transcription factor with oncogenic properties in vitro. Paradoxically,
expression of EWS/FLI1 in nontransformed primary cells results in apoptosis, but 
the exact mechanism remains unclear. In primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts
derived from conditional EWS/FLI1 knock-in embryos, expression of EWS/FLI1
resulted in apoptosis with concomitant increase in the endogenous Caspase 3
(Casp3) mRNA. EWS/FLI1 directly bound and activated the CASP3 promoter, whereas
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of EWS/FLI1 led to a marked decrease in 
CASP3 transcripts in Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Ectopic expression of EWS/FLI1
resulted in an increased expression of CASP3 protein in heterologous cell lines. 
Importantly, expression of EWS/FLI1 in the mouse triggered an early onset of
apoptosis in kidneys and acute lethality. These findings suggest that EWS/FLI1
induces apoptosis, at least partially, through the activation of CASP3 and show
the cell context-dependent roles of EWS/FLI1 in apoptosis and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2818579
PMID: 20103643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2010 Feb;14(2):169-77. doi: 10.1517/14728220903531454.

Targeting DAX-1 in embryonic stem cells and cancer.

Lalli E(1), Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire CNRS UMR 6097, Valbonne,
France. ninino@ipmc.cnrs.fr

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: DAX-1 (NR0B1) is an unusual orphan nuclear receptor
whose function is essential for the development of the human adrenal cortex and
onset of puberty. Recent data have implicated this transcription factor also in
embryonic stem cell and cancer biology.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: The role of DAX-1 in the regulation of development 
and function of the adrenal cortex, reproductive axis, embryonic stem cells and a
few types of cancer.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: Here we review the past and present milestones in
DAX-1 research and try to provide hints about the development and fields of
application of DAX-1-targeted drugs in the future.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: The unusual structure and restricted expression pattern of
DAX-1 may offer unique opportunities for drug discovery.

PMID: 20055716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Apr;54(4):606-9. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22365.

Pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia with bulk extramedullary disease and
chromosome 22 (EWSR1) rearrangement masquerading as Ewing sarcoma.

Jakovljevic G(1), Nakic M, Rogosic S, Kardum-Skelin I, Mrsic-Davidovic S, Zadro
R, Kruslin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Pediatric Clinic, Children's Hospital
Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. gordanajakovljevic@yahoo.com

We report a 2-year-old female with a subcutaneous tumor who was initially
misdiagnosed as suffering from Ewing sarcoma with a positive EWSR1 rearrangement 
and EWS/FLI1 transcript. After finding lymphoblasts in peripheral blood, the
diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia was established. This necessitated
further analysis of the subcutaneous tumor. The tissue was positive for immature 
B-cell markers and an immunoglobulin heavy chain gene rearrangement, which
confirmed the final diagnosis of common type acute lymphoblastic leukemia with
bulk extramedullary disease. The patient was treated with chemotherapy and was in
remission 30 months after the diagnosis.

PMID: 20049929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Anticancer Res. 2009 Nov;29(11):4489-96.

Development and characterization of HAT-sensitive Ewing tumour cells for
immunotherapy.

Pfeifle C(1), Reinhardt K, Heins S, Burdach S, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik und Poliklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Klinikum der 
Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Ernst Grube Str. 40, D-06097 Halle,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Despite improvements in the treatment of patients with Ewing family
tumours (EFT) during the past decades, the prognosis for patients with advanced
disease is still unsatisfying. New treatment strategies have to be developed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A hypoxanthine/aminopterin/thymidine (HAT)-sensitive EFT
cell line was developed by repetitive treatment of the EFT cell line SK-N-MC with
8'-azaguanine (8AG). By using DNA microarrays, the gene expression profile of
this cell line was characterized. Immunostimulatory activity was assessed by
mixed lymphocyte/tumour cell culture (MLTC). Artificial fusion of tumour cells
and dendritic cells was visualized by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: After selection of 8AG-resistant cells, a cell line with high
sensitivity for treatment with HAT was obtained. Expression of the X chromosome
inactivation specific transcript XIST was higher in HAT-sensitive cells.
Nevertheless, HAT-sensitive cells retained the EFT-associated gene expression
profile. Moreover, in the presence of HAT, it was possible to use these cells
without irradiation as stimulatory cells in MLTC or as fusion partner for
dendritic cells.
CONCLUSION: HAT-sensitive EFT cells might be an interesting tool for the
development of new immunotherapeutic approaches for the treatment of EFT.

PMID: 20032396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Mar;31(3):394-401. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp317. Epub 2009 Dec
17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic protein inhibits expression of the Wnt inhibitor
DICKKOPF-1 gene and antagonizes beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription.

Navarro D(1), Agra N, Pestaña A, Alonso J, González-Sancho JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas
Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, E-28029, Madrid, Spain.

Tumours of the Ewing family, which comprise Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours, are highly aggressive and mostly affect
children and adolescents. They are characterized by chromosomal translocations
leading to the generation of fusion proteins between EWS (or very rarely FUS) and
members of the E-twenty-six (ETS) family of transcription factors that are
capable of transforming cells. EWS/FLI1, the most frequent fusion, is thought to 
cause transformation through activation or repression of specific target genes.
We present evidence demonstrating that the Wnt inhibitor and beta-catenin/T-cell 
factor (TCF)-responsive gene DICKKOPF-1 (DKK-1) is a transcriptional target of
EWS/FLI1, which can inhibit both basal and beta-catenin-induced transactivation
of the DKK-1 promoter. Moreover, our data indicate that EWS/FLI1 has a more
general effect on beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription since it can block
transactivation of a consensus beta-catenin/TCF reporter construct. Consistently,
Ewing tumour cells expressing different EWS/ETS translocations cannot engage
beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, whereas silencing of EWS/FLI1 restores 
beta-catenin responsiveness in A673 and RD-ES Ewing tumour cells. Accordingly,
gene set enrichment analysis shows that beta-catenin/TCF target genes are
significantly enriched among genes downregulated by EWS/FLI1 in the Ewing cell
line A673. Mechanistically, the inhibitory effect of EWS/FLI1 can be overcome by 
a constitutively active TCF4 protein (TCF4-VP16). Moreover, EWS/FLI1 binds
lymphoid enhancer factor 1, a TCF family member, and interferes with its binding 
to beta-catenin, which could explain its negative effect on
beta-catenin/TCF-mediated transcription. Our results show that EWS/FLI1 inhibits 
both DKK-1 expression as well as beta-catenin/TCF-dependent transcription, which 
could contribute to progression of tumours of the Ewing family.

PMID: 20019092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010 May;160(2):275-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2009.04080.x. 
Epub 2009 Dec 15.

Decreased expression of Fli-1 in bone marrow-derived haematopoietic cells
significantly affects disease development in Murphy Roths
Large/lymphoproliferation (MRL/lpr) mice.

Molano I(1), Mathenia J, Ruiz P, Gilkeson GS, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425-6370, USA.

The transcription factor Fli-1 is implicated in the pathogenesis of both murine
and human lupus. Decreased expression of Fli-1 in heterozygous (Fli-1(+/-))
Murphy Roths Large (MRL)/lpr mice resulted in significantly lower kidney
pathological scores and markedly increased survival. In this study, bone marrow
(BM) transplantation was used to investigate the role of decreased expression of 
Fli-1 in haematopoietic versus non-haematopoietic cell lineages in autoimmune
disease development. Wild-type (WT) MRL/lpr that received BM from Fli-1(+/-)
MRL/lpr mice had statistically significantly lower autoantibodies, less
proteinuria, reduced renal disease and prolonged survival compared to WT MRL/lpr 
mice that received BM from WT MRL/lpr mice. Although not statistically
significant, Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice that received BM from WT MRL/lpr mice also
had lower autoantibodies and improved survival compared to WT MRL/lpr mice that
received BM from WT MRL/lpr mice. Our data indicate that expression of Fli-1 in
haematopoietic cell lineages has a significant effect on disease development in
MRL/lpr mice.

PMCID: PMC2857951
PMID: 20015093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 1;69(23):9047-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1540. Epub
2009 Nov 17.

EWS/FLI and its downstream target NR0B1 interact directly to modulate
transcription and oncogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma.

Kinsey M(1), Smith R, Iyer AK, McCabe ER, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Most Ewing's sarcomas harbor chromosomal translocations that encode fusions
between EWS and ETS family members. The most common fusion, EWS/FLI, consists of 
an EWSR1-derived strong transcriptional activation domain fused, in-frame, to the
DNA-binding domain-containing portion of FLI1. EWS/FLI functions as an aberrant
transcription factor to regulate genes that mediate the oncogenic phenotype of
Ewing's sarcoma. One of these regulated genes, NR0B1, encodes a corepressor
protein, and likely plays a transcriptional role in tumorigenesis. However, the
genes that NR0B1 regulates and the transcription factors it interacts with in
Ewing's sarcoma are largely unknown. We used transcriptional profiling and
chromatin immunoprecipitation to identify genes that are regulated by NR0B1, and 
compared these data to similar data for EWS/FLI. Although the transcriptional
profile overlapped as expected, we also found that the genome-wide localization
of NR0B1 and EWS/FLI overlapped as well, suggesting that they regulate some genes
coordinately. Further analysis revealed that NR0B1 and EWS/FLI physically
interact. This protein-protein interaction is likely to be relevant for the
development of Ewing's sarcoma because mutations in NR0B1 that disrupt the
interaction have transcriptional consequences and also abrogate oncogenic
transformation. Taken together, these data suggest that EWS/FLI and NR0B1
physically interact, coordinately modulate gene expression, and mediate the
transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2789197
PMID: 19920188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genome Med. 2009 Nov 16;1(11):108. doi: 10.1186/gm108.

Discovery of microvascular miRNAs using public gene expression data: miR-145 is
expressed in pericytes and is a regulator of Fli1.

Larsson E(1), Fredlund Fuchs P, Heldin J, Barkefors I, Bondjers C, Genové G,
Arrondel C, Gerwins P, Kurschat C, Schermer B, Benzing T, Harvey SJ, Kreuger J,
Lindahl P.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory for Cardiovascular Research, Bruna Stråket 16,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, SE-413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: A function for the microRNA (miRNA) pathway in vascular development
and angiogenesis has been firmly established. miRNAs with selective expression in
the vasculature are attractive as possible targets in miRNA-based therapies.
However, little is known about the expression of miRNAs in microvessels in vivo. 
Here, we identified candidate microvascular-selective miRNAs by screening public 
miRNA expression datasets.
METHODS: Bioinformatics predictions of microvascular-selective expression were
validated with real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR on purified
microvascular fragments from mouse. Pericyte expression was shown with in situ
hybridization on tissue sections. Target sites were identified with 3' UTR
luciferase assays, and migration was tested in a microfluid chemotaxis chamber.
RESULTS: miR-145, miR-126, miR-24, and miR-23a were selectively expressed in
microvascular fragments isolated from a range of tissues. In situ hybridization
and analysis of Pdgfb retention motif mutant mice demonstrated predominant
expression of miR-145 in pericytes. We identified the Ets transcription factor
Friend leukemia virus integration 1 (Fli1) as a miR-145 target, and showed that
elevated levels of miR-145 reduced migration of microvascular cells in response
to growth factor gradients in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-126, miR-24 and miR-23a are selectively expressed in
microvascular endothelial cells in vivo, whereas miR-145 is expressed in
pericytes. miR-145 targets the hematopoietic transcription factor Fli1 and blocks
migration in response to growth factor gradients. Our findings have implications 
for vascular disease and provide necessary information for future drug design
against miRNAs with selective expression in the microvasculature.

PMCID: PMC2808743
PMID: 19917099  [PubMed]


25. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3257-65. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22148.

Characterization of molecular markers to assess cardiac cushions formation in
Xenopus.

Lee YH(1), Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Chonbuk National University, 
Jeonju, South Korea.

The valves and septa of the mature heart are derived from the cardiac cushions,
which develop from discrete swellings in two regions of developing heart tube:
the atrioventricular (AV) canal and the ventricular outflow tract (OFT). In
higher vertebrates, three distinct lineages contribute to the heart valves and
septa, the endocardium, the myocardium, and the cardiac neural crest that will
populate the cardiac jelly of the OFT. Very little is known about cardiac
cushions development in amphibians. Here, we describe the expression of eight
genes during key stages of cardiac cushion development in Xenopus. Among these
genes, the Wnt antagonist Frzb1 and the transcription factors Xl-Fli, Sox8, Sox9,
and Sox10 are differentially expressed in the mesenchyme of the OFT and AV
cushions. These genes can be used in combination with lineage-tracing experiments
to determine the embryonic origin of the cardiac cushions mesenchyme in Xenopus.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19890915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 17;106(46):19485-90. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909228106. Epub 2009 Nov 3.

Hypoxia-induced pathological angiogenesis mediates tumor cell dissemination,
invasion, and metastasis in a zebrafish tumor model.

Lee SL(1), Rouhi P, Dahl Jensen L, Zhang D, Ji H, Hauptmann G, Ingham P, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute, 171 
77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Mechanisms underlying pathological angiogenesis in relation to hypoxia in tumor
invasion and metastasis remain elusive. Here, we have developed a zebrafish tumor
model that allows us to study the role of pathological angiogenesis under
normoxia and hypoxia in arbitrating early events of the metastatic cascade at the
single cell level. Under normoxia, implantation of a murine T241 fibrosarcoma
into the perivitelline cavity of developing embryos of transgenic fli1:EGFP
zebrafish did not result in significant dissemination, invasion, and metastasis. 
In marked contrast, under hypoxia substantial tumor cells disseminated from
primary sites, invaded into neighboring tissues, and metastasized to distal parts
of the fish body. Similarly, expression of the hypoxia-regulated angiogenic
factor, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) to a high level resulted in
tumor cell dissemination and metastasis, which correlated with increased tumor
neovascularization. Inhibition of VEGF receptor signaling pathways by sunitinib
or VEGFR2 morpholinos virtually completely ablated VEGF-induced tumor cell
dissemination and metastasis. To the best of our knowledge, hypoxia- and
VEGF-induced pathological angiogenesis in promoting tumor dissemination,
invasion, and metastasis has not been described perviously at the single cell
level. Our findings also shed light on molecular mechanisms of beneficial effects
of clinically available anti-VEGF drugs for cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC2780785
PMID: 19887629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 27;4(10):e7608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007608.

GLI1 is a central mediator of EWS/FLI1 signaling in Ewing tumors.

Joo J(1), Christensen L, Warner K, States L, Kang HG, Vo K, Lawlor ER, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Childrens Hospital 
Los Angeles and the Saban Research Institute, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The Ewing Sarcoma Family Tumors (ESFT) consist of the classical pathologic
entities of Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor.
Occurring largely in the childhood through young adult years, these tumors have
an unsurpassed propensity for metastasis and have no defined cell of origin. The 
biology of these aggressive malignancies centers around EWS/FLI1 and related
EWS/ETS chimeric transcription factors, which are largely limited to this tumor
class. Much progress has been made in the identification of a network of loci
whose expression is modulated by EWS/FLI1 and its congeners. To date, little
progress has been made in reconstructing the sequence of direct and indirect
events that produce this network of modulated loci. The recent identification of 
GLI1 as an upregulated target of EWS/ETS transcription factors suggests a target 
which may be a more central mediator in the ESFT signaling network. In this
paper, we further define the relationship of EWS/FLI1 expression and GLI1
upregulation in ESFT. This relationship is supported with data from primary tumor
specimens. It is consistently observed across multiple ESFT cell lines and with
multiple means of EWS/FLI1 inhibition. GLI1 inhibition affects tumor cell line
phenotype whether shRNA or endogenous or pharmacologic inhibitors are employed.
As is seen in model transformation systems, GLI1 upregulation by EWS/FLI1 appears
to be independent of Hedgehog stimulation. Consistent with a more central role in
ESFT pathogenesis, several known EWS/FLI1 targets appear to be targeted through
GLI1. These findings further establish a central role for GLI1 in the
pathogenesis of Ewing Tumors.

PMCID: PMC2763206
PMID: 19859563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Feb;54(2):319-21. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22289.

Pitfalls in the differential diagnosis of renal tumor in an adolescent.

Valera ET(1), Brassesco MS, de Freitas Cortez MA, Queiroz RG, Castro-Gamero AM,
Barros MV, Vicente YA, Junior ST, Scrideli CA, Tone LG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University of São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. etvalera@hcrp.fmrp.usp.br

The differential diagnosis of renal tumors, particularly in adolescents, may be
challenging. We describe an 11-year-old female with a primary intra-renal mass.
Initial differential diagnoses included primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET),
desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT), and Wilms Tumor (WT). Extensive
pathologic and molecular analysis on initial and relapsed tumor samples confirmed
WT. The EWS-WT1 and EWS-FLI1 rearrangements, distinctive of DSRCT and PNET were
negative. The differential diagnosis on monophasic blastemal WT may be complex.
Primary renal DSRCT and PNET have been rarely described. Nevertheless, molecular 
confirmation for these rare conditions may be necessary in selected cases.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19856391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Haematologica. 2010 Jan;95(1):144-7. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2009.010017. Epub 2009
Oct 22.

Megakaryocyte-erythroid lineage promiscuity in EKLF null mouse blood.

Tallack MR(1), Perkins AC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia, 4072
Qld, Australia.

Commitment towards megakaryocyte versus erythroid blood cell lineages occurs in
the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor, where mutually exclusive expression of
either EKLF (Klf1) or Fli1 defines alternative outcomes. Here we show there is a 
marked increase in the number of circulating platelets in mice lacking the
erythroid transcription factor EKLF. In addition, committed erythroid cells
retain key signatures of megakaryocytes both on the cell surface and at the mRNA 
level. We also show that the effect of EKLF on megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor
lineage decision and commitment is cell autonomous in bone marrow reconstitution 
assays where stem cells lacking EKLF favor the megakaryocyte differentiation
pathway. We conclude the megakaryocyte program is aberrantly activated in EKLF
null erythroid cells.

PMCID: PMC2805734
PMID: 19850899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Ther. 2010 Feb;18(2):343-52. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.233. Epub 2009 Oct 20.

Gene therapy of MPL deficiency: challenging balance between leukemia and
pancytopenia.

Wicke DC(1), Meyer J, Buesche G, Heckl D, Kreipe H, Li Z, Welte KH, Ballmaier M, 
Baum C, Modlich U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany.

Erratum in
    Mol Ther. 2010 Feb;18(2):448.

Signaling of the thrombopoietin (THPO) receptor MPL is critical for the
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and megakaryocytic
differentiation. Inherited loss-of-function mutations of MPL cause severe
thrombocytopenia and aplastic anemia, a syndrome called congenital
amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (CAMT). With the aim to assess the toxicity of
retroviral expression of Mpl as a basis for further development of a gene therapy
for this disorder, we expressed Mpl in a murine bone marrow transplantation (BMT)
model. Treated mice developed a profound yet transient elevation of multilineage 
hematopoiesis, which showed morphologic features of a chronic myeloproliferative 
disorder (CMPD) with progressive pancytopenia. Ten percent of mice (3/27)
developed erythroleukemia, associated with insertional activation of Sfpi1 and
Fli1. The majority of transplanted mice developed a progressive pancytopenia with
histopathological features of a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-like disorder. To 
avoid these adverse reactions, improved retroviral vectors were designed that
mediate reduced and more physiological Mpl expression. Self-inactivating
gamma-retroviral vectors were constructed that expressed Mpl from the
phosphoglycerate kinase (PGK) or the murine Mpl promoter. Mice that received BM
cells expressing Mpl from the Mpl promoter were free of any previously observed
adverse reactions.

PMCID: PMC2839299
PMID: 19844195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Virchows Arch. 2009 Nov;455(5):397-411. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0842-7. Epub 2009
Oct 17.

Histological heterogeneity of Ewing's sarcoma/PNET: an immunohistochemical
analysis of 415 genetically confirmed cases with clinical support.

Llombart-Bosch A(1), Machado I, Navarro S, Bertoni F, Bacchini P, Alberghini M,
Karzeladze A, Savelov N, Petrov S, Alvarado-Cabrero I, Mihaila D, Terrier P,
Lopez-Guerrero JA, Picci P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Ave. Blasco Ibañez, 17,
46010, Valencia, Spain. antonio.llombart@uv.es

Ewing's sarcoma (ES)/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) are malignant
neoplasms affecting children and young adults. We performed a study to typify the
histological diversity and evaluate antibodies that may offer
diagnostic/prognostic support. In total, 415 cases of genetically confirmed
paraffin-embedded ES/PNET were analyzed on whole sections and in tissue
microarrays. This study confirms the structural heterogeneity of ES/PNET,
distinguishing three major subtypes: conventional ES (280 cases); PNET (53
cases); and atypical ES/PNET (80), including large cells, vascular-like patterns,
spindle pattern, and adamantinoma-like configuration. All cases presented
positivity for at least three of the four tested antibodies (CD99, FLI1, HNK1,
and CAV1). CAV1 appeared as a diagnostic immunomarker of ES/PNET being positive
in CD99-negative cases. Hence, the immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the
diagnostic value of all four antibodies, which together cover more than 99% of
the tumors, independently of the histological variety. The univariate analysis
for survival revealed atypical ES as the only histological parameter apparently
associated with less favorable clinical outcome, particularly in the subgroup of 
patients treated with surgery. In conclusion, the diagnosis of atypical ES is a
challenge for the pathologist and needs support from molecular techniques to
perform an optimal differential diagnosis with other small round cell tumors.

PMID: 19841938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Immun. 2010 Mar;11(2):161-72. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.73. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

The mouse and human Fli1 genes are similarly regulated by Ets factors in T cells.

Svenson JL(1), Chike-Harris K, Amria MY, Nowling TK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Children's Research
Institute, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathon Lucas Street,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Fli1 is a member of the Ets family of transcription factors and is preferentially
expressed in hematopoietic cell lineages. Its expression level is linked to the
pathogenesis of lupus. In this study, we identified mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of the mouse and human Fli1 promoters. We show that
the Fli1 promoter is upregulated by Ets factors Ets1, Ets2, Fli1 and Elf1 either 
alone or in combination with GATA factors, but is inhibited by Tel. In vitro
binding studies show that Elf1, Tel and Fli1 in T cells bind the three
Ets-binding sites in the murine Fli1 proximal promoter. We identified
transcription factor-binding sites in the human Fli1 promoter region that
function in T cells in a similar manner to those in the mouse promoter.
Furthermore, we show similar binding of Ets factors to the endogenous mouse and
human Fli1 promoters in T cells and knocking down Ets1 results in an upregulation
of Fli1 expression. Together, these results suggest that the human and mouse
genes are regulated similarly and that Ets1 may be important in preventing the
overexpression of Fli1 in T cells. This report lays the groundwork for
identifying targets for manipulating Fli1 expression as a possible therapeutic
approach.

PMCID: PMC2832078
PMID: 19829305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2009 Aug;19(6):1131-6. doi: 10.1111/IGC.0b013e3181acae33.

Primary vulvar Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor: a report of 2 cases
and review of the literature.

Cetiner H(1), Kir G, Gelmann EP, Ozdemirli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University Hospital, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) family of tumor is a very
aggressive malignant round cell tumor characterized by translocations involving
EWS-FLI1 genes. They are increasingly recognized in extraosseous sites as a
result of improvements in diagnostic tools. In this paper, we report 2 additional
cases arising in vulva of young adults who have been treated aggressively and
have survived fore more than 7 and 4 years successively. Histologic examination
showed small round (blue) cell morphology in both cases. The tumor cells
contained glycogen and were positive for CD99 and vimentin and negative for
keratins, lymphoid markers, S-100, synaptophysin, chromogranin, and desmin.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction analysis from paraffin-embedded
tissue revealed EWS-FLI1 fusion product in 1 case. Collectively, 13 cases of
vulvar ES/PNET have been reported in the literature. Only 8 cases have detailed
follow-up information with an average follow-up data of 28 months. Ewing
sarcoma/PNET should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any
undifferentiated tumors involving the lower gynecologic tract and all axillary
tests including molecular tests should be performed for correct diagnosis because
prolonged survival is possible for this dreadful disease after complete surgical 
resection, followed by adjuvant therapy.

PMID: 19820381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jan 15;316(2):203-15. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.10.002. Epub
2009 Oct 9.

Identification of four alternatively spliced transcripts of the Ucma/GRP gene,
encoding a new Gla-containing protein.

Le Jeune M(1), Tomavo N, Tian TV, Flourens A, Marchand N, Camuzeaux B,
Mallein-Gerin F, Duterque-Coquillaud M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8161, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Université de Lille Nord de
France, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59021 Lille IFR 142, France.

The Ucma protein (Upper zone of growth plate and cartilage matrix associated
protein) has recently been described as a novel secretory protein mainly
expressed in cartilage and also as a novel vitamin-K-dependent protein named GRP 
(Gla-rich protein). This protein has the highest Gla content of any protein known
to date. In this article, we identify four alternatively spliced variants of
Ucma/GRP gene transcripts in mouse chondrocytes. We show that the expression of
all four isoforms is associated with the early stages of chondrogenesis. The
Ucma/GRP gene encodes four proteins named Ucma/GRP-F1, -F2, -F3, and -F4, which
differ by exon 2, exon 4, or both. Among them, only Ucma/GRP-F1 and -F3 were
secreted into the culture medium of transfected chondrocytes, while Ucma/GRP-F2
and -F4 accumulated in the cells. Using HeLa cells or freshly isolated embryonic 
mouse chondrocytes transfected with enhanced green fluorescent protein fusions,
microscopy analysis revealed that Ucma/GRP-F1 and -F3 were localized in the Golgi
complex, whereas Ucma/GRP-F2 and -F4 formed aggregates. This aggregation was
microtubule-dependent since disruption of microtubules with nocodazole reduced
Ucma/GRP-F2 and -F4 aggregation in a reversible manner. Using biochemical
fractionation and Western blot analysis, Ucma/GRP-F1 and -F3 isoforms were
detected in the soluble fraction while Ucma/GRP-F2 and -F4 were found in an
insoluble-enriched fraction. We conclude that the co-expression of soluble and
insoluble isoforms also Gla-rich and Gla-deleted isoforms may be finely tuned.
Imbalance in isoform expression may therefore be involved in skeletal pathology.

PMID: 19819238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Oct;62(10):915-9. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.064014.

Primary cutaneous Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour: a
clinicopathological analysis of seven cases highlighting diagnostic pitfalls and 
the role of FISH testing in diagnosis.

Shingde MV(1), Buckland M, Busam KJ, McCarthy SW, Wilmott J, Thompson JF, Scolyer
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Camperdown, 
NSW, Australia.

AIMS: To perform a clinicopathological analysis of a series of primary cutaneous 
Ewing sarcomas/primitive neuroectodermal tumours (ES/PNET) to highlight the
pathological features, discuss the differential diagnosis, emphasise the role of 
molecular testing (particularly fluorescence in situ hybridisation, FISH) in
diagnosis and outline the patients' clinical course.
METHODS: Seven cases of primary cutaneous ES/PNET were identified from the
authors' consultation files.
RESULTS: The patients were aged 16-61 years (median 25). Five were female and two
were male. Five cases involved the limbs and two the trunk. Five were initially
misdiagnosed (three as carcinoma and two as melanoma). All cases were
characterised histologically by sheet-like growth of small round cells with
little cytoplasm and showed strong membranous staining for CD99 and positive but 
variable staining for FLI-1. Six patients showed an EWS rearrangement (five on
FISH analysis and one on RT-PCR). All tumours were completely excised. Three
patients received adjuvant chemotherapy, one of whom also received radiotherapy. 
Follow-up was available in all cases (range 11-57 months; median 41). No
recurrences or metastases occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: Although rare, primary cutaneous ES/PNET should be considered in the
differential diagnosis of cutaneous "small blue cell tumours". Immunostaining for
FLI-1 and molecular testing for evidence of an EWS rearrangement are useful
ancillary investigations to confirm the diagnosis. The prognosis of primary
cutaneous ES/PNET appears to be more favourable than extracutaneous ES/PNET.

PMID: 19783720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 15;69(18):7140-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4041. Epub 
2009 Sep 8.

Advances in Ewing's sarcoma research: where are we now and what lies ahead?

Ordóñez JL(1), Osuna D, Herrero D, de Alava E, Madoz-Gúrpide J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology of Sarcomas, Centro de Investigación del
Cáncer-Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer (IBMCC), Universidad 
de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (EFT) are characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations, which lead to EWS/ETS transcription factors. Elucidation of
EWS/ETS target gene networks within the context of other signaling pathways,
together with the identification of the initiating cell, and the development of
genetically engineered mice will hopefully lead to biology-based therapeutic
strategies for these tumors.

PMID: 19738075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2009 Oct;194(1):53-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.06.002.

Ewing sarcoma-peripheral neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney with a FUS-ERG
fusion transcript.

Berg T(1), Kalsaas AH, Buechner J, Busund LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø,
Norway. Thomas.Berg@unn.no

The Ewing family of tumors (EFTs) represents a neoplastic entity characterized by
specific chromosomal rearrangements. The most commonly detected translocation
involves fusion of EWSR1 to one of the genes encoding ETS family of transcription
factors, usually FLI1 or ERG. In rare cases, FUS or FEV has been shown to
substitute for EWSR1. The detection of specific translocations by fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH), reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), or both has become a diagnostic hallmark for the EFTs. We report here a
case of small round blue cell tumor detected in the kidney of a 3-year-old girl. 
The use of FISH in combination with RT-PCR led to identification of a novel
FUS-ERG fusion transcript in the tumor, with FUS exons 1-5 fused in-frame to ERG 
exons 6-9. The results from the molecular analyses were critical for reaching a
final diagnostic conclusion of Ewing tumor-peripheral neuroectodermal tumor and
hence had important therapeutic implications for the patient.

PMID: 19737655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Oligonucleotides. 2009 Sep;19(3):255-64. doi: 10.1089/oli.2009.0197.

Antitumor vectorized oligonucleotides in a model of ewing sarcoma: unexpected
role of nanoparticles.

Elhamess H(1), Bertrand JR, Maccario J, Maksimenko A, Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Vectorologie et Transfert des Gènes, Institut Gustave Roussy,
UMR CNRS 8121, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif Cedex 94805, France.
helhamess@igr.fr

Oligonucleotides (ONs) such as antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ON) and siRNAs are 
used as experimental tools to study gene function and are currently being tested 
in clinical trials for use as therapeutic anticancer agents. However, their
therapeutic use has been limited by their low physiological stability and their
slow cellular uptake. The systemic delivery of sequence-specific AS-ON targeting 
the EWS/FLI1 gene product by a targeted, nonviral delivery system dramatically
inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of Ewing's sarcoma. The nonviral delivery
system uses a poly-iso-hexyl-cyanoacrylate (PIHCA)-containing polycation
(chitosan) to bind and protect the AS-ON. No antitumor effect is observed using a
control oligonucleotide sequence. We found here that injection of the free AS-ON 
stimulates tumor growth independently of its sequence and that this stimulation
is abolished in the presence of nanosphere-chitosan, which exerts with the
oligonucleotides a specific inhibitory effect on tumor growth. The stimulation of
tumor growth is likely to be due to a polyanionic effect; indeed, a similar
stimulatory response is observed upon treatment with dextran sulfate and heparin 
in vivo. These results suggest that ON loaded onto nanosphere-chitosan provides
efficient and tumor-specific delivery, and provides protection against a
polyanionic secondary effect.

PMID: 19732024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 19;28(46):4126-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.262. Epub 2009 Aug
31.

GSTM4 is a microsatellite-containing EWS/FLI target involved in Ewing's sarcoma
oncogenesis and therapeutic resistance.

Luo W(1), Gangwal K, Sankar S, Boucher KM, Thomas D, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a malignant bone-associated tumor of children and young
adults. Most cases of Ewing's sarcoma express the EWS/FLI fusion protein. EWS/FLI
functions as an aberrant ETS-type transcription factor and serves as the master
regulator of Ewing's sarcoma-transformed phenotype. We recently showed that
EWS/FLI regulates one of its key targets, NR0B1, through a GGAA-microsatellite in
its promoter. Whether other critical EWS/FLI targets are also regulated by
GGAA-microsatellites was unknown. In this study, we combined transcriptional
analysis, whole genome localization data, and RNA interference knockdown to
identify glutathione S-transferase M4 (GSTM4) as a critical EWS/FLI target gene
in Ewing's sarcoma. We found that EWS/FLI directly binds the GSTM4 promoter, and 
regulates GSTM4 expression through a GGAA-microsatellite in its promoter.
Reduction of GSTM4 levels caused a loss of oncogenic transformation. Furthermore,
reduction of GSTM4 resulted in an increased sensitivity of Ewing's sarcoma cells 
to chemotherapeutic agents, suggesting a role for this protein in drug
resistance. Consistent with this hypothesis, patients with Ewing's sarcoma whose 
tumors had higher levels of GSTM4 expression had worse outcomes than those with
lower expression levels. These data show that GSTM4 contributes to the cancerous 
behavior of Ewing's sarcoma and define a wider role for GGAA-microsatellites in
EWS/FLI function than previously appreciated. These data also suggest a novel
therapeutic resistance mechanism, in which the central oncogenic abnormality
directly regulates a resistance gene.

PMID: 19718047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):13814-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0906556106. Epub 2009 Jul 31.

Dual requirement for the ETS transcription factors Fli-1 and Erg in hematopoietic
stem cells and the megakaryocyte lineage.

Kruse EA(1), Loughran SJ, Baldwin TM, Josefsson EC, Ellis S, Watson DK, Nurden P,
Metcalf D, Hilton DJ, Alexander WS, Kile BT.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Molecular Medicine and Cancer and Haematology, The Walter and
Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville 3052,
Australia.

Fli-1 and Erg are closely related members of the Ets family of transcription
factors. Both genes are translocated in human cancers, including Ewing's sarcoma,
leukemia, and in the case of Erg, more than half of all prostate cancers.
Although evidence from mice and humans suggests that Fli-1 is required for
megakaryopoiesis, and that Erg is required for normal adult hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) regulation, their precise physiological roles remain to be defined. To
elucidate the relationship between Fli-1 and Erg in hematopoiesis, we conducted
an analysis of mice carrying mutations in both genes. Our results demonstrate
that there is a profound genetic interaction between Fli-1 and Erg. Double
heterozygotes displayed phenotypes more dramatic than single heterozygotes:
severe thrombocytopenia, with a significant deficit in megakaryocyte numbers and 
evidence of megakaryocyte dysmorphogenesis, and loss of HSCs accompanied by a
reduction in the number of committed hematopoietic progenitor cells. These
results illustrate an indispensable requirement for both Fli-1 and Erg in normal 
HSC and megakaryocyte homeostasis, and suggest these transcription factors may
coregulate common target genes.

PMCID: PMC2728977
PMID: 19666492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Semin Oncol. 2009 Aug;36(4):338-46. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2009.06.006.

Small round cell sarcomas.

Lessnick SL(1), Dei Tos AP, Sorensen PH, Dileo P, Baker LH, Ferrari S, Hall KS.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Small round cell sarcomas are the most aggressive of the tumors morphologically
and clinically encountered in children and adults, and in some ways the most
leukemia- or lymphoma-like of sarcomas. Small round cell sarcomas often are
associated with chromosomal translocations, like hematologic malignancies, and
are usually more sensitive to chemotherapy than other sarcoma subtypes. They have
a high risk of mortality, but chemotherapy (in addition to surgery and often
radiation therapy) provides a good cure rate, although treatment is often long
and intensive. The biology of these tumors is very telling in terms of some of
the mechanisms of cancer cell survival and proliferation. Although there is some 
overlap of the discussion below with the section on translocation associated
sarcomas, we have highlighted some of the key issues with these sarcomas below,
with some ideas that may bear fruit both in terms of the management of these,
other sarcomas, and other cancers alike.

PMID: 19664494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Intern Med. 2009;48(15):1267-72. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor as a differential diagnosis of CD56-positive
tumors in adults.

Nagaya T(1), Tanaka N, Kamijo A, Joshita S, Nakazawa K, Miyabayashi H, Yoneda S, 
Ito T, Komatsu M, Tanaka E, Kitano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Matsumoto Medical Center, Matsumoto.

A 33-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital after a huge intrapelvic 
tumor with bilateral hydronephrosis was found following persistent lumbago.
Natural killer/T-cell lymphoma was suspected due to positive immunostaining for
CD56, but CHOP therapy was ineffective. Re-evaluation of the tumor cells showed
that they were positive for CD99, neuron-specific enolase, and synaptophysin and 
had a t(11 ; 22) (q24 ; q12) translocation, leading to the revised diagnosis of
primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). Systemic chemotherapies and radiation
therapy were added to surgical resection, and no recurrence has been detected for
3 years. Taken together, PNET may be considered in adult patients with
CD56-positive tumors.

PMID: 19652428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):750-6. doi: 10.1038/nm.1983. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

A small molecule blocking oncogenic protein EWS-FLI1 interaction with RNA
helicase A inhibits growth of Ewing's sarcoma.

Erkizan HV(1), Kong Y, Merchant M, Schlottmann S, Barber-Rotenberg JS, Yuan L,
Abaan OD, Chou TH, Dakshanamurthy S, Brown ML, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of
Oncology, Washington, DC, USA.

Many sarcomas and leukemias carry nonrandom chromosomal translocations encoding
tumor-specific mutant fusion transcription factors that are essential to their
molecular pathogenesis. Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs) contain a
characteristic t(11;22) translocation leading to expression of the oncogenic
fusion protein EWS-FLI1. EWS-FLI1 is a disordered protein that precludes standard
structure-based small-molecule inhibitor design. EWS-FLI1 binding to RNA helicase
A (RHA) is important for its oncogenic function. We therefore used surface
plasmon resonance screening to identify compounds that bind EWS-FLI1 and might
block its interaction with RHA. YK-4-279, a derivative of the lead compound from 
the screen, blocks RHA binding to EWS-FLI1, induces apoptosis in ESFT cells and
reduces the growth of ESFT orthotopic xenografts. These findings provide proof of
principle that inhibiting the interaction of mutant cancer-specific transcription
factors with the normal cellular binding partners required for their oncogenic
activity provides a promising strategy for the development of uniquely effective,
tumor-specific anticancer agents.

PMCID: PMC2777681
PMID: 19584866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Bioconjug Chem. 2009 Jul;20(7):1307-14. doi: 10.1021/bc900005j.

Synthesis and studies on cell-penetrating peptides.

Bertrand JR(1), Malvy C, Auguste T, Tóth GK, Kiss-Ivánkovits O, Illyés E, Hollósi
M, Bottka S, Laczkó I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute Gustave Roussy, CNRS UMR 8121, University Paris 11, Villejuif,
France.

The ability of different synthetic cell penetrating peptides, as Antennapedia
(wild and Phe(6) mutated penetratins), flock house virus, and integrin peptides
to form complexes with a 25mer antisense oligonucleotide was compared and their
conformation was determined by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The efficiency
for oligonucleotide delivery into cells was measured using peptides labeled with 
a coumarin derivative showing blue fluorescence and the fluorescein-labeled
antisense oligonucleotide showing green fluorescence. Fluorescence due to the
excitation energy transfer confirmed the interaction of the antisense
oligonucleotide and cell-penetrating peptides. The most efficient oligonucleotide
delivery was found for penetratins. Comparison of the two types of penetratins
shows that the wild-type penetratin proved to be more efficient than mutated
penetratin. The paper also emphasizes that the attachment of a fluorescent label 
may have an effect on the conformation and flexibility of cell-penetrating
peptides that must be taken into consideration when evaluating biological
experiments.

PMID: 19552459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2009 Apr;10(1-2):126-40. doi:
10.1007/s11864-009-0104-6. Epub 2009 Jun 17.

Ewing's sarcoma: standard and experimental treatment options.

Subbiah V(1), Anderson P, Lazar AJ, Burdett E, Raymond K, Ludwig JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, Division of Cancer Medicine, Labortory
of Sarcoma Molecular Therapeutics, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

OPINION STATEMENT: Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EWS), which include classic
Ewing's sarcoma in addition to primitive neuroectodermal tumor and Askin tumor,
are the second most common variety of primary bone cancer to afflict adolescents 
and young adults. Multi-disciplinary care incorporating advances in diagnosis,
surgery, chemotherapy, and radiation has substantially improved the survival rate
of patients with localized Ewing sarcoma to nearly 70%. Unfortunately, those
advances have not significantly changed the long-term outcome for those with
metastatic or recurrent disease; 5-year survival remains less than 25%. This
apparent therapeutic plateau exists despite extensive effort during the last four
decades to optimize the efficacy of cytotoxic chemotherapy through combination of
chemotherapies of mechanistically diverse action, dose-dense scheduling (provided
as frequently as every 2 weeks), increased adjuvant treatment duration, and
higher dosage per cycle (facilitated with parallel strides in supportive care
incorporating growth factors). As has already occurred for malignancies such as
breast or colon cancer, the "-omics-based" revolution has enhanced our
understanding of the molecular changes responsible for Ewing's tumor formation
and identified a number of potential targets (such as IGF-1R or mTOR) amenable to
biological therapy. It has also created both a challenge and an opportunity to
develop predictive biomarkers capable of selecting patients most likely to
benefit from targeted therapy. In this review, we discuss current
standard-of-care for patients with Ewing's sarcoma and highlight the most
promising experimental therapies in early-phase clinical trials.

PMID: 19533369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2009 Jun;20(2):83-6.

Friend leukemia virus integration-1 (FLI-1) expression in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors.

Kaygusuz G(1), Kuzu I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ankara University, School of Medicine, Ankara,
Turkey. gulsah@gmail.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Friend leukemia virus integration-1 expression has been shown in
a variety of tumors, including vascular tumors, desmoplastic small round cell
tumor, Merkel cell carcinoma, and lymphoblastic lymphoma, in addition to Ewing's 
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The aim of the current study was to
examine Friend leukemia virus integration-1 protein expression in a series of
gastrointestinal stromal tumors and also to assess if Friend leukemia virus
integration-1 has any role in the disease process. It is the first study
analyzing Friend leukemia virus integration-1 expression in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors in the English literature.
METHODS: A tissue microarray block containing 52 cases of gastrointestinal
stromal tumors was done. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed for Friend
leukemia virus integration-1 polyclonal antibody.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemically, Friend leukemia virus integration-1 was negative 
in all cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Friend leukemia virus integration-1 can be expressed in a variety of
tumors, and is helpful in making the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. We think that this protein is not expressed in
gastrointestinal stromal tumors and it is not a part of the pathogenesis of this 
disease.

PMID: 19530039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Anticancer Res. 2009 Jun;29(6):1901-8.

Cleavage of the Ewing tumour-specific EWSR1-FLI1 mRNA by hammerhead ribozymes.

Hühn R(1), Staege MS, Hesse M, Liebig B, Burdach SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Cancer Research Centre,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, D-06097 Halle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Ewing family tumours (EFT) are the second most common bone tumours in
children and adolescents. In the majority of EFT, EWSR1-FLI1 (Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint region 1-Friend leukaemia virus integration 1) fusion proteins can be 
detected and EWSR1-FLI1 substantially contributes to the malignant phenotype of
EFT. Therefore, inactivation of EWSR1-FLI1 is an interesting strategy for EFT
therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A ribozyme with specificity for EWSR1-FLI1 was developed
and the activity in vitro was investigated. Synthetic RNAs corresponding to
EWSR1-FLI1 were used as substrates. In addition, the total RNA from EFT cells was
used as substrate and the rapid amplification of cDNA ends method for the
detection of the cleavage products was used.
RESULTS: The ribozyme cleaved the synthetic RNA in a sequence specific manner
with high efficiency in vitro. Furthermore, the expected cleavage products were
detected after digestion of the total cellular RNA with this ribozyme. A point
mutation in the catalytic centre of the ribozyme abolished enzymatic activity.
CONCLUSION: The RNA corresponding to EWSR1-FLI1 is accessible for ribozyme
mediated inactivation and ribozymes are able to cleave EWSR1-FLI1 specific RNA in
the presence of a high background of normal cellular RNAs.

PMID: 19528446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jul 1;8(13):1991-6. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

Epigenetic maintenance of stemness and malignancy in peripheral neuroectodermal
tumors by EZH2.

Burdach S(1), Plehm S, Unland R, Dirksen U, Borkhardt A, Staege MS, Müller-Tidow 
C, Richter GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics and Children's Cancer Research Center, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. somagene@lrz.tum.de

Chromatin modifications are increasingly recognized as a key mechanism in cancer.
The histone methyltransferase Enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 (EZH2),
the enzymatic subunit of the polycomb PRC2 complex methylates histone H3K27,
thereby, mediating gene silencing. EZH2 is overexpressed in a variety of tumor
tissue including breast and prostate. Ewing tumors (ET), alias peripheral
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly malignant tumors molecularly defined by
ews/ets translocations. We found EWS-FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in vivo.
Other components of the PRC2 complex, like EED or SUZ12 were not deregulated in
ET. Downregulation of EZH2 by RNA interference suppressed tumor development and
metastasis in vivo and microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down revealed an
EZH2-maintained, undifferentiated, reversible phenotype in ET. EZH2 suppression
resulted in a generalized loss of H3K27me3 as well as increase in H3 acetylation.
ChIP-Chip assays for H3K27me3 verified such genes that had specifically lost
H3K27me3 upon EZH2 silencing, suggesting that stemness features are preserved via
epigenetic mechanisms. Taken together, the genetic EWS-FLI1 translocation is
intimately linked to global and gene specific epigenetic alterations in ET
biology. EZH2 mediates neuroectodermal and endothelial embryonal tumor stem cell 
growth and metastatic spread induced by a translocation derived chimeric
transcription factor.

PMID: 19502792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):80-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605104. Epub 2009 Jun 
2.

Stable interference of EWS-FLI1 in an Ewing sarcoma cell line impairs
IGF-1/IGF-1R signalling and reveals TOPK as a new target.

Herrero-Martín D(1), Osuna D, Ordóñez JL, Sevillano V, Martins AS, Mackintosh C, 
Campos M, Madoz-Gúrpide J, Otero-Motta AP, Caballero G, Amaral AT, Wai DH, Braun 
Y, Eisenacher M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC
(USAL-CSIC), Campus Unamuno s/n, Salamanca, Spain. david.herrero@kispi.uzh.ch

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a paradigm of solid tumour -bearing chromosomal
translocations resulting in fusion proteins that act as deregulated transcription
factors. Ewing sarcoma translocations fuse the EWS gene with an ETS transcription
factor, mainly FLI1. Most of the EWS-FLI1 target genes still remain unknown and
many have been identified in heterologous model systems.
METHODS: We have developed a stable RNA interference model knocking down EWS-FLI1
in the Ewing sarcoma cell line TC71. Gene expression analyses were performed to
study the effect of RNA interference on the genetic signature of EWS-FLI1 and to 
identify genes that could contribute to tumourigenesis.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1 inhibition induced apoptosis, reduced cell migratory and
tumourigenic capacities, and caused reduction in tumour growth. IGF-1 was
downregulated and the IGF-1/IGF-1R signalling pathway was impaired. PBK/TOPK
(T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase) expression was decreased because of
EWS-FLI1 inhibition. We showed that TOPK is a new target gene of EWS-FLI1. TOPK
inhibition prompted a decrease in the proliferation rate and a dramatic change in
the cell's ability to grow in coalescence.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report of TOPK activity in Ewing sarcoma and
suggests a significant role of this MAPKK-like protein kinase in the Ewing
sarcoma biology.

PMCID: PMC2694277
PMID: 19491900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 2009 Aug 20;114(8):1506-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-178863. Epub 2009
May 28.

A common bipotent progenitor generates the erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages
in embryonic stem cell-derived primitive hematopoiesis.

Klimchenko O(1), Mori M, Distefano A, Langlois T, Larbret F, Lecluse Y, Feraud O,
Vainchenker W, Norol F, Debili N.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U790, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Aug 20;114(8):1455-6.

The megakaryocytic (MK) and erythroid lineages are tightly associated during
differentiation and are generated from a bipotent megakaryocyte-erythroid
progenitor (MEP). In the mouse, a primitive MEP has been demonstrated in the yolk
sac. In human, it is not known whether the primitive MK and erythroid lineages
are generated from a common progenitor or independently. Using hematopoietic
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells on the OP9 cell line, we identified
a primitive MEP in a subset of cells coexpressing glycophorin A (GPA) and CD41
from day 9 to day 12 of coculturing. This MEP differentiates into primitive
erythroid (GPA(+)CD41(-)) and MK (GPA(-)CD41(+)) lineages. In contrast to
erythropoietin (EPO)-dependent definitive hematopoiesis, KIT was not detected
during erythroid differentiation. A molecular signature for the commitment and
differentiation toward both the erythroid and MK lineages was detected by
assessing expression of transcription factors, thrombopoietin receptor (MPL) and 
erythropoietin receptor (EPOR). We showed an inverse correlation between FLI1 and
both KLF1 and EPOR during primitive erythroid and MK differentiation, similar to 
definitive hematopoiesis. This novel MEP differentiation system may allow an
in-depth exploration of the molecular bases of erythroid and MK commitment and
differentiation.

PMID: 19478046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;29(15):4103-15. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00090-09. Epub 2009 May 
26.

Differentiation-dependent interactions between RUNX-1 and FLI-1 during
megakaryocyte development.

Huang H(1), Yu M, Akie TE, Moran TB, Woo AJ, Tu N, Waldon Z, Lin YY, Steen H,
Cantor AB.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor RUNX-1 plays a key role in megakaryocyte differentiation
and is mutated in cases of myelodysplastic syndrome and leukemia. In this study, 
we purified RUNX-1-containing multiprotein complexes from phorbol ester-induced
L8057 murine megakaryoblastic cells and identified the ets transcription factor
FLI-1 as a novel in vivo-associated factor. The interaction occurs via direct
protein-protein interactions and results in synergistic transcriptional
activation of the c-mpl promoter. Interestingly, the interaction fails to occur
in uninduced cells. Gel filtration chromatography confirms the
differentiation-dependent binding and shows that it correlates with the assembly 
of a complex also containing the key megakaryocyte transcription factors GATA-1
and Friend of GATA-1 (FOG-1). Phosphorylation analysis of FLI-1 with uninduced
versus induced L8057 cells suggests the loss of phosphorylation at serine 10 in
the induced state. Substitution of Ser10 with the phosphorylation mimic aspartic 
acid selectively impairs RUNX-1 binding, abrogates transcriptional synergy with
RUNX-1, and dominantly inhibits primary fetal liver megakaryocyte differentiation
in vitro. Conversely, substitution with alanine, which blocks phosphorylation,
augments differentiation of primary megakaryocytes. We propose that
dephosphorylation of FLI-1 is a key event in the transcriptional regulation of
megakaryocyte maturation. These findings have implications for other cell types
where interactions between runx and ets family proteins occur.

PMCID: PMC2715817
PMID: 19470763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4363-71. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3229. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Ewing sarcoma fusion protein EWSR1/FLI1 interacts with EWSR1 leading to mitotic
defects in zebrafish embryos and human cell lines.

Embree LJ(1), Azuma M, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Transplantation and Immunology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mechanism whereby the fusion of EWSR1 with the ETS transcription factor FLI1 
contributes to malignant transformation in Ewing sarcoma remains unclear. We show
that injection of human or zebrafish EWSR1/FLI1 mRNA into developing zebrafish
embryos leads to mitotic defects with multipolar and disorganized mitotic
spindles. Expression of human EWSR1/FLI1 in HeLa cells also results in mitotic
defects, along with mislocalization of Aurora kinase B, a key regulator of
mitotic progression. Because these mitotic abnormalities mimic those observed
with the knockdown of EWSR1 in zebrafish embryos and HeLa cells, we investigated 
whether EWSR1/FLI1 interacts with EWSR1 and interferes with its function. EWSR1
coimmunoprecipitates with EWSR1/FLI1, and overexpression of EWSR1 rescues the
mitotic defects in EWSR1/FLI1-transfected HeLa cells. This interaction between
EWSR1/FLI1 and EWSR1 in Ewing sarcoma may induce mitotic defects leading to
genomic instability and subsequent malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC2766243
PMID: 19417137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2009 Aug;38(8):891-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijom.2009.03.711. Epub 2009 May 2.

Unusual histological variant of Ewing's sarcoma of mandible.

Makary R(1), Tucker M, Fernandes RP, Shuja S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida-Jacksonville Campus,
Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Ewing family of tumors (EFTs) comprise highly malignant, nearly undifferentiated 
neoplasms including Ewing's sarcoma (ES), primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) 
and a spectrum of other unusual variants. In general, EFTs are included among
small blue cell tumors. Establishing histological diagnosis can be difficult;
CD99 and FLI1 immunohistochemical staining has improved diagnosis, but these
markers are not specific for EFTs. The diagnosis of EFTs is confirmed by
molecular diagnostic testing showing the presence of established rearrangements
of the EWS gene. The use of this molecular signature in EFTs revealed rare
variants in the histomorphologic spectrum of these tumors. The authors report an 
unusual variant of EFT in the mandible of a 17-year-old patient, which was
confirmed by translocation rearrangement in EWR1 gene at 22q12 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. The unusual histologic features, with prominent spindling of 
tumor cells and deviation from the classic features of Ewing's sarcoma posed a
diagnostic challenge for the medical centers involved in the diagnosis and
treatment of this patient. This highlights the importance of the genetic study of
undifferentiated sarcomas to identify rare morphologic variants of ES, in view of
the chemosensitivity of EFTs and how this affects patient management.

PMID: 19411158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Anticancer Drugs. 2009 Aug;20(7):527-33. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32832c3a4f.

Devazepide, a nonpeptide antagonist of CCK receptors, induces apoptosis and
inhibits Ewing tumor growth.

Carrillo J(1), Agra N, Fernández N, Pestaña A, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética y Patología Molecular de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles,
Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols (CSIC-UAM), Madrid 28029, Spain.

The Ewing family of tumors is a group of highly malignant tumors that mainly
arise in bone and most often affect children and young adults in the first two
decades of life. Despite the use of multimodal therapy, the long-term
disease-free survival rate of patients with Ewing tumors is still disappointingly
low, making the discovery of innovative therapeutic strategies all the more
necessary. We have recently shown that cholecystokinin (CCK), a neuroendocrine
peptide, involved in many biological functions, including cell growth and
proliferation, is a relevant target of the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein characteristic of
Ewing tumors. CCK silencing inhibits cell proliferation and tumor growth in vivo,
suggesting that CCK acts as an autocrine growth factor for Ewing cells. Here, we 
analyzed the impact of two CCK receptor antagonists, devazepide (a CCK1-R
antagonist) and L365 260 (a CCK2-R antagonist), on the growth of Ewing tumor
cells. Devazepide (10 micromol/l) inhibited cell growth of four different Ewing
tumor cells in vitro (range 85-88%), whereas the effect of the CCK2-R antagonist 
on cell growth was negligible. In a mouse tumor xenograft model, devazepide
reduced tumor growth by 40%. Flow cytometry experiments showed that devazepide,
but not L365 260, induced apoptosis of Ewing tumor cells. In summary, devazepide 
induces cell death of Ewing tumor cells, suggesting that it could represent a new
therapeutic approach in the management of Ewing's tumor patients.

PMID: 19407653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005415. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

A molecular function map of Ewing's sarcoma.

Kauer M(1), Ban J, Kofler R, Walker B, Davis S, Meltzer P, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

BACKGROUND: EWS-FLI1 is a chimeric ETS transcription factor that is, due to a
chromosomal rearrangement, specifically expressed in Ewing's sarcoma family
tumors (ESFT) and is thought to initiate the development of the disease. Previous
genomic profiling experiments have identified EWS-FLI1-regulated genes and genes 
that discriminate ESFT from other sarcomas, but so far a comprehensive analysis
of EWS-FLI1-dependent molecular functions characterizing this aggressive cancer
is lacking.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, a molecular function map of ESFT
was constructed based on an integrative analysis of gene expression profiling
experiments following EWS-FLI1 knockdown in a panel of five ESFT cell lines, and 
on gene expression data from the same platform of 59 primary ESFT. Out of 80
normal tissues tested, mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPC) were found to fit the
hypothesis that EWS-FLI1 is the driving transcriptional force in ESFT best and
were therefore used as the reference tissue for the construction of the molecular
function map. The interrelations of molecular pathways were visualized by
measuring the similarity among annotated gene functions by gene sharing. The
molecular function map highlighted distinct clusters of activities for EWS-FLI1
regulated genes in ESFT and revealed a striking difference between EWS-FLI1 up-
and down-regulated genes: EWS-FLI1 induced genes mainly belong to cell cycle
regulation, proliferation, and response to DNA damage, while repressed genes were
associated with differentiation and cell communication.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study revealed that EWS-FLI1 combines by distinct 
molecular mechanisms two important functions of cellular transformation in one
protein, growth promotion and differentiation blockage. By taking MPC as a
reference tissue, a significant EWS-FLI1 signature was discovered in ESFT that
only partially overlapped with previously published EWS-FLI1-dependent gene
expression patterns, identifying a series of novel targets for the chimeric
protein in ESFT. Our results may guide target selection for future ESFT specific 
therapies.

PMCID: PMC2671847
PMID: 19404404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Oct;17(5):409-12. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181972b6d.

Immunohistochemical evaluation of FLI-1 in acute lymphoblastic lymphoma (ALL): a 
potential diagnostic pitfall.

Lin O(1), Filippa DA, Teruya-Feldstein J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Cases of CD45-negative acute lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia (ALL) immunoreactive
for CD99 and Friend Leukemia Integration-1 (FLI-1) can occur and may lead to a
misdiagnosis of Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor with critical
clinical treatment management implications. The objective of this study was to
evaluate a panel of antibodies that would allow greater diagnostic accuracy of
ALL and evaluate the frequency of FLI-1 immunoreactivity in a series of ALL cases
and an expanded series of T-cell lymphoma subtypes. Immunoreactivity for CD3 was 
seen in 12/20 (60%), CD20 in 5/20 (25%), CD43 in 19/20(95%), CD45 in 15/20(75%), 
CD99 in 15/20 (75%), FLI-1, and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) in
17/20 (85%) cases. Two cases negative for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), CD20,
and CD3 were positive for FLI-1, CD99, TdT, and CD43. Two other LCA-negative
cases were positive for CD99 but negative for FLI-1. The majority of cases showed
immunoreactivity for CD43 and/or TdT. Therefore, CD43 and/or TdT should be
included in the immunohistochemical evaluation of small round blue cell tumors.
Absence of immunoreactivity for LCA does not exclude ALL and immunoreactivity of 
FLI-1 is not restricted to Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor. We
also report FLI-1 expression in an expanded series of 75 cases of T-cell lymphoma
and found high expression in anaplastic large cell lymphoma and
angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma.

PMID: 19349856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 1;15(7):2259-68. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2184.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

The NFATc2 gene is involved in a novel cloned translocation in a Ewing sarcoma
variant that couples its function in immunology to oncology.

Szuhai K(1), Ijszenga M, de Jong D, Karseladze A, Tanke HJ, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma is an aggressive sarcoma and is the second most common
bone sarcoma in childhood. Disease-specific t(11;22) ( approximately 85-90%),
t(21;22) ( approximately 5-10%), or rarer variant translocations with the
involvement of chromosome 22 ( approximately 5%) are present. At the gene level, 
the EWSR1 gene fuses with FLI1, ERG, or other ETS transcription factor family
members. Thus far, no Ewing sarcoma has been identified with a fusion to
transcription factors other than ETS.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using molecular tools such as multicolor fluorescence in
situ hybridization and array comparative genomic hybridization, a ring chromosome
containing chromosomes 20 and 22 was identified in four Ewing sarcoma cases. The 
breakpoint was mapped with (fiber-) fluorescence in situ hybridization and
reverse transcription-PCR followed by sequencing of the fusion partners.
RESULTS: Molecular karyotyping showed the translocation and amplification of
regions of chromosomes 20q13 and 22q12. Cloning of the breakpoint showed an
in-frame fusion between the EWSR1 and NFATc2 genes, resulting in loss of the
NH(2)-terminal, calcineurin-dependent control region and an intact active domain 
of NFATc2 controlled by the transactivation domains of EWSR1.
CONCLUSION: A new translocation involving EWSRI and NFATc2 was cloned. NFATc2 is 
a transcription factor that is not a member of the ETS family and functions in
T-cell differentiation and immune response. Direct involvement of NFATc2 has not 
yet been observed in oncogenesis. We show that due to the shared sequence
recognition of NFATc2 and the ETS family, shared transcriptional control is
possible using activating protein complex 1.

PMID: 19318479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4932. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004932. Epub 2009 Mar 23.

The oncogenic EWS-FLI1 protein binds in vivo GGAA microsatellite sequences with
potential transcriptional activation function.

Guillon N(1), Tirode F, Boeva V, Zynovyev A, Barillot E, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Paris, France.

The fusion between EWS and ETS family members is a key oncogenic event in Ewing
tumors and important EWS-FLI1 target genes have been identified. However, until
now, the search for EWS-FLI1 targets has been limited to promoter regions and no 
genome-wide comprehensive analysis of in vivo EWS-FLI1 binding sites has been
undertaken. Using a ChIP-Seq approach to investigate EWS-FLI1-bound DNA sequences
in two Ewing cell lines, we show that this chimeric transcription factor
preferentially binds two types of sequences including consensus ETS motifs and
microsatellite sequences. Most bound sites are found outside promoter regions.
Microsatellites containing more than 9 GGAA repeats are very significantly
enriched in EWS-FLI1 immunoprecipitates. Moreover, in reporter gene experiments, 
the transcription activation is highly dependent upon the number of repeats that 
are included in the construct. Importantly, in vivo EWS-FLI1-bound
microsatellites are significantly associated with EWS-FLI1-driven gene
activation. Put together, these results point out the likely contribution of
microsatellite elements to long-distance transcription regulation and to
oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2654724
PMID: 19305498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Mar 31;106(13):5324-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0810759106. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

EZH2 is a mediator of EWS/FLI1 driven tumor growth and metastasis blocking
endothelial and neuro-ectodermal differentiation.

Richter GH(1), Plehm S, Fasan A, Rössler S, Unland R, Bennani-Baiti IM, Hotfilder
M, Löwel D, von Luettichau I, Mossbrugger I, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Kovar H,
Staege MS, Müller-Tidow C, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics and Transplantation Biology, Department of 
Pediatrics, Technische Universität München and Pediatric Oncology Center, 81664
Munich, Germany.

Ewing tumors (ET) are highly malignant, localized in bone or soft tissue, and are
molecularly defined by ews/ets translocations. DNA microarray analysis revealed a
relationship of ET to both endothelium and fetal neural crest. We identified
expression of histone methyltransferase enhancer of Zeste, Drosophila, Homolog 2 
(EZH2) to be increased in ET. Suppressive activity of EZH2 maintains stemness in 
normal and malignant cells. Here, we found EWS/FLI1 bound to the EZH2 promoter in
vivo, and induced EZH2 expression in ET and mesenchymal stem cells.
Down-regulation of EZH2 by RNA interference in ET suppressed oncogenic
transformation by inhibiting clonogenicity in vitro. Similarly, tumor development
and metastasis was suppressed in immunodeficient Rag2(-/-)gamma(C)(-/-) mice.
EZH2-mediated gene silencing was shown to be dependent on histone deacetylase
(HDAC) activity. Subsequent microarray analysis of EZH2 knock down,
HDAC-inhibitor treatment and confirmation in independent assays revealed an
undifferentiated phenotype maintained by EZH2 in ET. EZH2 regulated stemness
genes such as nerve growth factor receptor (NGFR), as well as genes involved in
neuroectodermal and endothelial differentiation (EMP1, EPHB2, GFAP, and GAP43).
These data suggest that EZH2 might have a central role in ET pathology by shaping
the oncogenicity and stem cell phenotype of this tumor.

PMCID: PMC2656557
PMID: 19289832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 May;29(10):2852-64. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01435-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
16.

Spi-1 and Fli-1 directly activate common target genes involved in ribosome
biogenesis in Friend erythroleukemic cells.

Juban G(1), Giraud G, Guyot B, Belin S, Diaz JJ, Starck J, Guillouf C,
Moreau-Gachelin F, Morlé F.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lyon 1, Lyon F-69003, France.

Spi-1 and Fli-1 are ETS transcription factors recurrently deregulated in mouse
erythroleukemia induced by Friend viruses. Since they share the same core DNA
binding site, we investigated whether they may contribute to erythroleukemia by
common mechanisms. Using inducible knockdown, we demonstrated that Fli-1
contributes to proliferation, survival, and differentiation arrest of
erythroleukemic cells harboring an activated fli-1 locus. Similarly, we used
inducible Fli-1 knockdown and either hexamethylenebisacetamide (HMBA)- or small
interfering RNA-mediated Spi-1 knockdown to investigate their respective
contributions in erythroleukemic cells harboring an activated spi-1 locus. In
these cells, simple or double knockdown of both Spi-1 and Fli-1 additively
contributed to induce proliferation arrest and differentiation. Transcriptome
profiling revealed that virtually all transcripts affected by both Fli-1
knockdown and HMBA are affected in an additive manner. Among these additively
downregulated transcripts, more than 20% encode proteins involved in ribosome
biogenesis, and conserved ETS binding sites are present in their gene promoters. 
Through chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated the association of Spi-1
and Fli-1 on these promoters in Friend erythroleukemic cells. These data lead us 
to propose that the oncogenicity of Spi-1, Fli-1, and possibly other ETS
transcription factors may involve their ability to stimulate ribosome biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2682047
PMID: 19289502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Leukemia. 2009 Jul;23(7):1311-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.20. Epub 2009 Mar 12.

Continuous Fli-1 expression plays an essential role in the proliferation and
survival of F-MuLV-induced erythroleukemia and human erythroleukemia.

Cui JW(1), Vecchiarelli-Federico LM, Li YJ, Wang GJ, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences
Centre, Toronto, Canada.

Erythroleukemia induced by Friend Murine Leukemia Virus (F-MuLV) serves as a
powerful tool for the study of multistage carcinogenesis and hematological
malignancies in mice. Fli-1, a proto-oncogene and member of the Ets family, is
activated through viral integration in F-MuLV-induced erythroleukemia, and is the
most critical event in the induction of this disease. Fli-1 aberrant regulation
is also observed in human malignancies, including Ewing's sarcoma, which is often
linked to expression of the EWS/Fli-1 fusion oncoprotein. Here we examined the
effects of Fli-1 inhibition to further elucidate its role in these pathological
occurrences. The constitutive suppression of Fli-1, through RNA interference
(RNAi), inhibits growth and induces death in F-MuLV-induced erythroleukemia
cells. Expression of a dominant negative protein Engrailed (En)/Fli-1 reduces
proliferation of EWS/Fli-1-transformed NIH-3T3 cells, and both F-MuLV-induced and
human erythroleukemia cells. F-MuLV-induced erythroleukemia cells also display
increased apoptosis, associated with reduced expression of bcl-2, a known fli-1
target gene. Introduction of En/Fli-1 into an F-MuLV-infected erythroblastic cell
line induces differentiation, as shown by increased alpha-globin expression.
These results suggest, for the first time, an essential role for continuous Fli-1
overexpression in the maintenance and survival of the malignant phenotype in
murine and human erythroleukemias.

PMID: 19282832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Haematologica. 2009 Apr;94(4):518-27. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2008.001347. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

Molecular allelokaryotyping of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia cells with high
density single nucleotide polymorphism arrays identifies novel common genomic
lesions and acquired uniparental disomy.

Nowak D(1), Le Toriellec E, Stern MH, Kawamata N, Akagi T, Dyer MJ, Hofmann WK,
Ogawa S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, 8700 Beverly Blvd, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Daniel.Nowak@cshs.org

BACKGROUND: T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia is a rare aggressive
lymphoproliferative disease with a mature T-cell phenotype and characteristic
genomic lesions such as inv(14)(q11q34), t(14;14)(q11;q32) or t(X;14)(q28;q11),
mutation of the ATM gene on chromosome 11 and secondary alterations such as
deletions of chromosome 8p and duplications of 8q.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed malignant cells from 18 patients with T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia using high density 250K single nucleotide polymorphism
arrays and molecular allelokaryotyping to refine understanding of known
alterations and identify new target genes.
RESULTS: Our analyses revealed that characteristic disruptions of chromosome 14
are frequently unbalanced. In the commonly deleted region on chromosome 11, we
found recurrent microdeletions targeting the microRNA 34b/c and the transcription
factors ETS1 and FLI1. On chromosome 8, we identified genes such as PLEKHA2,
NBS1, NOV and MYST3 to be involved in breakpoints. New recurrent alterations were
identified on chromosomes 5p, 12p, 13q, 17 and 22 with a common region of
acquired uniparental disomy in four samples on chromosome 17q. Single nucleotide 
polymorphism array results were confirmed by direct sequencing and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: The first high density single nucleotide polymorphism array
allelokaryotyping of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia genomes added substantial new
details about established alterations in this disease and moreover identified
numerous new potential target genes in common breakpoints, deletions and regions 
of acquired uniparental disomy.

PMCID: PMC2663615
PMID: 19278963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2009 Jan-Feb;25(1):61-3. doi:
10.1097/IOP.0b013e31819361fd.

Ewing sarcoma presenting as a subconjunctival mass.

Lane KA(1), Katowitz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Hospital
System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4399, USA. katelane@verizon.net

A 14-year-old previously healthy boy presented for evaluation of a
subconjunctival mass that had been present for 2 to 3 years, but had recently
started to enlarge. Imaging demonstrated an anterior orbital lesion that enhanced
with gadolinium. An excisional biopsy was performed and revealed highly
malignant-appearing small, blue, round tumor cells. Immuohistochemical stains
were strongly reactive with CD99 (MIC2 and O13), CD56, and retained INI-1
reactivity. The EWS-FLI1 chimeric fusion gene transcript was also detected by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis, confirming Ewing
sarcoma. Full-body CT, bone scan, and bone marrow biopsy were all negative,
proving this to be a premetastatic, primary orbital tumor arising from soft
tissue.

PMID: 19273933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Circ Res. 2009 Apr 24;104(8):952-60. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.189803. Epub
2009 Mar 5.

Vascular lipid accumulation, lipoprotein oxidation, and macrophage lipid uptake
in hypercholesterolemic zebrafish.

Stoletov K(1), Fang L, Choi SH, Hartvigsen K, Hansen LF, Hall C, Pattison J,
Juliano J, Miller ER, Almazan F, Crosier P, Witztum JL, Klemke RL, Miller YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0682, USA.

Lipid accumulation in arteries induces vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis,
the major cause of heart attack and stroke in humans. Extreme hyperlipidemia
induced in mice and rabbits enables modeling many aspects of human
atherosclerosis, but microscopic examination of plaques is possible only
postmortem. Here we report that feeding adult zebrafish (Danio rerio) a
high-cholesterol diet (HCD) resulted in hypercholesterolemia, remarkable
lipoprotein oxidation, and fatty streak formation in the arteries. Feeding an HCD
supplemented with a fluorescent cholesteryl ester to optically transparent
fli1:EGFP zebrafish larvae in which endothelial cells express green fluorescent
protein (GFP), and using confocal microscopy enabled monitoring vascular lipid
accumulation and the endothelial cell layer disorganization and thickening in a
live animal. The HCD feeding also increased leakage of a fluorescent dextran from
the blood vessels. Administering ezetimibe significantly diminished the
HCD-induced endothelial cell layer thickening and improved its barrier function. 
Feeding HCD to lyz:DsRed2 larvae in which macrophages and granulocytes express
DsRed resulted in the accumulation of fluorescent myeloid cells in the vascular
wall. Using a fluorogenic substrate for phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2)), we observed 
an increased vascular PLA(2) activity in live HCD-fed larvae compared to control 
larvae. Furthermore, by transplanting genetically modified murine cells into
HCD-fed larvae, we demonstrated that toll-like receptor-4 was required for
efficient in vivo lipid uptake by macrophages. These results suggest that the
novel zebrafish model is suitable for studying temporal characteristics of
certain inflammatory processes of early atherogenesis and the in vivo function of
vascular cells.

PMCID: PMC2834250
PMID: 19265037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 May;296(5):F1219-26. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.90710.2008. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Marinobufagenin induces increases in procollagen expression in a process
involving protein kinase C and Fli-1: implications for uremic cardiomyopathy.

Elkareh J(1), Periyasamy SM, Shidyak A, Vetteth S, Schroeder J, Raju V, Hariri
IM, El-Okdi N, Gupta S, Fedorova L, Liu J, Fedorova OV, Kahaleh MB, Xie Z,
Malhotra D, Watson DK, Bagrov AY, Shapiro JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo,
Ohio, USA.

The cardiotonic steroid marinobufagenin (MBG) has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of experimental uremic cardiomyopathy, which is characterized by
progressive cardiac fibrosis. We examined whether the transcription factor Friend
leukemia integration-1 (Fli-1) might be involved in this process. Fli-1-knockdown
mice demonstrated greater cardiac collagen-1 expression and fibrosis compared
with wild-type mice; both developed increased cardiac collagen expression and
fibrosis after 5/6 nephrectomy. There was a strong inverse relationship between
the expressions of Fli-1 and procollagen in primary culture of rat cardiac and
human dermal fibroblasts as well as a cell line derived from renal fibroblasts
and MBG-induced decreases in nuclear Fli-1 as well as increases in procollagen-1 
expression in these cells. Transfection of a Fli-1 expression vector prevented
increased procollagen-1 expression from MBG. MBG exposure induced a rapid
translocation of the delta-isoform of protein kinase C (PKCdelta) to the nucleus.
This translocation was prevented by pharmacological inhibition of phospholipase
C, and MBG-induced increases in procollagen-1 expression were prevented with a
PKCdelta- but not a PKCalpha-specific inhibitor. Finally, immunoprecipitation
studies strongly suggest that MBG induced phosphorylation of Fli-1. We feel these
data support a causal relationship with MBG-induced translocation of PKCdelta,
which results in phosphorylation of as well as decreases in nuclear Fli-1
expression, which, in turn, leads to increases in collagen production. Should
these findings be confirmed, we speculate that this pathway may represent a
therapeutic target for uremic cardiomyopathy as well as other conditions
associated with excessive fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC2681369
PMID: 19261738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Pediatr Neurosurg. 2009;45(1):61-8. doi: 10.1159/000204906. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

CNS tumor 22 years after spinal neuroblastoma IV: diagnostic dilemma between
recurrence and secondary malignancy.

Gutenberg A(1), Schulten HJ, Gunawan B, Ludwig HC, Brück W, Larsen J, Rohde V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany.
agutenberg@med.uni-goettingen.de

We present the very unusual case of a young woman suffering from a brain tumor 22
years after a stage IV spinal neuroblastoma as an infant, demonstrating the
difficulties of differentiating late neuroblastoma relapse from secondary
supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor (sPNET). Lacking specific
immunohistochemical features, the first cerebral tumor at the age of 21 was
regarded as sPNET, and we pursued a therapeutic approach consisting of
neurosurgical resection as well as irradiation and high-dose alkylator-based
chemotherapy according to the HIT2000 protocol. Two years later the patient
suffered from a diffusely infiltrating local recurrence, changing its imaging
appearance as well as its immunohistochemical characteristics, now revealing
disseminated positivity for neuron-specific enolase and neural cell adhesion
molecule. Moreover, the lack of PNET-specific translocations (EWS/FLI1 gene
fusion) in both brain tumors as well as the development of hepatic metastases was
more compatible with the diagnosis of a very late relapse 22 years after initial 
stage IV spinal neuroblastoma.

PMID: 19258732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Pathol Res Pract. 2009;205(7):451-7. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2009.01.003. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

Pediatric extra-renal rhabdoid tumors with unusual morphology: a diagnostic
pitfall for small biopsies.

Alaggio R(1), Boldrini R, Di Venosa B, Rosolen A, Bisogno G, Magro G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche e Oncologiche, Sezione Anatomia
Patologica, Università di Padova, Padova, Italy.

The diagnosis of malignant rhabdoid tumor (MRT) is straightforward if the
typical, large eosinophilic rhabdoid cells are identified. We report on two
diagnostically challenging cases of pediatric extra-renal MRTs which, when
evaluated at incisional biopsy, were composed exclusively of small- to
medium-sized round cells with focal spindling, lacking rhabdoid phenotype. This
morphology, along with a polyphenotypic immunoprofile, including the expression
of vimentin/CD99/cytokeratins/alpha-smooth muscle actin and vimentin/CD99/S-100
protein in case 1 and case 2, respectively, suggested the possibility of Ewing
sarcoma (EWS)/PNET. However, molecular analyses failed to show the presence of
the EWS/FLI-1 and EWS/ERG fusion transcripts, indicative of the most common
translocations, i.e., t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(22;21)(q22;q12), occurring in this 
tumor family. The revision of both cases included an immunohistochemical analysis
with a commercially available anti-INI1 protein antibody. Immunohistochemistry,
showing the absence of INI1 expression in neoplastic cells, strongly supported
the diagnosis of MRT. Ultrastructural studies, performed on formalin-fixed
tissues, were consistent with the diagnosis of MRT. This study suggests including
anti-INI1 protein antibody in the immunohistochemical panel when evaluating
pediatric tumors with ambiguous morphological and immunohistochemical features,
particularly from small biopsies. A careful evaluation of clinical, pathological,
and molecular findings is the key to a correct diagnostic approach of pediatric
tumors.

PMID: 19243895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Dyn. 2009 Mar;238(3):656-63. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21892.

Automated image-based phenotypic analysis in zebrafish embryos.

Vogt A(1), Cholewinski A, Shen X, Nelson SG, Lazo JS, Tsang M, Hukriede NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Presently, the zebrafish is the only vertebrate model compatible with
contemporary paradigms of drug discovery. Zebrafish embryos are amenable to
automation necessary for high-throughput chemical screens, and optical
transparency makes them potentially suited for image-based screening. However,
the lack of tools for automated analysis of complex images presents an obstacle
to using the zebrafish as a high-throughput screening model. We have developed an
automated system for imaging and analyzing zebrafish embryos in multi-well plates
regardless of embryo orientation and without user intervention. Images of
fluorescent embryos were acquired on a high-content reader and analyzed using an 
artificial intelligence-based image analysis method termed Cognition Network
Technology (CNT). CNT reliably detected transgenic fluorescent embryos
(Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1)) arrayed in 96-well plates and quantified intersegmental blood
vessel development in embryos treated with small molecule inhibitors of
anigiogenesis. The results demonstrate it is feasible to adapt image-based
high-content screening methodology to measure complex whole organism phenotypes.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2861575
PMID: 19235725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2009 Mar;18(1):1-10. doi: 10.1097/PDM.0b013e318181fa05.

A rational approach to genetic testing for sarcoma.

Gulley ML(1), Kaiser-Rogers KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA. margaret_gulley@med.unc.edu

Diagnosis of sarcoma increasingly relies on identifying genetic defects using
modern molecular technologies. Each analytic method has unique advantages and
specimen requirements that should be considered when allocating tissue for
downstream testing. Karyotype on fresh tissue represents a genome-wide screen of 
gross chromosomal alterations, whereas fluorescence in situ hybridization and
polymerase chain reaction detect specific defects that are characteristic of a
given tumor type such as t(11;22) EWSR1-FLI1 in Ewing family tumors, t(X;18)
SS18-SSX1 in synovial sarcoma, t(2;13) PAX3-FOXO1A in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, 
and MYCN gene amplification in neuroblastoma. Identifying a clonal genetic defect
also provides a tumor marker that could help stage the extent of spread of the
neoplasm or monitor the efficacy of therapy. In research laboratories,
array-based methods identify genes and biochemical pathways contributing to tumor
growth and maintenance, opening avenues for pharmacogenetic tests that predict
which therapy is likely to overcome the biochemical defects with minimal
toxicity. Array-based discoveries are also spurring validation of smaller test
panels that rely on conventional technologies such as immunohistochemistry and
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. The pathologist's expertise is
critical in: (1) consulting with clinicians about specimen collection and
handling; (2) preserving tissue for immediate testing and for any downstream
testing that is indicated once morphology and immunophenotype are known; (3)
performing tests that maximize outcome on the basis of the strengths and
limitations of each assay in each available specimen type; and (4) conveying
results to the rest of the healthcare team using proper gene nomenclature and
interpreting the findings in a way that facilitates optimal clinical management.

PMID: 19214114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2009 Aug;135(8):1125-36. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0554-z.
Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Simultaneous inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinase and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathways augment the sensitivity to actinomycin D
in Ewing sarcoma.

Yamamoto T(1), Ohno T, Wakahara K, Nagano A, Kawai G, Saitou M, Takigami I,
Matsuhashi A, Yamada K, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of Medicine,
1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

PURPOSE: Ewing sarcoma cells, of which over 85% retain chimeric fusion gene
EWS/Fli-1, are by and large more resistant to chemotherapeutics compared to
nonneoplastic cells. The purpose of this study is to determine the role of
EWS/Fli-1 fusion and its downstream targets regarding the cells' resistance
against actinomycin D (ActD), which is one of the most commonly used antitumor
agents in combination chemotherapy of Ewing sarcomas.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity was measured by WST-8 assay. Caspase-dependent and
-independent cell death was examined by fluorescence microscope. Protein
expression was analyzed by western blotting. Caspase activity was determined by
Caspase-Glo assay.
RESULTS: ActD-induced caspase-dependent apoptotic cell death to Ewing sarcoma
TC-135 cells in a dose- and time- dependent manner. Knockdown of EWS/Fli-1 fusion
by siRNA resulted in enhancement of ActD-induced apoptosis. ActD treatment
activated both mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
pathways although in a distinctive manner. Combined administration of U0126 (MEK 
inhibitor) and LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor) significantly enhanced ActD-induced
apoptosis in vitro and suppressed xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated for the first time that combination
of U0126 and LY294002 can augment the cytotoxicity of ActD against Ewing sarcoma 
cells in vitro and in vivo. Our results indicate that further study on
combination of conventional chemotherapies with MEK and PI3K inhibitors may be
considered for innovative treatments of Ewing sarcoma patients.

PMID: 19205734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 3;284(14):9074-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806233200. Epub 2009
Feb 3.

GLI1 is a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Beauchamp E(1), Bulut G, Abaan O, Chen K, Merchant A, Matsui W, Endo Y, Rubin JS,
Toretsky J, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, D C 20057, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is an undifferentiated neoplasm of the bone
and soft tissue. ESFT is characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation
occurring between chromosome 22 and (in most cases) chromosome 11, which
generates an aberrant transcription factor, EWS-FLI1. The function of EWS-FLI1 is
essential for the maintenance of ESFT cell survival and tumorigenesis. The
Hedgehog pathway is activated in several cancers. Oncogenic potential of the
Hedgehog pathway is mediated by increasing the activity of the GLI family of
transcription factors. Recent evidence suggests that EWS-FLI1 increases
expression of GLI1 by an unknown mechanism. Our data from chromatin
immunoprecipitation and promoter reporter studies indicated GLI1 as a direct
transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1. Expression of EWS-FLI1 in non-ESFT cells
increased GLI1 expression and GLI-dependent transcription. We also detected high 
levels of GLI1 protein in ESFT cell lines. Pharmacological inhibition of GLI1
protein function decreased proliferation and soft agar colony formation of ESFT
cells. Our results establish GLI1 as a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 
and suggest a potential role for GLI1 in ESFT tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2666556
PMID: 19189974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5783-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-187757. Epub 2009
Jan 26.

Expression of the leukemia oncogene Lmo2 is controlled by an array of
tissue-specific elements dispersed over 100 kb and bound by Tal1/Lmo2, Ets, and
Gata factors.

Landry JR(1), Bonadies N, Kinston S, Knezevic K, Wilson NK, Oram SH, Janes M,
Piltz S, Hammett M, Carter J, Hamilton T, Donaldson IJ, Lacaud G, Frampton J,
Follows G, Kouskoff V, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Jun 4;113(23):5693.

The Lmo2 gene encodes a transcriptional cofactor critical for the development of 
hematopoietic stem cells. Ectopic LMO2 expression causes leukemia in T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) patients and severe combined immunodeficiency
patients undergoing retroviral gene therapy. Tightly controlled Lmo2 expression
is therefore essential, yet no comprehensive analysis of Lmo2 regulation has been
published so far. By comparative genomics, we identified 17 highly conserved
noncoding elements, 9 of which revealed specific acetylation marks in
chromatin-immunoprecipitation and microarray (ChIP-chip) assays performed across 
250 kb of the Lmo2 locus in 11 cell types covering different stages of
hematopoietic differentiation. All candidate regulatory regions were tested in
transgenic mice. An extended LMO2 proximal promoter fragment displayed strong
endothelial activity, while the distal promoter showed weak forebrain activity.
Eight of the 15 distal candidate elements functioned as enhancers, which together
recapitulated the full expression pattern of Lmo2, directing expression to
endothelium, hematopoietic cells, tail, and forebrain. Interestingly, distinct
combinations of specific distal regulatory elements were required to extend
endothelial activity of the LMO2 promoter to yolk sac or fetal liver
hematopoietic cells. Finally, Sfpi1/Pu.1, Fli1, Gata2, Tal1/Scl, and Lmo2 were
shown to bind to and transactivate Lmo2 hematopoietic enhancers, thus identifying
key upstream regulators and positioning Lmo2 within hematopoietic regulatory
networks.

PMID: 19171877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Apr;29(7):1882-94. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01320-08. Epub 2009 Jan
21.

Phosphorylation of Fli1 at threonine 312 by protein kinase C delta promotes its
interaction with p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor and subsequent
acetylation in response to transforming growth factor beta.

Asano Y(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Previous studies have shown that transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta)-induced collagen gene expression involves acetylation-dependent
dissociation from the human alpha2(I) collagen (COL1A2) promoter of the
transcriptional repressor Fli1. The goal of this study was to elucidate the
regulatory steps preceding the acetylation of Fli1. We first showed that TGF-beta
induces Fli1 phosphorylation on a threonine residue(s). The major phosphorylation
site was localized to threonine 312 located in the DNA binding domain of Fli1.
Using several independent approaches, we demonstrated that Fli1 is directly
phosphorylated by protein kinase C delta (PKC delta). Additional experiments
showed that in response to TGF-beta, PKC delta is recruited to the collagen
promoter to phosphorylate Fli1 and that this step is a prerequisite for the
subsequent interaction of Fli1 with p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor
(PCAF) and an acetylation event. The phosphorylation of endogenous Fli1 preceded 
its acetylation in response to TGF-beta stimulation, and the blockade of PKC
delta abrogated both the phosphorylation and acetylation of Fli1 in dermal
fibroblasts. Promoter studies showed that a phosphorylation-deficient mutant of
Fli1 exhibited an increased inhibitory effect on the COL1A2 gene, which could not
be reversed by the forced expression of PCAF or PKC delta. These data strongly
suggest that the phosphorylation-acetylation cascade triggered by PKC delta
represents the primary mechanism whereby TGF-beta regulates the transcriptional
activity of Fli1 in the context of the collagen promoter.

PMCID: PMC2655609
PMID: 19158279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncogene. 2009 Mar 5;28(9):1280-4. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.484. Epub 2009 Jan 19.

O-GlcNAcylation is involved in the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Bachmaier R(1), Aryee DN, Jug G, Kauer M, Kreppel M, Lee KA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

The oncogene EWS-FLI1 encodes a chimeric transcription factor expressed in
Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFTs). EWS-FLI1 target gene expression is thought
to drive ESFT pathogenesis and, therefore, inhibition of EWS-FLI1 activity holds 
high therapeutic promise. As the activity of many transcription factors is
regulated by post-translational modifications, we studied the presence of
modifications on EWS-FLI1. The immuno-purified fusion-protein was recognized by
an antibody specific for O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosaminylation, and bound
readily to a phosphoprotein-specific dye. Inhibition of Ser/Thr-specific
phophatases increased EWS-FLI1 molecular weight and reduced its O-GlcNAc content,
suggesting that phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation of EWS-FLI1 interact
dynamically. By mutation analysis, O-GlcNAcylation was delineated to Ser/Thr
residues of the amino-terminal EWS transcriptional-activation domain. Metabolic
inhibition of the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway abrogated O-GlcNAcylation of
EWS-FLI1 and interfered specifically with transcriptional activation of the
EWS-FLI1 target Id2. These results suggest that drugs modulating glycosylation of
EWS-FLI1 interfere functionally with its activity and might, therefore,
constitute promising additions to the current ESFT chemotherapy.

PMID: 19151750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Hum Pathol. 2009 Mar;40(3):283-92. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.07.019. Epub 2009 
Jan 15.

Molecular and phenotypic analysis of poorly differentiated sinonasal neoplasms:
an integrated approach for early diagnosis and classification.

Cordes B(1), Williams MD, Tirado Y, Bell D, Rosenthal DI, Al-Dhahri SF, Hanna EY,
El-Naggar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Bobby R. Alford Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Primary poorly differentiated (small round and non-small) sinonasal neoplasms
comprise histogenetically and biologically diverse entities with overlapping
morphologic features. Because of the limited initial biopsy tissue materials,
differential diagnostic difficulties may arise and complicate timely management
of some cases. We used immunohistochemical and molecular marker analyses in a
large cohort of these tumors to optimize their early diagnosis and
classification. Fifty-two tumors of the skull base and sinonasal regions and, for
comparison, 19 poorly differentiated neoplasms of other head and neck sites were 
analyzed by a panel of immunohistochemical markers including those of epithelial,
mesenchymal, melanocytic, and neuroectodermal origin using tissue microarray.
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of messenger RNA for
EWS-FLI1 and PAX-FKHR fusion transcripts and the human achaete-scute homolog-1
gene was performed on 24 of the 52 sinonasal tumors and the 19 tumors of other
sites for comparison. The immunohistochemical results substantiated the
phenotypic assessment and the initial diagnosis in 49 of the 52 tumors. In 4
instances the integrated markers and phenotypic analyses led to reclassification 
of 3 tumors and confirmed the histogenesis of a mesenchymal tumor with aberrant
cytokeratin expression. Molecular analysis of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene transcript
revealed 4 (9.3%) of the 43 tumors to be positive; all were Ewing sarcomas. The
human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript was identified in 10 (23.8%) of 42 
tumors: 3 of 6 neuroblastomas, all 4 neuroendocrine carcinomas, and 1 each in
sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and melanoma. The
PAX-FKHR fusion transcript was not detected in any tumors. We conclude that (1)
an integrated morphologic and biomarker algorithm may better optimize the early
diagnosis of poorly differentiated sinonasal and skull-base tumors; (2) molecular
analysis may assist in future biological stratification of certain classes of
these tumors; and (3) the human achaete-scute homolog-1 gene transcript is a
nonspecific marker for the diagnosis of neuroblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4573623
PMID: 19150107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Rev Recent Clin Trials. 2009 Jan;4(1):12-26.

Molecular pathology of sarcomas.

Osuna D(1), de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC,
Campus Miguel de Unamuno s/n, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.

Bone and soft tissue sarcomas are an infrequent group of tumours with a
prevalence of 4 in 100,000 people/year. Sarcomas, such as synovial sarcoma,
Ewing's sarcoma and osteosarcoma, are more usual in adolescents or in young
adults. Neoplasias such as leiomyosarcoma or liposarcoma are more frequent in
patients over 55 years. One relevant topic is related to sarcomagenesis
elucidation, a key for discovering the early molecular mechanisms involved in the
development of sarcomas as well as the identification of reliable molecular
markers and possible therapeutic targets. Today, it is known that the cellular
context contributes to the phenotype. Analysis of gene expression profiling of
human sarcomas revealed tightly clustered groups and could denote the existence
of common signalling pathways for each branch. From the molecular point of view, 
these neoplasias are grouped into two main types: (a) sarcomas showing specific
genetic alterations and relatively simple karyotypes, and translocations which
originate gene fusions (e.g., EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma); or specific genetic
mutations (e.g., c-kit in the gastrointestinal stromal tumour), and (b) sarcomas 
showing unspecific gene alterations and very complex karyotypes, and very
numerous gains and losses. This review points out the clinical projection of
sarcomagenesis elucidation and knowledge of diverse types of molecular
alterations.

PMID: 19149759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jan 14;9:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-17.

Combined use of expression and CGH arrays pinpoints novel candidate genes in
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Savola S(1), Klami A, Tripathi A, Niini T, Serra M, Picci P, Kaski S, Zambelli D,
Scotlandi K, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and HUSLAB, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. suvi.savola@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), characterized by
t(11;22)(q24;q12), is one of the most common tumors of bone in children and young
adults. In addition to EWS/FLI1 gene fusion, copy number changes are known to be 
significant for the underlying neoplastic development of ESFT and for patient
outcome. Our genome-wide high-resolution analysis aspired to pinpoint genomic
regions of highest interest and possible target genes in these areas.
METHODS: Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and expression arrays were
used to screen for copy number alterations and expression changes in ESFT patient
samples. A total of 31 ESFT samples were analyzed by aCGH and in 16 patients DNA 
and RNA level data, created by expression arrays, was integrated. Time of the
follow-up of these patients was 5-192 months. Clinical outcome was statistically 
evaluated by Kaplan-Meier/Logrank methods and RT-PCR was applied on 42 patient
samples to study the gene of the highest interest.
RESULTS: Copy number changes were detected in 87% of the cases. The most
recurrent copy number changes were gains at 1q, 2, 8, and 12, and losses at 9p
and 16q. Cumulative event free survival (ESFT) and overall survival (OS) were
significantly better (P < 0.05) for primary tumors with three or less copy number
changes than for tumors with higher number of copy number aberrations. In three
samples copy number imbalances were detected in chromosomes 11 and 22 affecting
the FLI1 and EWSR1 loci, suggesting that an unbalanced t(11;22) and subsequent
duplication of the derivative chromosome harboring fusion gene is a common event 
in ESFT. Further, amplifications on chromosomes 20 and 22 seen in one patient
sample suggest a novel translocation type between EWSR1 and an unidentified
fusion partner at 20q. In total 20 novel ESFT associated putative oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes were found in the integration analysis of array CGH and
expression data. Quantitative RT-PCR to study the expression levels of the most
interesting gene, HDGF, confirmed that its expression was higher than in control 
samples. However, no association between HDGF expression and patient survival was
observed.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that array CGH and integration analysis proved to be
effective methods to identify chromosome regions and novel target genes involved 
in the tumorigenesis of ESFT.

PMCID: PMC2633345
PMID: 19144156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurosci. 2009 Jan 7;29(1):206-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3656-08.2009.

Homeostatic control of sensory output in basal vomeronasal neurons:
activity-dependent expression of ether-à-go-go-related gene potassium channels.

Hagendorf S(1), Fluegge D, Engelhardt C, Spehr M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Physiology, Ruhr University, D-44780 Bochum, Germany.

Conspecific chemosensory communication controls a broad range of social and
sexual behaviors. In most mammals, social chemosignals are predominantly detected
by sensory neurons of a specialized olfactory subsystem, the vomeronasal organ
(VNO). The behavioral relevance of social chemosignaling puts high demands on the
accuracy and dynamic range of the underlying transduction mechanisms. However,
the physiological concepts implemented to ensure faithful transmission of social 
information remain widely unknown. Here, we show that sensory neurons in the
basal layer of the mouse VNO dynamically control their input-output relationship 
by activity-dependent regulation of K(+) channel gene expression. Using
large-scale expression profiling, immunochemistry, and electrophysiology, we
provide molecular and functional evidence for a role of ether-à-go-go-related
gene (ERG) K(+) channels as key determinants of cellular excitability. Our
findings indicate that an increase in ERG channel expression extends the dynamic 
range of the stimulus-response function in basal vomeronasal sensory neurons.
This novel mechanism of homeostatic plasticity in the periphery of the accessory 
olfactory system is ideally suited to adjust VNO neurons to a target output range
in a layer-specific and use-dependent manner.

PMID: 19129398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Mol Biol. 2009 Feb 27;386(3):579-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2008.12.030. Epub 2008 
Dec 24.

Transcriptional regulation of the human prostacyclin receptor gene is dependent
on Sp1, PU.1 and Oct-1 in megakaryocytes and endothelial cells.

Turner EC(1), Kinsella BT.

Author information: 
(1)UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, UCD Conway Institute of
Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin
4, Ireland.

Prostacyclin plays a central role in hemostasis, inflammation and nociception.
However, the factors regulating expression of the prostacyclin receptor (IP) gene
in humans and in other species have not been identified. In this study, we sought
to identify the key trans-acting factors and cis-acting elements regulating IP
expression in the megakaryoblastic human erythroleukemia (HEL) 92.1.7 and
vascular endothelial EA.hy 926 cell lines. With the use of deletion and genetic
reporter analyses, the essential core promoter, termed PrmIP, was localized to
the -1022 to -895 region proximal to the transcription initiation site, while an 
upstream repressor region, localized to -1502 to -1271, was also identified.
Bioinformatic analysis revealed evolutionarily conserved Sp1, PU.1 and Oct-1
sites within the core PrmIP, and disruption of these elements each led to
substantial reductions in PrmIP-directed gene expression in both HEL and EA.hy
926 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays established that 
Sp1, PU.1 and Oct-1 can bind to elements within the core promoter in vitro, while
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed their specific binding to
chromatin in vivo. Furthermore, combination mutations of the Sp1, PU.1 and Oct-1 
elements revealed that they act independently to co-regulate basal transcription 
of the IP gene, while ectopic expression of each of the trans-acting factors led 
to substantial increases in PrmIP-directed gene expression and IP mRNA expression
in both HEL and EA.hy 926 cells. While electrophoretic mobility shift and
antibody supershift assays established that the Ets family member Fli1, but not
Ets-1, is capable of binding to the PU.1 element within PrmIP in vitro, chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis established that neither Fli1 nor Ets-1 binds to
that element in vivo. Collectively, these data provide critical insights into the
transcriptional regulation of the IP gene in human megakaryocytic and endothelial
cells, identifying Sp1, PU.1 and Oct-1 as the critical factors involved in its
basal regulation in humans.

PMID: 19118563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Sci. 2009 Feb;100(2):200-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01024.x.

Recent advances in the molecular pathology of soft tissue sarcoma: implications
for diagnosis, patient prognosis, and molecular target therapy in the future.

Oda Y(1), Tsuneyoshi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.
oda@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

In the present paper, recent advances in the molecular pathology of soft tissue
sarcomas (STS) and the implications for their prognostic value are reviewed, and 
the potential targets of molecular therapy are discussed. According to the
molecular genetic aspect, STS are divided into two groups: chromosome
translocation-associated sarcomas and sarcomas without specific translocation. In
the former group,specific fusion transcripts, such as SS18SSX, EWSFLI1, and
PAX3FKHR, could be detected in synovial sarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma,respectively. The direct or 
indirect interactions between these fusion transcripts and cell cycle regulators 
have been elucidated by several investigators. Therefore, these fusion
transcripts are promising candidates as molecular targets. As evaluated in
carcinomas,alterations of several tumor-suppressor genes and adhesion molecules
and overexpression of growth factors and their receptors have been extensively
assessed in STS. In mixed-type STS, epidermal growth factor receptor
overexpression was associated with decreased overall survival, suggesting the
beneficial role of epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors in STS. In
malignant rhabdoid tumor and epithelioid sarcoma, frequent alteration of the
SMARCB1/INI1 tumor-suppressor gene and the loss of its protein have been
demonstrated, indicating that this molecule could be an effective target of these
sarcomas. In sarcomas with epithelioid differentiation,such as synovial sarcoma
and epithelioid sarcoma, overexpression of dysadherin, which downregulates
E-cadherin expression, was a poor prognostic factor. In conclusion, further
studies are necessary to search for effective and specific molecules for the
inhibition of tumor growth in each type of STS, especially in sarcomas without
specific translocation.

PMID: 19076980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biochem J. 2009 Mar 15;418(3):625-34. doi: 10.1042/BJ20082097.

Phosphorylation of Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) and EWS-Fli1 in response to DNA 
damage.

Klevernic IV(1), Morton S, Davis RJ, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, The Sir James Black Centre, University of
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, U.K.

In Ewing's sarcomas, chromosomal translocations cause the N-terminal domain of
the EWS (Ewing's sarcoma protein) to fuse with the DNA-binding domains of the Ets
(E26 transformation-specific) family of transcription factors. Here we show that 
EWS and EWS-Fli1 (Friend leukaemia virus integration 1), the fusion most
frequently found in Ewing's sarcomas, become phosphorylated at Thr(79) in
response to either mitogens or DNA-damaging agents. The much weaker
mitogen-induced phosphorylation of EWS is catalysed by the MAPKs
(mitogen-activated protein kinases) ERK1 (extracellular signal-regulated kinase
1) and ERK2, whereas the much stronger phosphorylation of EWS induced by the DNA 
alkylating agent MMS (methyl methanesulphonate) can be catalysed by JNK (c-Jun
N-terminal kinase) and at least one other protein kinase distinct from ERK1/ERK2.
In contrast, the phosphorylation of EWS-Fli1 induced by MMS was largely mediated 
by p38alpha/p38beta MAPKs. MMS induced a much stronger phosphorylation of
EWS-Fli1 than EWS in heterodimers comprising both proteins.

PMID: 19076070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1937-45. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0054.

EWS-Fli1 up-regulates expression of the Aurora A and Aurora B kinases.

Wakahara K(1), Ohno T, Kimura M, Masuda T, Nozawa S, Dohjima T, Yamamoto T,
Nagano A, Kawai G, Matsuhashi A, Saitoh M, Takigami I, Okano Y, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu, Japan.

EWS-Fli1, a fusion gene resulting from the chromosomal translocation t(11;22,
q24;q12), encodes a transcriptional activator, promotes cellular transformation, 
and is often found in Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The
Aurora A and Aurora B kinases belong to a highly conserved family of
serine/threonine protein kinases, are tightly regulated during the cell cycle,
and are overexpressed in many carcinomas. Because the relationship between the
Aurora A and/or Aurora B genes and the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene is unknown, we
investigated the regulatory mechanism(s) by which Aurora kinases are controlled. 
Knockdown of EWS-Fli1 by small interfering RNA reduced mRNA levels not only of
EWS-Fli1 but also of Aurora A and Aurora B. Luciferase assay using Aurora A and
Aurora B promoters showed up-regulated activities compared with those of an empty
vector. Experiments with deletion and point mutants showed positive regulatory
Ets-binding sites located -84 and -71 bp upstream of the transcription initiation
sites in Aurora A and Aurora B, respectively. Moreover, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay revealed that EWS-Fli1 gene products interact with both
the Aurora A and Aurora B promoters. These results strongly suggest that the
mitotic kinases Aurora A and Aurora B are regulated by EWS-Fli1 fusion protein in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

PMID: 19074838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Ann Pathol. 2008 Nov;28 Spec No 1(1):S33-4. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2008.09.006.
Epub 2008 Oct 11.

[Stem cells and connective-tissue tumors: Ewing's sarcoma].

[Article in French]

Tirode F(1), Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)U830 Inserm, institut Curie, 26, rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris, France.
franck.tirode@curie.fr

PMID: 18984293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 23;378(4):766-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.127. Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Pharmacologically induced angiogenesis in transgenic zebrafish.

Raghunath M(1), Sy Wong Y, Farooq M, Ge R.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Modulation Laboratory, NUS Tissue Engineering Programme, Life Science
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore. bierm@nus.edu.sg

The rapid vascularisation of biomaterials and engineered tissue after
implantation is a current unmet need. To this end, we explored the
pharmacological option of inducing neovascularisation using compounds that
inhibit hypoxia-induced factor-1alpha prolyl hydroxylase. This stabilises hypoxia
inducible factor-1alpha and therefore de-repress the transcription of various
angiogenic genes. In the quest for a small vertebrate model allowing for in vivo 
screening we exposed (TG(Fli1:EGFP)) transgenic zebrafish embryos exhibiting
fluorescent blood vessels to hydralazine hydrochloride and 2,4-pyridine
dicarboxylic acid from 6hpf to 72hpf by immersion. Live observation of embryos
revealed that the substances induced formation of ectopic blood vessels in the
subintestinal vessel basket. We confirmed the HIF-stabilising effects
biochemically in human fibroblasts and with an in vitro angiogenesis
fibroblast/HUVEC co-culture model. Cross-inhibition of collagen prolyl
hydroxylase was confirmed by reduced collagen secretion by fibroblasts and
reduced collagen content of zebrafish embryos.

PMID: 19068208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cancer Sci. 2009 Jan;100(1):82-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01008.x. Epub
2008 Nov 24.

Analysis of CHOP rearrangement in pleomorphic liposarcomas using fluorescence in 
situ hybridization.

Sugita S(1), Seki K, Yokozawa K, Tochigi N, Furuta K, Hisaoka M, Hashimoto H,
Shimoda T, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Laboratory, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Pleomorphic liposarcoma (PLS) is an aggressive subtype of liposarcoma composed of
high-grade sarcoma with pleomorphic lipoblasts. PLS usually exhibits a
heterogeneous histology and sometimes has a myxoid or round cell area similar to 
myxoid/round cell liposarcomas (MLS/RCs). Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis, we investigated the existence of CHOP split
signals in various histological areas of PLS including the MLS/RC-like feature
and also estimated the distribution of various signals with polyploidy and
amplification. Moreover, to detect CHOP fusion transcripts we performed nested
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Seven PLSs and three
MLS/RCs were selected for FISH analysis using the locus-specific indicator CHOP
(12q13) dual color, break apart probe (Vysis, USA). The FISH analysis was applied
to formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections of representative areas in
all cases. Six of seven PLS cases showed the CHOP split signal ranging from 0.5% 
to 3% of counted nuclei, while all cases of MLS/RC exhibited CHOP rearrangement
in more than 50% of counted nuclei. All cases of PLS showed a varied distribution
of extra signals with polyploidy and amplification in each histological area. No 
CHOP fusion transcript was found in any case of PLS by nested RT-PCR. A CHOP
rearrangement in PLS should be recognized only as a representative part of
complex karyotypes, because the number of cells with split signals was minute
compared with that of MLS/RC, and the signals were found in any area despite
their histological differences. The cytogenetic background of PLS and that of
MLS/RC are obviously different despite histological similarity.

PMID: 19037998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Endod. 2008 Dec;34(12):1549-53. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2008.08.028. Epub 2008 Sep 
26.

Loss of pulp sensitivity and pain as the first symptoms of a Ewing's sarcoma in
the right maxillary sinus and alveolar process: report of a case.

Bornstein MM(1), von Arx T, Altermatt HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Stomatology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. michael.bornstein@zmk.unibe.ch

This case report describes the diagnosis and treatment of a Ewing's sarcoma in
the right maxillary sinus and alveolar bone of a 19-year-old female patient. The 
first clinical symptoms were a loss of sensitivity of the premolars and first
molar in the right maxilla and acute pain located in the area of these teeth.
Initially, the referring dentist had treated these findings as an acute apical
periodontitis with root canal medication. Because swellings on the palatal and
buccal aspects of the teeth occurred and could not be treated with incision and
drainage, the dentist referred the patient. Cone-beam computed tomography
revealed a proliferation of soft tissue in the right maxillary sinus, with a
radiopaque material at the tip of the mesiobuccal root of the first molar and
resorptive signs of the mesiobuccal and distobuccal roots of the first molar. The
palatal cortical bone of the right alveolar process seemed to be intact. After
explorative surgery with biopsies from the buccal, palatal, and sinus
proliferation areas, the pathologist diagnosed the lesion as a Ewing's sarcoma.
Treatment of the patient consisted of initial chemotherapy, hemimaxillectomy, and
postsurgical chemoradiotherapy.

PMID: 19026893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2008 Nov;25(4):304-16.

Targeting sarcomas: therapeutic targets and their rational.

Ordóñez JL(1), Martins AS, Osuna D, Madoz-Gúrpide J, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC,
Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain.

Bone and soft tissue sarcomas are an infrequent and heterogeneous group of
mesenchymal tumors, including more than a hundred different entities attending to
histological patterns. Sarcomas are quite resistant to conventional chemotherapy 
(anthracycline and ifosfamide) with the exception of some subtypes, such as
Ewing's sarcoma (ES). New drugs with proved efficacy against sarcomas include
taxanes, gemcitabine, and ET-743. Preclinical studies have also identified key
molecular events leading to the progression and development of sarcomas which are
good candidates to targeted therapy. Inhibitors of the tyrosine kinase receptors,
such as IGF-1R, c-kit, PDGFR, VEGFR, or the mTOR signaling pathway, proteasome,
angiogenesis, and stress response proteins are under clinical evaluation against 
sarcomas. ES, a tumor characterized by chromosomal translocations that originate 
gene fusions (EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG), is an example of a good chemotherapy responder 
tumor whose survival rate shows a plateau in recent years. Preclinical studies
have identified that new targets such as HSP90 are of relevance to ES. On the
other hand, recent studies showed the role of cancer stem cells (CSCs) in
sarcomas and the relevance of the identification of reliable molecular markers
and possible therapeutic targets. New therapeutic approaches could be directed
against CSCs. This review describes more recent targeted therapy in sarcomas,
with special emphasis on ES and the role of CSCs. We also emphasize the role of
high throughput proteomic techniques in identifying new therapeutic targets.

PMID: 19013896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;29(2):425-34. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01278-08. Epub 2008 Nov
10.

Transcription factor Fli1 regulates collagen fibrillogenesis in mouse skin.

Asano Y(1), Markiewicz M, Kubo M, Szalai G, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Biosynthesis of fibrillar collagen in the skin is precisely regulated to maintain
proper tissue homeostasis; however, the molecular mechanisms involved in this
process remain largely unknown. Transcription factor Fli1 has been shown to
repress collagen synthesis in cultured dermal fibroblasts. This study
investigated the role of Fli1 in regulation of collagen biosynthesis in mice skin
in vivo using mice with the homozygous deletion of the C-terminal transcriptional
activation (CTA) domain of the Fli1 gene (Fli1(DeltaCTA/DeltaCTA)). Skin analyses
of the Fli1 mutant mice revealed a significant upregulation of fibrillar collagen
genes at mRNA level, as well as increased collagen content as measured by acetic 
acid extraction and hydroxyproline assays. In addition, collagen fibrils
contained ultrastructural abnormalities including immature thin fibrils and very 
thick irregularly shaped fibrils, which correlated with the reduced levels of
decorin, fibromodulin, and lumican. Fibroblasts cultured from the skin of
Fli1(DeltaCTA/DeltaCTA) mice maintained elevated synthesis of collagen mRNA and
protein. Additional experiments in cultured fibroblasts have revealed that
although Fli1 DeltaCTA retains the ability to bind to the collagen promoter in
vitro and in vivo, it no longer functions as transcriptional repressor. Together,
these results establish Fli1 as a key regulator of the collagen homeostasis in
the skin in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2612518
PMID: 19001092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 Mar;52(3):324-7. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21822.

Phase II study of intermediate-dose cytarabine in patients with relapsed or
refractory Ewing sarcoma: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

DuBois SG(1), Krailo MD, Lessnick SL, Smith R, Chen Z, Marina N, Grier HE,
Stegmaier K; Children's Oncology Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UCSF School of Medicine, San Francisco, California
94143-0106, USA. duboiss@peds.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 Aug;53(2):238.
    Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2009 Mar;52(3):310-1.

BACKGROUND: Patients with relapsed or refractory Ewing sarcoma have a poor
outcome with conventional therapies. Cytarabine decreases EWS/FLI1 protein levels
in Ewing sarcoma cells and has demonstrated preclinical activity against Ewing
sarcoma in vitro and in vivo. The purpose of this phase II clinical trial was to 
estimate the response rate of intermediate-dose cytarabine in patients with
relapsed or refractory Ewing sarcoma.
PROCEDURE: Patients with a histologic diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma were eligible if
they were <30 years of age, had relapsed or refractory measurable disease, and
met standard organ function requirements. Patients received cytarabine 500
mg/m(2)/dose intravenously over 2 hr every 12 hr for 10 doses with cycles
repeated every 21 days. Response was assessed according to RECIST criteria.
RESULTS: Ten patients (median age 20 years; 7 males) were treated. Only five
patients had documented EWS/FLI1 translocated tumors. No objective responses were
seen. One patient had stable disease for 5 cycles before developing progressive
disease. All patients evaluable for hematologic toxicity developed grade 4
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia during protocol therapy. Patients were not able 
to receive therapy according to the planned 21-day cycles, with a median interval
of 26.5 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Cytarabine at the dose and schedule utilized in this trial resulted 
in hematologic toxicity that limited delivery of this therapy. This regimen also 
had minimal activity in this patient population.

PMCID: PMC2791370
PMID: 18989890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8968-75. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-0573.

EWS-FLI1 induces developmental abnormalities and accelerates sarcoma formation in
a transgenic mouse model.

Lin PP(1), Pandey MK, Jin F, Xiong S, Deavers M, Parant JM, Lozano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. plin@mdanderson.org

Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the t(11;22)(q24:q12) reciprocal
translocation. To study the effects of the fusion gene EWS-FLI1 on development
and tumor formation, a transgenic mouse model was created. A strategy of
conditional expression was used to limit the potentially deleterious effects of
EWS-FLI1 to certain tissues. In the absence of Cre recombinase, EWS-FLI1 was not 
expressed in the EWS-FLI1 transgenic mice, and they had a normal phenotype. When 
crossed to the Prx1-Cre transgenic mouse, which expresses Cre recombinase in the 
primitive mesenchymal cells of the embryonic limb bud, the EF mice were noted to 
have a number of developmental defects of the limbs. These included shortening of
the limbs, muscle atrophy, cartilage dysplasia, and immature bone. By itself,
EWS-FLI1 did not induce the formation of tumors in the EF transgenic mice.
However, in the setting of p53 deletion, EWS-FLI1 accelerated the formation of
sarcomas from a median time of 50 to 21 weeks. Furthermore, EWS-FLI1 altered the 
type of tumor that formed. Conditional deletion of p53 in mesenchymal cells
(Prx1-Cre p53(lox/lox)) produced osteosarcomas as the predominant tumor. The
presence of EWS-FLI1 shifted the tumor phenotype to a poorly differentiated
sarcoma. The results taken together suggest that EWS-FLI1 inhibits normal limb
development and accelerates the formation of poorly differentiated sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC4167779
PMID: 18974141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Eur Surg Res. 2009;42(1):17-20. doi: 10.1159/000166166. Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of the stomach--a newly described entity.

Rafailidis S(1), Ballas K, Psarras K, Pavlidis T, Symeonidis N, Marakis G,
Sakadamis A.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Propedeutical Department of Surgery, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Thessaloniki, Greece. svrafail@otenet.gr

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) includes classic Ewing sarcoma of the
bone, extraosseous or soft tissue Ewing sarcoma, Askin tumors of the chest wall, 
and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the bone and soft tissues.
They share a common neural histogenesis, tumor genetics and biology. The genetic 
hallmark of the ESFT is the presence of t(11;22)(q24;q12), which creates the
EWS/FLI1 fusion gene and results in the expression of a chimeric protein.
Although Ewing tumors can occur at any age, the great majority are found in
individuals less than 20 years of age. We herein report a case of gastric Ewing
sarcoma in a 68-year-old male. This patient illustrates the second reported
occurrence of primary Ewing sarcoma in the stomach and the first reported with
the t(11;22)(q24;q12) gene translocation.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18971581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cell. 2008 Oct 17;135(2):355-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.08.032.

Mammalian 26S proteasomes remain intact during protein degradation.

Kriegenburg F(1), Seeger M, Saeki Y, Tanaka K, Lauridsen AM, Hartmann-Petersen R,
Hendil KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The August Krogh Building, Universitetsparken 13,
DK-2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

It has been suggested that degradation of polyubiquitylated proteins is coupled
to dissociation of 26S proteasomes. In contrast, using several independent types 
of experiments, we find that mammalian proteasomes can degrade polyubiquitylated 
proteins without disassembling. Thus, immobilized, (35)S-labeled 26S proteasomes 
degraded polyubiquitylated Sic1 and c-IAP1 without releasing any subunits. In
addition, it is predicted that if 26S proteasomes dissociate into 20S proteasomes
and regulatory complexes during a degradation cycle, the reassembly rate would be
limiting at low proteasome concentrations. However, the rate with which each
proteasome degraded polyubiquitylated Sic1 was independent of the proteasome
concentration. Likewise, substrate-dependent dissociation of 26S proteasomes
could not be detected by nondenaturing electrophoresis. Lastly,
epoxomicin-inhibited 20S proteasomes can trap released regulatory complexes,
forming inactive 26S proteasomes, but addition of epoxomicin-inhibited 20S
proteasomes had no effect on the degradation of either polyubiquitylated Sic1 or 
UbcH10 by 26S proteasomes or of endogenous substrates in cell extracts.

PMID: 18957208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Cycle. 2008 Oct;7(20):3127-32. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Microsatellites are EWS/FLI response elements: genomic "junk" is EWS/FLI's
treasure.

Gangwal K(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a solid tumor of the bone that primarily occurs in children
and young adults. Most cases harbor the (11;22) (q24;q12) chromosomal
translocation that encodes the EWS/FLI oncoprotein. EWS/FLI is an aberrant
ETS-type transcription factor that dysregulates a number of genes important in
the development of Ewing's sarcoma. Because EWS/FLI is the key oncoprotein in
this tumor and ETS proteins are often dysregulated in various human cancers,
Ewing's sarcoma serves as a useful paradigm for ETS-mediated oncogenesis. We
recently showed that EWS/FLI interacts with GGAA-microsatellites to regulate some
of its target genes, including NR0B1, an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is required 
for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. While microsatellites typically
have no ascribed function, and are sometimes considered "junk" DNA, our findings 
provide a unique role for microsatellites in cancer development. Furthermore,
these findings may indicate a novel mechanism for normal ETS protein function as 
well. Finally, it is tempting to speculate that microsatellite polymorphisms may 
confer differences in susceptibility to Ewing's sarcoma, both between individuals
and between populations, and other diseases mediated by ETS transcription
factors. The observation of microsatellites as transcriptional response elements 
for EWS/FLI suggest that these elements may not be "junk" after all.

PMID: 18927503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Lab Invest. 2008 Dec;88(12):1291-302. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2008.99. Epub 2008
Oct 6.

Genetically defined EWS/FLI1 model system suggests mesenchymal origin of Ewing's 
family tumors.

Potikyan G(1), France KA, Carlson MR, Dong J, Nelson SF, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, 
USA.

Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) are characterized by recurrent chromosomal
translocations that produce chimeric fusions between the EWS gene and one of five
ETS transcription factors. The expression of EWS/FLI1, the predominant fusion
product in EFTs, is believed to deregulate downstream target genes in an
undefined tissue type and leads to development of EFTs. Attempts to generate
model systems that represent EFTs have been hampered by an unexpected toxicity of
the fusion gene. In the present study, we used gene expression analysis to
identify tissue types based on the similarity of their expression profiles to
those of EWS/FLI1-modulated genes. The data obtained from this screen helped to
identify IMR-90 cells, a human fetal fibroblast, that upon further manipulation
can maintain stable EWS/FLI1 expression without the reported toxicity. In
addition, gene expression profiling of these cells revealed a significant overlap
of genes that have been previously reported to be targets of EWS/FLI1.
Furthermore, we show, for the first time, a partial transformation of these human
primary fibroblasts with EWS/FLI1 expression. The experiments presented here
provide a solid foundation for generation of a new model system for studying
Ewing's sarcoma biology.

PMID: 18838963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Circ Res. 2008 Nov 7;103(10):1147-54. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.179713. Epub
2008 Oct 2.

Genome-wide analysis of the zebrafish ETS family identifies three genes required 
for hemangioblast differentiation or angiogenesis.

Liu F(1), Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2008 Nov 7;103(10):1050-2.

ETS domain transcription factors have been linked to hematopoiesis,
vasculogenesis, and angiogenesis. However, their biological functions and the
mechanisms of action, remain incompletely understood. Here, we have performed a
systematic analysis of zebrafish ETS domain genes and identified 31 in the
genome. Detailed gene expression profiling revealed that 12 of them are expressed
in blood and endothelial precursors during embryonic development. Combined with a
phylogenetic tree assay, this suggests that some of the coexpressed genes may
have redundant or additive functions in these cells. Loss-of-function analysis of
3 of them, erg, fli1, and etsrp, demonstrated that erg and fli1 act cooperatively
and are required for angiogenesis possibly via direct regulation of an
endothelial cell junction molecule, VE-cadherin, whereas etsrp is essential for
primitive myeloid/endothelial progenitors (hemangioblasts) in zebrafish. Taken
together, these results provide a global view of the ETS genes in the zebrafish
genome during embryogenesis and provide new insights on the functions and biology
of erg, fli1, and etsrp, which could be applicable to higher vertebrates,
including mice and humans.

PMID: 18832752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 16;8:84. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-84.

Requirement of vasculogenesis and blood circulation in late stages of liver
growth in zebrafish.

Korzh S(1), Pan X, Garcia-Lecea M, Winata CL, Pan X, Wohland T, Korzh V, Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. dbskorzh@nus.edu.sg

BACKGROUND: Early events in vertebrate liver development have been the major
focus in previous studies, however, late events of liver organogenesis remain
poorly understood. Liver vasculogenesis in vertebrates occurs through the
interaction of endoderm-derived liver epithelium and mesoderm-derived endothelial
cells (ECs). In zebrafish, although it has been found that ECs are not required
for liver budding, how and when the spatio-temporal pattern of liver growth is
coordinated with ECs remains to be elucidated.
RESULTS: To study the process of liver development and vasculogenesis in vivo, a 
two-color transgenic zebrafish line Tg(lfabf:dsRed; elaA:EGFP) was generated and 
named LiPan for liver-specific expression of DsRed RFP and exocrine
pancreas-specific expression of GFP. Using the LiPan line, we first followed the 
dynamic development of liver from live embryos to adult and showed the formation 
of three distinct yet connected liver lobes during development. The LiPan line
was then crossed with Tg(fli1:EGFP)y1 and vascular development in the liver was
traced in vivo. Liver vasculogenesis started at 55-58 hpf when ECs first
surrounded hepatocytes from the liver bud surface and then invaded the liver to
form sinusoids and later the vascular network. Using a novel non-invasive and
label-free fluorescence correction spectroscopy, we detected blood circulation in
the liver starting at approximately 72 hpf. To analyze the roles of ECs and blood
circulation in liver development, both cloche mutants (lacking ECs) and Tnnt2
morphants (no blood circulation) were employed. We found that until 70 hpf liver 
growth and morphogenesis depended on ECs and nascent sinusoids. After 72 hpf, a
functional sinusoidal network was essential for continued liver growth. An
absence of blood circulation in Tnnt2 morphants caused defects in liver
vasculature and small liver.
CONCLUSION: There are two phases of liver development in zebrafish, budding and
growth. In the growth phase, there are three distinct stages: avascular growth
between 50-55 hpf, where ECs are not required; endothelium-dependent growth,
where ECs or sinusoids are required for liver growth between 55-72 hpf before
blood circulation in liver sinusoids; and circulation-dependent growth, where the
circulation is essential to maintain vascular network and to support continued
liver growth after 72 hpf.

PMCID: PMC2564926
PMID: 18796162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Oct 1;146A(19):2449-54. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32490.

Clinical and molecular-cytogenetic evaluation of a family with partial Jacobsen
syndrome without thrombocytopenia caused by an approximately 5 Mb deletion
del(11)(q24.3).

Bernaciak J(1), Szczaluba K, Derwinska K, Wisniowiecka-Kowalnik B, Bocian E,
Sasiadek MM, Makowska I, Stankiewicz P, Smigiel R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

Clinical manifestations of Jacobsen syndrome (JBS) depend on the size of the
11qter deletion, which usually varies between approximately 7 and 20 Mb. Typical 
JBS features include developmental delay/mental retardation, short stature,
congenital heart defects, thrombocytopenia, and characteristic dysmorphic facial 
features. We report on a family in which a 4-year-old girl as well as her mother 
and maternal uncle present with subtle features of JBS. Notably, neither
thrombocytopenia nor congenital anomalies were detected in this family.
Cytogenetic analyses revealed normal karyotypes. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and whole-genome oligonucleotide array CGH analyses, we
identified an approximately 5 Mb deletion of the terminal part of chromosome 11q 
in all the three affected family members. The deletion breakpoint was mapped
between 129,511,419 and 129,519,794 bp. This is the smallest deletion reported in
a JBS patient. Interestingly, the FLI1 (friend leukemia virus integration 1)
hematopoiesis factor gene located approximately 6.5 Mb from 11qter and usually
deleted in patients with JBS, is intact. Our data support previous hypotheses
that FLI1 haploinsufficiency is responsible for thrombocytopenia in patients with
JBS.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18792974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Histol Histopathol. 2008 Nov;23(11):1309-14.

Fli-1 expression in malignant melanoma.

Torlakovic EE(1), Slipicevic A, Flørenes VA, Chibbar R, DeCoteau JF, Bilalovic N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal University Hospital, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.
emt323@mail.usask.ca

Friend leukemia integration site 1 (Fli-1) has been reported as the first nuclear
marker of endothelial differentiation; it is expressed in leukocytes and recently
demonstrated in melanomas. Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections from
97 melanomas including 69 cases of primary and 28 metastatic melanomas were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry. Five melanoma cell lines were evaluated by
Western blot and immunocytochemistry. Fli-1 expression was observed in all cell
lines. Fli-1 expression was higher in metastatic than in primary tumors (r=0.208,
p=0.041, Spearman correlation), it positively correlated with Ki-67 expression
(r=0.233, p=0.022, Spearman correlation), and the presence of an ulcer in the
primary tumor (r=0.267, p=0.030, Spearman correlation). Therefore, the expression
of Fli-1 in malignant melanoma appears to be associated with biologically more
aggressive tumors.

PMID: 18785112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cesk Patol. 2008 Jul;44(3):67-70.

A comparision of RT-PCR and FISH techniques in molecular diagnosis of Ewing's
sarcoma in paraffin-embedded tissue.

Berková A(1), Dundr P, Povýsil C, Melcákova S, Tvrdík D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, Charles
University and General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

Ewing's sarcoma is relatively uncommon tumor representing 6-8 percent of
malignant bone tumors with variable morphology. Cytogenetically, Ewing's sarcomas
are characterized by a specific reciprocal chromosomal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12). The presence of this chromosomal translocation has been
detected in approximately 85 percent of the cases. The translocation results in
the fusion of EWS gene from chromosome 22 to FLI1 gene at 11q24 which is a member
of ETS family of transcription factors. In this study we performed a comparison
of two molecular diagnostic strategies, namely RT-PCR and FISH, in fresh, frozen 
and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues. We conclude that FISH is a more
sensitive technique than RT-PCR for the diagnosis of Ewing's tumors in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. In conclusion, molecular pathology
techniques, using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and/or
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) are valuable diagnostic tools for
evaluation of undifferentiated small round-cell tumors like Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 18783137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 Nov;32(11):1742-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181706252.

Primary extraskeletal Ewing family tumor with complex epithelial differentiation:
a unique case arising in the lateral neck presenting with Horner syndrome.

Weinreb I(1), Goldstein D, Perez-Ordoñez B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology , University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
weinrebi@yahoo.ca

A great deal of attention has been given to epithelial differentiation in Ewing
family of tumors (EFTs) in recent years, with studies showing variable keratin
expression in 20% to 32% of cases. A 29-year-old man presented with a right-sided
Horner syndrome suggesting a sympathetic chain related lesion. No radiologic
evidence of a mass was appreciated initially. Several months later, he developed 
right vocal cord palsy and a large right-sided neck mass. An open biopsy
demonstrated a high-grade malignant neoplasm with sheets of undifferentiated
round cells infiltrating soft tissues and a large peripheral branch of the vagus 
nerve. Focally, the tumor abruptly produced keratinizing cells and frank squamous
pearls. The tumor showed diffuse expression of CD99, high molecular weight
keratin, p63, cytokeratin (CK) 5/6, AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, CK19, and focal CK14. It was
negative for muscle-specific actin, desmin, MyoD1, MYF-4, S100, and CK7.
Ultrastructurally, abundant cytoplasmic tonofilaments and well-formed desmosomes 
were demonstrated. Initial diagnosis was a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of 
probable upper aerodigestive origin. Subsequently, the tumor was shown to harbor 
the t(11;22) involving EWSR1 and FLI-1 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction, characteristic of EFT's, which was confirmed by dual color break apart 
fluorescence in-situ hybridization analysis. This tumor is related to, if not an 
example of the recently described "adamantinoma-like" EFT and demonstrates a
potential diagnostic pitfall. It seems to be the first EFT to arise within, or in
close proximity to the cervical sympathetic chain of ganglia. It is also the
first EFT with complex epithelial differentiation arising outside the extremities
and with diffuse expression of high molecular weight keratin and p63.

PMID: 18769338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 1;68(17):7100-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6145.

EWS-FLI1 suppresses NOTCH-activated p53 in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ban J(1), Bennani-Baiti IM, Kauer M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C, Jug G, Schwentner R,
Smrzka O, Muehlbacher K, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna,
Austria.

Although p53 is the most frequently mutated gene in cancer, half of human tumors 
retain wild-type p53, whereby it is unknown whether normal p53 function is
compromised by other cancer-associated alterations. One example is Ewing's
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), where 90% express wild-type p53. ESFT are
characterized by EWS-FLI1 oncogene fusions. Studying 6 ESFT cell lines, silencing
of EWS-FLI1 in a wild-type p53 context resulted in increased p53 and
p21(WAF1/CIP1) levels, causing cell cycle arrest. Using a candidate gene
approach, HEY1 was linked to p53 induction. HEY1 was rarely expressed in 59
primary tumors, but consistently induced upon EWS-FLI1 knockdown in ESFT cell
lines. The NOTCH signaling pathway targets HEY1, and we show NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 to
be expressed in ESFT primary tumors and cell lines. Upon EWS-FLI1 silencing,
NOTCH3 processing accompanied by nuclear translocation of the activated
intracellular domain was observed in all but one p53-mutant cell line. In cell
lines with the highest HEY1 induction, NOTCH3 activation was the consequence of
JAG1 transcriptional induction. JAG1 modulation by specific siRNA,
NOTCH-processing inhibition by either GSI or ectopic NUMB1, and siRNA-mediated
HEY1 knockdown all inhibited p53 and p21(WAF1/CIP1) induction. Conversely, forced
expression of JAG1, activated NOTCH3, or HEY1 induced p53 and p21(WAF1/CIP1).
These results indicate that suppression of EWS-FLI1 reactivates NOTCH signaling
in ESFT cells, resulting in p53-dependent cell cycle arrest. Our data link
EWS-FLI1 to the NOTCH and p53 pathways and provide a plausible basis both for
NOTCH tumor suppressor effects and oncogenesis of cancers that retain wild-type
p53.

PMID: 18757425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Curr Biol. 2008 Aug 26;18(16):1234-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.07.048.

Fli1 acts at the top of the transcriptional network driving blood and endothelial
development.

Liu F(1), Walmsley M, Rodaway A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, OX3 9DS Oxford, United Kingdom.

Blood and endothelium arise in close association during development, possibly
from a common precursor, the hemangioblast [1-4]. Genes essential for blood and
endothelial development contain functional ETS binding sites, and binding and
expression data implicate the transcription factor, friend leukaemia integration 
1 (Fli1) [5-10]. However, loss-of-function phenotypes in mice, although suffering
both blood and endothelial defects, have thus far precluded the conclusion that
Fli1 is essential for these two lineages [11, 12]. By using Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that loss of Fli1 function results in a substantial reduction or
absence of hemangioblasts, revealing an absolute requirement. TUNEL assays show
that the cells are eventually lost by apoptosis, but only after the regulatory
circuit has been disrupted by loss of Fli1. In addition, a constitutively active 
form of Fli1 is sufficient to induce expression of key hemangioblast genes, such 
as Scl/Tal1, Lmo2, Gata2, Etsrp, and Flk1. Epistasis assays show that Fli1
expression is induced by Bmp signaling or Cloche, depending on the hemangioblast 
population, and in both cases Fli1 acts upstream of Gata2, Scl, Lmo2, and Etsrp. 
Taken together, these results place Fli1 at the top of the transcriptional
regulatory hierarchy for hemangioblast specification in vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 18718762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Semin Oncol. 2008 Aug;35(4):365-77. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2008.04.007.

Cytogenetic, molecular genetic, and clinical characteristics of acute myeloid
leukemia with a complex karyotype.

Mrózek K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210-1228, 
USA. krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu <krzysztof.mrozek@osumc.edu>

Patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) harboring three or more acquired
chromosome aberrations in the absence of the prognostically favorable
t(8;21)(q22;q22), inv(16)(p13q22)/t(6;16)(p13;q22), and t(15;17)(q22;q21)
aberrations form a separate category - AML with a complex karyotype. They
constitute 10% to 12% of all AML patents, with the incidence of complex
karyotypes increasing with the more advanced age. Recent studies using
molecular-cytogenetic techniques (spectral karyotyping [SKY], multiplex
fluorescence in situ hybridization [M-FISH]) and array comparative genomic
hybridization (a-CGH) considerably improved characterization of previously
unidentified, partially identified, or cryptic chromosome aberrations, and
allowed precise delineation of genomic imbalances. The emerging nonrandom pattern
of abnormalities includes relative paucity, but not absence, of balanced
rearrangements (translocations, insertions, or inversions), predominance of
aberrations leading to loss of chromosome material (monosomies, deletions, and
unbalanced translocations) that involve, in decreasing order, chromosome arms 5q,
17p, 7q, 18q, 16q, 17q, 12p, 20q, 18p, and 3p, and the presence of recurrent,
albeit less frequent and often hidden (in marker chromosomes and unbalanced
translocations) aberrations leading to overrepresentation of segments from 8q,
11q, 21q, 22q, 1p, 9p, and 13q. Several candidate genes have been identified as
targets of genomic losses, for example, TP53, CTNNA1, NF1, ETV6, and TCF4, and
amplifications, for example, ERG, ETS2, APP, ETS1, FLI1, MLL, DDX6, GAB2, MYC,
TRIB1, and CDX2. Treatment outcomes of complex karyotype patients receiving
chemotherapy are very poor. They can be improved to some extent by allogeneic
stem cell transplantation in younger patients. It is hoped that better
understanding of genomic alterations will result in identification of novel
therapeutic targets and improved prognosis in patients with complex karyotypes.

PMCID: PMC3640813
PMID: 18692687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Clin Immunol. 2008 Oct;129(1):19-30. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2008.05.010. Epub 2008
Aug 9.

A role for Fli-1 in B cell proliferation: implications for SLE pathogenesis.

Bradshaw S(1), Zheng WJ, Tsoi LC, Gilkeson G, Zhang XK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA. gallant@musc.edu

Transgenic overexpression of Fli-1 in normal mice leads to SLE-like disease and
increased expression was reported in SLE-affected human and murine lymphocytes.
Reducing Fli-1 expression in MRL/lpr mice decreased antibody production,
proteinuria, renal pathology, and mortality. Compared to those with wild-type
expression of Fli-1, we report here that proliferative responses of
Fli-1-deficient naïve B cells to several mitogens were reduced in lupus-prone and
control mice. Expression of mitogen receptors, including BCR, TLR4, and TLR9, was
not significantly impacted in Fli-1-deficient naïve B cells. IL12a transcripts
were upregulated and NFAT transcripts were downregulated in Fli-1-deficient
MRL/lpr B cells. These results demonstrate that Fli-1 deficiency affects B cell
proliferative responses to mitogens, independent of BCR and TLR expression. IL12a
and NFAT, known to influence proliferation, were identified as potential
mediators of this effect. This may be a mechanism by which overexpression of
Fli-1 contributes to B cell hyperactivity and subsequent SLE pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2562591
PMID: 18692443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 6;3(8):e2850. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002850.

K-ras/PI3K-Akt signaling is essential for zebrafish hematopoiesis and
angiogenesis.

Liu L(1), Zhu S, Gong Z, Low BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cell Signaling and Developmental Biology
Laboratory, The National University of Singapore, Singapore, The Republic of
Singapore.

The RAS small GTPases orchestrate multiple cellular processes. Studies on
knock-out mice showed the essential and sufficient role of K-RAS, but not N-RAS
and H-RAS in embryonic development. However, many physiological functions of
K-RAS in vivo remain unclear. Using wild-type and fli1:GFP transgenic zebrafish, 
we showed that K-ras-knockdown resulted in specific hematopoietic and angiogenic 
defects, including the impaired expression of erythroid-specific gene gata1 and
sse3-hemoglobin, reduced blood circulation and disorganized blood vessels.
Expression of either K-rasC40 that links to phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
activation, or Akt2 that acts downstream of PI3K, could rescue both hematopoietic
and angiogenic defects in the K-ras knockdown. Consistently, the functional
rescue by k-ras mRNA was significantly suppressed by wortmannin, a PI3K-specific 
inhibitor. Our results provide direct evidence that PI3K-Akt plays a crucial role
in mediating K-ras signaling during hematopoiesis and angiogenesis in vivo, thus 
offering new targets and alternative vertebrate model for studying these
processes and their related diseases.

PMCID: PMC2483249
PMID: 18682746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2008 Sep;99(7):555-9.

[Case report of a subcutaneous peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor].

[Article in Spanish]

Cabrera R(1), Sánchez P, Rodríguez MA.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Dermatología. Complejo Asistencial de León. León. España.
rcp1312@yahoo.es

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors - also known as Ewing sarcomas - are 
a rare type of malignant tumor the histology of which characteristically reveals 
the presence of small round cells. Typically, t(11;22) translocation is observed.
We describe the case of a 45-year-old man with a subcutaneous peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor in which the t(11;22) translocation was detected.
He was satisfactorily treated with surgery and radiotherapy.

PMID: 18682169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Cycle. 2008 Aug;7(15):2299-305. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Coupled alteration of transcription and splicing by a single oncogene: boosting
the effect on cyclin D1 activity.

Sanchez G(1), Delattre O, Auboeuf D, Dutertre M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U685, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Paris, France.

In cancer cells, gene expression is altered at the levels of transcription and
mRNA maturation, with many splice variants being associated with cancer. Splicing
is tightly connected to transcription and can be affected by transcription
elongation dynamics. Moreover, various transcriptional coregulators that are
altered in cancer, such as the proto-oncogene EWS, are thought to play a role in 
splicing. A recent study shows that an alteration of EWS in Ewing sarcoma alters 
the dynamics of RNA polymerase II over the CCND1 proto-oncogene encoding cyclin
D1, leading to an increase in its transcription and to an alteration of splicing 
that results in high levels of the oncogenic cyclin D1b splice isoform. The
cyclin D1b isoform is highly expressed in Ewing sarcoma cells and tumors and
stimulates Ewing sarcoma cell growth. Thus, alterations of transcriptional
regulators in disease may lead to splicing alterations. We review these data and 
discuss how this concept may apply to various factors that are altered in cancer.

PMID: 18677114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Diagn Pathol. 2008 Jul 15;3 Suppl 1:S27. doi: 10.1186/1746-1596-3-S1-S27.

Tissue microarrays: applications in study of p16 and p53 alterations in Ewing's
cell lines.

Noguera R(1), Machado I, Piqueras M, Lopez-Guerrero JA, Navarro S, Mayordomo E,
Pellin A, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
rosa.noguera@uv.es

BACKGROUND: Tissue microarrays (TMAs) are used to study genomics and proteomics
in several tumour tissue samples. Cell lines (CC) are of great importance in the 
study of the genetic changes in tumours, and some reveal several aspects of
tumour oncogenesis. There are few published reports on Ewing's tumours with TMAs 
including original tumours (OT) and corresponding CC.
METHODS: We have performed four TMAs, from 3 OT and the corresponding CC of
successive in vivo and in vitro tumour passages. Xenotransplant CC in nude mice
from OT (XT/OT) was made. Subsequently multiple XT were performed and in vitro XT
cell line (CC/XT) was obtained. In vivo re-inoculation of CC/XT (XT/CC) was
planned. TMAs with the successive tumour passages that grew in nude mice (XT/OT
and XT/CC) were analyzed by morphologic pattern (Hematoxilin/eosin),
immunohistochemical staining (CD99, FLI1, p16, p53, ki-67), fluorescent in situ
hybridization-FISH-(EWSR1 break apart, p16 and p53 status) and gene fusion types.
RESULTS: Heterogeneous results of the p16, p53 and ki67 in OT, XT/OT, CC/XT and
XT/CC were observed. The three cell lines revealed EWS/FLI1 rearrangements. p16
gene was deleted only in one case. The deletion was detected by FISH and
confirmed by PCR assays. A p53 alteration was found in the second case with
monosomy and subsequently polysomic status of chromosome 17 during the evolution 
of CC. The PCR study revealed p53 mutation. The third case showed
hypermethylation in the promoter of p16. The growth of the tumour in nude mice
was more accelerated when the inoculation was performed from the CC/XT,
increasing progressively over the passages. The third case did not reveal tumour 
growth in nude mice after the re-inoculation of CC/XT.
CONCLUSION: The study of several cores from original tumours and successive
tumour passages in TMAs facilitated the analysis of the genetic alteration and
protein expression in Ewing's tumours.

PMCID: PMC2500108
PMID: 18673516  [PubMed]


109. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Aug;13(8B):2061-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00432.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 24.

Fibroblast growth factor 2-induced angiogenesis in zebrafish: the zebrafish yolk 
membrane (ZFYM) angiogenesis assay.

Nicoli S(1), De Sena G, Presta M.

Author information: 
(1)General Pathology and Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Biotechnology, University of Brescia Medical School, Brescia, Italy.

Angiogenesis plays a key role in tumour growth and metastasis. The teleost
zebrafish (Danio rerio) represents a promising alternative model in cancer
research. Here, we describe a zebrafish yolk membrane (ZFYM) angiogenesis assays 
based on the injection of 1-30 ng of human recombinant FGF2 (rFGF2) in the
perivitelline space of zebrafish embryos in the proximity of developing
subintestinal vein vessels (SIVs) at 48 hrs after fertilization. The rFGF2
induces a rapid and dose-dependent angiogenic response from the SIV basket,
characterized by the ectopic growth of newly formed, alkaline
phosphatase-positive blood vessels. These vessels are formed by proliferating
cells that incorporate bromodeoxyuridine and express the endothelial cell markers
vegfr2/kdr and fli1. Microangiography shows that rFGF2-induced vessels are patent
and connected to the systemic circulation of the embryo. In keeping with these
observations, fli1:EGFP(+) cells isolated from transgenic tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1)
zebrafish embryos express the tyrosine kinase (TK) FGF receptor-1 (FGFR1) and
activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase signalling when stimulated in
vitro by rFGF2. The low molecular weight TK-FGFR1 inhibitor SU5402 and the high
molecular weight FGF2 antagonist long-pentraxin 3 inhibit the angiogenic activity
of rFGF2 when added to fish water or when co-injected with the growth factor,
respectively. Moreover, similar to rFGF2, injection of the zebrafish form of
vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) induces a significant angiogenic
response in the ZFYM assay that is suppressed by the VEGF receptor-2/KDR TK
inhibitor SU5416. The ZFYM assay represents a novel tool for testing the activity
of low and high molecular weight inhibitors targeting a defined angiogenic growth
factor in zebrafish. The assay may offer significant advantages when compared to 
other animal models.

PMID: 18657228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 9;3(7):e2634. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002634.

IGF1 is a common target gene of Ewing's sarcoma fusion proteins in mesenchymal
progenitor cells.

Cironi L(1), Riggi N, Provero P, Wolf N, Suvà ML, Suvà D, Kindler V, Stamenkovic 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology CHUV, University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is associated with 85-90% of Ewing's
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), the remaining 10-15% of cases expressing chimeric
genes encoding EWS or FUS fused to one of several ets transcription factor family
members, including ERG-1, FEV, ETV1 and ETV6. ESFT are dependent on insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) for growth and survival and recent evidence suggests that
mesenchymal progenitor/stem cells constitute a candidate ESFT origin.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To address the functional relatedness between
ESFT-associated fusion proteins, we compared mouse progenitor cell (MPC)
permissiveness for EWS-FLI-1, EWS-ERG and FUS-ERG expression and assessed the
corresponding expression profile changes. Whereas all MPC isolates tested could
stably express EWS-FLI-1, only some sustained stable EWS-ERG expression and none 
could express FUS-ERG for more than 3-5 days. Only 14% and 4% of the total number
of genes that were respectively induced and repressed in MPCs by the three fusion
proteins were shared. However, all three fusion proteins, but neither FLI-1 nor
ERG-1 alone, activated the IGF1 promoter and induced IGF1 expression.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Whereas expression of different ESFT-associated fusion
proteins may require distinct cellular microenvironments and induce transcriptome
changes of limited similarity, IGF1 induction may provide one common mechanism
for their implication in ESFT pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2481291
PMID: 18648544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):1807-16. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0058.

Targeting Lyn inhibits tumor growth and metastasis in Ewing's sarcoma.

Guan H(1), Zhou Z, Gallick GE, Jia SF, Morales J, Sood AK, Corey SJ, Kleinerman
ES.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Unit 87, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Src family tyrosine kinases (SFK) play an important role in growth and metastasis
of many types of human malignancies. However, their significance in Ewing's
sarcoma remains to be elucidated. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
role of Lyn, one member of the SFK, in Ewing's sarcoma growth and metastasis and 
to determine whether a SFK inhibitor can induce Ewing's tumor regression. Lyn was
expressed and activated in TC71, A4573, and SK-ES human Ewing's sarcoma cells.
Lyn expression was seen in 13 of 15 patient tumor samples, 6 of which showed Lyn 
activation. Specific inhibition of Lyn using small interfering RNA significantly 
decreased primary tumor growth and lytic activity, and also reduced lung
metastases in vivo. Down-regulation of Lyn resulted in decreased invasive
capacity of tumor cells in vitro. AP23994, a small-molecule SFK inhibitor,
decreased Lyn kinase activity and suppressed TC71 cell growth in vitro in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, treatment of mice bearing s.c. TC71 tumors
with AP23994 or with polyethylenimine/Lyn-small interfering RNA gene therapy
resulted in reduced Lyn kinase activity and significant tumor growth suppression.
EWS/FLI-1, which is translocation fusion protein associated with Ewing's sarcoma,
regulated Lyn gene expression and kinase activity. These data suggest that
targeting Lyn may be a new therapeutic approach in treatment of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2556989
PMID: 18644993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 1;181(3):1644-54.

The transcription factor Fli-1 modulates marginal zone and follicular B cell
development in mice.

Zhang XK(1), Moussa O, LaRue A, Bradshaw S, Molano I, Spyropoulos DD, Gilkeson
GS, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. zhangjo@musc.edu

Fli-1 belongs to the Ets transcription factor family and is expressed primarily
in hematopoietic cells, including most cells active in immunity. To assess the
role of Fli-1 in lymphocyte development in vivo, we generated mice that express a
truncated Fli-1 protein, lacking the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain
(Fli-1(DeltaCTA)). Fli-1(DeltaCTA)/Fli-1(DeltaCTA) mice had significantly fewer
splenic follicular B cells, and an increased number of transitional and marginal 
zone B cells, compared with wild-type controls. Bone marrow reconstitution
studies demonstrated that this phenotype is the result of lymphocyte intrinsic
effects. Expression of Igalpha and other genes implicated in B cell development, 
including Pax-5, E2A, and Egr-1, are reduced, while Id1 and Id2 are increased in 
Fli-1(DeltaCTA)/Fli-1(DeltaCTA) mice. Proliferation of B cells from
Fli-1(DeltaCTA)/Fli-1(DeltaCTA) mice was diminished, although intracellular
Ca(2+) flux in B cells from Fli-1(DeltaCTA)/Fli-1(DeltaCTA) mice was similar to
that of wild-type controls after anti-IgM stimulation. Immune responses and in
vitro class switch recombination were also altered in
Fli-1(DeltaCTA)/Fli-1(DeltaCTA) mice. Thus, Fli-1 modulates B cell development
both centrally and peripherally, resulting in a significant impact on the in vivo
immune response.

PMCID: PMC2504761
PMID: 18641300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 22;105(29):10149-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801073105. Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Microsatellites as EWS/FLI response elements in Ewing's sarcoma.

Gangwal K(1), Sankar S, Hollenhorst PC, Kinsey M, Haroldsen SC, Shah AA, Boucher 
KM, Watkins WS, Jorde LB, Graves BJ, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The ETS gene family is frequently involved in chromosome translocations that
cause human cancer, including prostate cancer, leukemia, and sarcoma. However,
the mechanisms by which oncogenic ETS proteins, which are DNA-binding
transcription factors, target genes necessary for tumorigenesis is not well
understood. Ewing's sarcoma serves as a paradigm for the entire class of
ETS-associated tumors because nearly all cases harbor recurrent chromosomal
translocations involving ETS genes. The most common translocation in Ewing's
sarcoma encodes the EWS/FLI oncogenic transcription factor. We used whole genome 
localization (ChIP-chip) to identify target genes that are directly bound by
EWS/FLI. Analysis of the promoters of these genes demonstrated a significant
over-representation of highly repetitive GGAA-containing elements
(microsatellites). In a parallel approach, we found that EWS/FLI uses GGAA
microsatellites to regulate the expression of some of its target genes including 
NR0B1, a gene required for Ewing's sarcoma oncogenesis. The microsatellite in the
NR0B1 promoter bound EWS/FLI in vitro and in vivo and was both necessary and
sufficient to confer EWS/FLI regulation to a reporter gene. Genome wide
computational studies demonstrated that GGAA microsatellites were enriched close 
to EWS/FLI-up-regulated genes but not down-regulated genes. Mechanistic studies
demonstrated that the ability of EWS/FLI to bind DNA and modulate gene expression
through these repetitive elements depended on the number of consecutive GGAA
motifs. These findings illustrate an unprecedented route to specificity for ETS
proteins and use of microsatellites in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2481306
PMID: 18626011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Nov;51(5):698-701. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21678.

Congenital Ewing sarcoma in retroperitoneum with multiple metastases.

Saito Y(1), Matsuzaki A, Suminoe A, Koga Y, Kurata H, Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Hara
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medical sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

A 7-day-old Japanese female showed the absence of spontaneous movement in her
both legs. MRI revealed tumors in the retroperitoneum invading into the spinal
canal, the left cerebral hemisphere and the right eyeball. Histological
examination of retroperitoneal tumor revealed the sheets of undifferentiated
small round cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and scanty cytoplasm. EWS-FLI1
fusion gene was detected by RT-PCR, indicating Ewing sarcoma. She received
chemo-radiotherapy and survived for 2 years and 10 months despite the multiple
metastases at initial presentation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18623202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Neurooncol. 2008 Nov;90(2):141-50. doi: 10.1007/s11060-008-9646-x. Epub 2008
Jul 12.

Neural differentiation arrest in embryonal carcinoma cells with forced expression
of EWS-FLI1.

Yang Y(1), Zhang L, Wei Y, Wang H, Fukuma M, Xu H, Xiong W, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100083, China.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) has a characteristic
chimeric oncogene EWS-FLI1, which results from chromosomal translocation t (11;
22), that is believed to initiate tumorigenesis of EWS/PNET. However, the
specific details of EWS/PNET oncogenesis and exact role of EWS-FLI1 remain
largely unknown. In this study we explored the role of EWS-FLI1 in tumor
differentiation using an embryonal carcinoma cell line P19 as a model, with
forced expression of EWS-FLI1 in these cells. EWS-FLI1 has been reported to
promote neural differentiation in fibroblasts, mesenchymal stem cells and
rhabdomyosarcoma cells. We show forced expression of EWS-FLI1 causes absence of
retinoic acid-induced neural morphology, and decreases expression of
neural-specific proteins MAPT and NCAM. Critical transcriptional factors for
neural differentiation and stem cells are also altered in the presence of
EWS-FLI1, including decreases in levels of Oct-3 and Pax-6, and an increase in
the level of Id2, which is a target of EWS-FLI1. Increased proliferation and
decreased apoptotic rates are also observed in P19 cells with forced expression
of EWS-FLI1. Our results raise the possibility that arrest of neural
differentiation by forced expression of EWS-FLI1 as observed in this study may
result from dysregulation of the cell cycle and cell proliferation. Taken
together, our results demonstrate that the modulation of neural differentiation
in P19 cells which have a stem cell-like pluripotency in vitro can provide a
novel model system to study the neural differentiation effects of EWS-FLI1
tumorigenesis of EWS/PNET.

PMID: 18622580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2008 Oct;47(10):845-52. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20587.

High-resolution molecular cytogenetic analysis of Wilms tumors highlights
diagnostic difficulties among small round cell kidney tumors.

Stewénius Y(1), Jin Y, Ora I, Panagopoulos I, Möller E, Mertens F, Sandstedt B,
Alumets J, Akerman M, Merks JH, de Kraker J, Gisselsson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ylva.stewenius@med.lu.se

Many solid tumors exhibit characteristic gene fusions, which are reflected by
balanced translocations at the cytogenetic level. These changes might be useful
diagnostic and prognostic tools. In Wilms tumor (WT, nephroblastoma) no fusions
genes or recurrent balanced translocations have been described thus far. To
screen for cryptic balanced translocations, we have analyzed 17 renal neoplasms, 
histopathologically classified as WT, by a combination of G-banding, multicolor
FISH, and subtelomeric FISH. This approach revealed several submicroscopic
chromosomal aberrations and three different seemingly balanced translocations,
resulting in a heterozygous deletion of HACE1, an EWSR1/ERG fusion, and an
EWSR1/FLI1 fusion, respectively. As EWSR1 rearrangements are known to be a
characteristic of Ewing tumors (ET), our findings illustrate the diagnostic
problems regarding small cell kidney tumors and strongly argue for the need of
adjuvant diagnostic techniques in this group of neoplasms. In summary, our
genomic screening approach proved efficient in finding structural chromosomal
aberrations. The fact that no recurrent translocations were found in the WTs of
this study argues against the presence of a frequent pathognomonic translocation 
in this disease entity.

PMID: 18615675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hum Pathol. 2008 Oct;39(10):1535-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.01.013. Epub 2008
Jul 7.

Primary Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the vulva.

Fong YE(1), López-Terrada D, Zhai QJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We report a case of Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(ES/pPNET) arising in the vulva in a 17-year-old adolescent girl. Primary
extraskeletal ES/pPNET is uncommon and only rarely affects the female genital
tract. Characteristic histologic features of ES/pPNET were present in this case
including a monomorphic population of small round blue cells with cytoplasmic
glycogen confirmed by periodic acid-Schiff and were immunohistochemically
positive for CD99 in a membranous and Fli-1 in a nuclear pattern. The presence of
an EWS/Fli-1 fusion transcript was demonstrated by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by direct sequencing. This report
described another very rare case of ES/pPNET arising in the vulva and confirmed
by molecular analysis.

PMID: 18602673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 9;27(46):6034-43. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.203. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

DAX1, a direct target of EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein, is a principal regulator of
cell-cycle progression in Ewing's tumor cells.

García-Aragoncillo E(1), Carrillo J, Lalli E, Agra N, Gómez-López G, Pestaña A,
Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Laboratorio de
Genética y Patología Molecular de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas A Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

The molecular hallmark of the Ewing's family of tumors is the presence of
balanced chromosomal translocations, leading to the formation of chimerical
transcription factors (that is, EWS/FLI1) that play a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's tumors by deregulating gene expression. We have recently 
demonstrated that DAX1 (NR0B1), an orphan nuclear receptor that was not
previously implicated in cancer, is induced by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and is
highly expressed in Ewing's tumors, suggesting that DAX1 is a biologically
relevant target of EWS/FLI1-mediated oncogenesis. In this study we demonstrate
that DAX1 is a direct transcriptional target of the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein through 
its binding to a GGAA-rich region in the DAX1 promoter and show that DAX1 is a
key player of EWS/FLI1-mediated oncogenesis. DAX1 silencing using an inducible
model of RNA interference induces growth arrest in the A673 Ewing's cell line and
severely impairs its capability to grow in semisolid medium and form tumors in
immunodeficient mice. Gene expression profile analysis demonstrated that about
10% of the genes regulated by EWS/FLI1 in Ewing's cells are DAX1 targets,
confirming the importance of DAX1 in Ewing's oncogenesis. Functional genomic
analysis, validated by quantitative RT-PCR, showed that genes implicated in
cell-cycle progression, such as CDK2, CDC6, MCM10 or SKP2 were similarly
regulated by EWS/FLI1 and DAX1. These findings indicate that DAX1 is important in
the pathogenesis of the Ewing's family of tumors, identify new functions for DAX1
as a cell-cycle progression regulator and open the possibility to new therapeutic
approaches based on DAX1 function interference.

PMID: 18591936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2008 Sep;466(9):2176-83. doi: 10.1007/s11999-008-0348-7.
Epub 2008 Jun 19.

Dendritic cell-Ewing's sarcoma cell hybrids enhance antitumor immunity.

Guo W(1), Guo Y, Tang S, Qu H, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, #11 South
Xizhimen Street, Beijing 100044, People's Republic of China. bonetumor@163.com

Given the effective immunotherapy of DC-based vaccine in other cancers, we
hypothesized DC-based vaccines would induce effective immune responses against
Ewing's sarcoma. To verify this hypothesis and develop the most effective
dendritic cell vaccine against Ewing's sarcoma, we evaluated the antitumor
efficacy of dendritic cell-Ewing's sarcoma hybrids and dendritic cells pulsed
with other antigen-loading methods, including cell lysates and the characteristic
EWS-FLI1 gene of Ewing's sarcoma, using an A673 cell line as a model. The hybrids
were generated by electrofusion with fusion efficiency and viability determined
by flow cytometry and fluorescent microscopy analyses. By interferon-gamma
secretion assay, the capacity of hybrids to stimulate cytotoxic T-lymphocytes
(CTLs) is higher than that of other antigen-loading methods showing stronger
tumor antigen-specific CTL cytotoxicity to A673. By in vivo experiment in SCID
mice, all dendritic cell-based strategies induced specific immune responses to
Ewing's sarcoma after mice-human immune system reconstitution by inoculating
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells into the peritoneal cavity of SCID mice.
However, the hybrids most inhibited the subcutaneous tumor growth in SCID mice
compared with dendritic cells pulsed with other loading methods. The data suggest
A673 cells respond to dendritic cell-based immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2493000
PMID: 18563501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Res. 2008 Aug;18(8):834-45. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.68.

Downregulation of the Spi-1/PU.1 oncogene induces the expression of TRIM10/HERF1,
a key factor required for terminal erythroid cell differentiation and survival.

Blaybel R(1), Théoleyre O, Douablin A, Baklouti F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, Université Lyon 
1, Bât. Gregor Mendel, 16, rue R. Dubois, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

Sustained expression of the Spi-1/PU.1 and Fli-1 oncoproteins blocks globin gene 
activation in mouse erythroleukemia cells; however, only Spi-1/PU.1 expression
inhibits the inclusion of exon 16 in the mature 4.1R mRNA. This splicing event is
crucial for a functional 4.1R protein and, therefore, for red blood cell membrane
integrity. This report demonstrates that Spi-1/PU.1 downregulation induces the
activation of TRIM10/hematopoietic RING finger 1 (HERF1), a member of the
tripartite motif (TRIM)/RBCC protein family needed for globin gene transcription.
Additionally, we demonstrate that TRIM10/HERF1 is required for the regulated
splicing of exon 16 during late erythroid differentiation. Using inducible
overexpression and silencing approaches, we found that: (1) TRIM10/HERF1
knockdown inhibits hemoglobin production and exon splicing and triggers cell
apoptosis in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)-induced cells; (2) TRIM10/HERF1
upregulation is required but is insufficient on its own to activate exon
retention; (3) Fli-1 has no effect on TRIM10/HERF1 expression, whereas either
DMSO-induced downregulation or shRNA-knockdown of Spi-1/PU.1 expression is
sufficient to activate TRIM10/HERF1 expression; and (4) Spi-1/PU.1 knockdown
triggers both the transcription and the splicing events independently of the
chemical induction. Altogether, these data indicate that primary Spi-1/PU.1
downregulation acts on late erythroid differentiation through at least two
pathways, one of which requires TRIM10/HERF1 upregulation and parallels the
Spi-1/PU.1-induced Fli-1 shutoff regulatory cascade.

PMID: 18560381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Stem Cells. 2008 Sep;26(9):2237-44. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0133. Epub 2008
Jun 12.

EWS-FLI1 causes neuroepithelial defects and abrogates emigration of neural crest 
stem cells.

Coles EG(1), Lawlor ER, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology M/C 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, 
California 91125, USA.

The most frequently occurring chromosomal translocation that gives rise to the
Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) is the chimeric fusion gene EWS-FLI1 that
encodes an oncogenic protein composed of the N terminus of EWS and the C terminus
of FLI1. Although the genetic basis of ESFT is fairly well understood, its
putative cellular origin remains to be determined. Previous work has proposed
that neural crest progenitor cells may be the causative cell type responsible for
ESFT. However, surprisingly little is known about the expression pattern or role 
of either wild-type EWS or wild-type FLI1 in this cell population during early
embryonic development. Using the developing chick embryo as a model system, we
identified EWS expression in emigrating and migratory neural crest stem cells,
whereas FLI1 transcripts were found to be absent in these populations and were
restricted to developing endothelial cells. By ectopically expressing EWS-FLI1 or
wild-type FLI1 in the developing embryo, we have been able to study the cellular 
transformations that ensue in the context of an in vivo model system. Our results
reveal that misexpression of the chimeric EWS-FLI1 fusion gene, or wild-type
FLI1, in the developing neural crest stem cell population leads to significant
aberrations in neural crest development. An intriguing possibility is that
misexpression of the EWS-FLI1 oncogene in neural crest-derived stem cells may be 
an initiating event in ESFT genesis.

PMID: 18556509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008 Jun;30(6):474-7. doi: 10.1097/MPH.0b013e31816e2309.

Primary PNET of maxilla: an unusual presentation.

Mohindra P(1), Zade B, Basu A, Patil N, Viswanathan S, Bakshi A, Muckaden MA,
Laskar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are a type of small round cell tumors
developing from migrating embryonal cells of the neural crest. Peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs) are less common with varying incidence 
of occurrence in head and neck region. Only 8 reported cases of primary PNET of
maxilla are available in English literature. We report a case of 8-year-old boy
diagnosed as pPNET of maxilla after detailed radiologic, histopathologic,
including immuno-histochemical examination and molecular diagnosis using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction showing EWS-FLI1 translocation. The boy
was treated with multiagent combination chemotherapy to be followed by definitive
radiation therapy. A brief literature review of diagnosis and management of the
previous 8 reported cases is done. In view of no definitive guideline for
management of such cases, treatment on the lines of other pPNET is suggested.

PMID: 18525469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):576-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-07-098996. Epub 2008 Jun
3.

EKLF restricts megakaryocytic differentiation at the benefit of erythrocytic
differentiation.

Bouilloux F(1), Juban G, Cohet N, Buet D, Guyot B, Vainchenker W, Louache F,
Morlé F.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Previous observations suggested that functional antagonism between FLI-1 and EKLF
might be involved in the commitment toward erythrocytic or megakaryocytic
differentiation. We show here, using inducible shRNA expression, that EKLF
knockdown in mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells decreases erythrocytic and
increases megakaryocytic as well as Fli-1 gene expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that the increase in megakaryocytic gene
expression is associated with a marked increase in RNA pol II and FLI-1 occupancy
at their promoters, albeit FLI-1 protein levels are only minimally affected.
Similarly, we show that human CD34(+) progenitors infected with shRNA lentivirus 
allowing EKLF knockdown generate an increased number of differentiated
megakaryocytic cells associated with increased levels of megakaryocytic and Fli-1
gene transcripts. Single-cell progeny analysis of a cell population enriched in
bipotent progenitors revealed that EKLF knockdown increases the number of
megakaryocytic at the expense of erythrocytic colonies. Taken together, these
data indicate that EKLF restricts megakaryocytic differentiation to the benefit
of erythrocytic differentiation and suggest that this might be at least partially
mediated by the inhibition of FLI-1 recruitment to megakaryocytic and Fli-1 gene 
promoters.

PMID: 18523154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Sarcoma. 1999;3(1):25-32. doi: 10.1080/13577149977839.

Detection of EWS/FLI-1 by Immunostaining. An Adjunctive Tool in Diagnosis of
Ewing's Sarcoma and Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumour on Cytological Samples and
Paraffin-Embedded Archival Material.

Nilsson G(1), Wang M, Wejde J, Kreicbergs A, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Tumour Pathology Cancer Center Karolinska
Karolinska Hospital Stockholm S-17176 Sweden.

Purpose. Recently we showed that the 68-kDa fusion protein derived from the
EWS/FLI1 hybrid gene can be specifically detected by Western blotting using a
polyclonal antibody to the C-terminal of FLI1 on biopsy material from Ewing's
sarcoma. The aim of this study was to investigate whether this antibody also
could be used for immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry in diagnosis of
Ewing's sarcoma.Methods. Immunostaining on paraffin-embedded archival material,
fine-needle aspirates and tumour touch imprints from Ewing's sarcomas and
primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNET) for detection of the fusion protein was 
performed. Most cases were also analysed by Western blotting.Tumours of
differential diagnostic importance were also included.Results. Eighty per cent
(12/15 cases) of the Ewing tumours exhibited a positive immunoreactivity for the 
FLI1 antibody. The signal was mainly localised in the nuclei of the tumour cells,
which seems reasonable since EWS/FLI1 is a transcription factor. The signal was
found to be specific since it did not appear when the blocking peptide was added 
to the antibody solution.Moreover, two other types of small-round cell tumours
(i.e. neuroblastoma and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma) were negative as well as most 
normal tissues.Discussion. Immunostaining of histological and cytological
specimens with the FLI1 antibody can be of diagnostic relevance in Ewing tumours 
carrying t(11;22).The absence of immunoreactivity in non-Ewing cells is most
likely due to a low expression of the wild-type FLI1 protein.

PMCID: PMC2395406
PMID: 18521261  [PubMed]


125. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2008 Sep 15;310(6):479-91. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21220.

Patterns of angiogenic and hematopoietic gene expression during brown trout
embryogenesis.

Marschallinger J(1), Steinbacher P, Haslett JR, Sänger AM, Rescan PY, Stoiber W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic Biology, Division of Zoology and Functional Anatomy, 
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.

In this article, whole mount in situ hybridization is used to examine early blood
vessel and blood cell development in the embryos of the brown trout Salmo trutta 
lacustris. cDNAs encoding for the angiogenic markers fli1 and flk1, and for the
hematopoietic markers gata1 and gata2, were identified from an expressed sequence
tag library of rainbow trout. Results show that fli1, flk1 and gata2 are
activated in bilateral bands of the lateral trunk mesoderm before the onset of
somitogenesis, shortly followed by gata1. These bands then converge toward the
ventral midline to form the intermediate cell mass (ICM) (anterior ICM).
Subsequent axial vasculogenesis and initial blood cell formation involve a clear 
spatial separation of fli1 and gata gene expression. Fli1 staining is most
intense within the axial vessel (dorsal aorta, posterior cardinal vein) forming
and lateral ICM cells, whereas binding of gata1 and gata2 probes becomes confined
to the central portion of ICM cells beneath the dorsal aorta. This is followed by
a first wave of angiogenesis, indicated by expression of fli1 and flk1. This
gives rise to the intersegmental, dorsal longitudinal anastomotic and intestinal 
vessels. Further angiogenesis and hematopoiesis are activated in the "posterior
ICM" of the tail. Here, the absence of gata1 indicates that hematopoiesis in this
tissue generates myeloid rather than erythroid cells. The results supplement and 
validate previous, now historical morphological work in salmonids, thus aiding
the elucidation of a comprehensive general scheme of angiogenic and hematopoietic
development in the teleost embryo.

PMID: 18512703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Surg Pathol. 2010 Oct;18(5):388-93. doi: 10.1177/1066896908316903. Epub
2008 May 21.

Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the esophagus: report of a
case and review of literature.

Johnson AD(1), Pambuccian SE, Andrade RS, Dolan MM, Aslan DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jun;19(3):409-10; author reply 410.

This study presents a case of Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor
arising in the esophagus of a 44-year-old woman who presented with progressive
dysphagia. Imaging studies demonstrated a polypoid lesion in the esophagus. The
tumor was characterized by corded and pseudopapillary architecture, cytologic
monotony, and low proliferative activity. Immunohistochemical stains were
positive for CD99, neuron-specific enolase, vimentin, cyclin D1, p53, and FLI1
gene product. Fluorescence in situ hybridization demonstrated a 22q12
translocation, associated with primitive neuroectodermal tumor in the tumor
cells, whereas reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction conformed
expression of Ewing sarcoma/FLI1 fusion transcript in the patient's bone marrow
aspirate. Although this is a rare site for this type of tumor to occur, primitive
neuroectodermal tumor should be considered in the differential diagnosis of
mesenchymal tumors of the esophagus. Genetic analysis is crucial to establish the
diagnosis and can be successfully performed on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
material and hematopoietic tissue.

PMID: 18499684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2008 Jul;56(5):257-9. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2008.03.005.
Epub 2008 May 15.

[Ewing's tumours, genetic and cellular aspects].

[Article in French]

Delattre O.

Ewing's tumour is the second most frequent primary tumour of bone. It is
associated in 85% of cases with a specific and recurrent chromosome
translocation, a t(11; 22)(q24; q12) which generates a fusion gene between the 5'
part of EWS and the 3' part of FLI-1, a member of the ETS family. Less
frequently, this gene fusion involves EWS and another member of the ETS family
which can be: ERG, ETV1, E1AF or FEV depending on the cases. The EWS-ETS fusion
is causative in the development of Ewing's tumour. Its mechanism of action mainly
relies on the abnormal transcription regulation of key target genes which are
involved in the regulation of cell cycle, signal transduction, migration. The
cellular context within which EWS-FLI-1 exerts its oncogenic action is a long
standing matter of debate. Recent data converge to suggest that the Ewing cell
origin is a mesenchymal stem cell.

PMID: 18485618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Aug;51(2):228-34. doi: 10.1002/pbc.21602.

Membrane-associated phospholipase A1 beta (LIPI) Is an Ewing tumour-associated
cancer/testis antigen.

Foell JL(1), Hesse M, Volkmer I, Schmiedel BJ, Neumann I, Staege MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Children's Cancer Research Centre,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, 06097 Halle, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cancer/testis antigens (CTA) represent a heterogeneous group of
antigens expressed nearly exclusively in tumour cells and testis. Recently, we
identified phospholipase A1 beta (a CTA also known as lipase member I, LIPI) as a
gene with high expression in Ewing family tumours (EFT). In the present paper we 
analyzed expression of LIPI in a panel of normal tissues and tumour samples.
PROCEDURE: The expression of CTA in EFT and normal tissues was analyzed by using 
DNA microarray datasets. Expression of LIPI in EFT, a panel of other tumour
samples, and normal tissues was analyzed by using RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: LIPI was expressed in EFT samples but not in other investigated tumour
samples. Expression of LIPI in normal tissues was restricted to testis and
thyroid. However, expression in these tissues was low compared with EFT.
Interestingly testis as well as thyroid expressed all analyzed EFT-associated
transcripts, suggesting that these tissues harbour a small cell population with
molecular features of EFT. The sensitivity of the LIPI RT-PCR was similar to the 
sensitivity of the conventional EWSR1-FLI1 RT-PCR, suggesting that LIPI might be 
useful as additional diagnostic target structure.
CONCLUSIONS: The human cancer/testis antigen LIPI is highly expressed in Ewing
family tumours and can be easily detected by RT-PCR or quantitative RT-PCR. LIPI 
might be an interesting target for the development of future diagnostic tools or 
treatment strategies.

PMID: 18435455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 May;36(9):e51. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn151. Epub 2008 Apr 17.

Identification of soluble protein fragments by gene fragmentation and genetic
selection.

Dyson MR(1), Perera RL, Shadbolt SP, Biderman L, Bromek K, Murzina NV, McCafferty
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Downing Site, Cambridge
CB2 1QW, UK. md458@cam.ac.uk

We describe a new method, which identifies protein fragments for soluble
expression in Escherichia coli from a randomly fragmented gene library.
Inhibition of E. coli dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) by trimethoprim (TMP)
prevents growth, but this can be relieved by murine DHFR (mDHFR). Bacterial
strains expressing mDHFR fusions with the soluble proteins green fluroscent
protein (GFP) or EphB2 (SAM domain) displayed markedly increased growth rates
with TMP compared to strains expressing insoluble EphB2 (TK domain) or
ketosteroid isomerase (KSI). Therefore, mDHFR is affected by the solubility of
fusion partners and can act as a reporter of soluble protein expression. Random
fragment libraries of the transcription factor Fli1 were generated by
deoxyuridine incorporation and endonuclease V cleavage. The fragments were cloned
upstream of mDHFR and TMP resistant clones expressing soluble protein were
identified. These were found to cluster around the DNA binding ETS domain. A
selected Fli1 fragment was expressed independently of mDHFR and was judged to be 
correctly folded by various biophysical methods including NMR. Soluble fragments 
of the cell-surface receptor Pecam1 were also identified. This genetic selection 
method was shown to generate expression clones useful for both structural studies
and antibody generation and does not require a priori knowledge of domain
architecture.

PMCID: PMC2396403
PMID: 18420658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2008 Apr 16;3(4):e1965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001965.

EWS/FLI mediates transcriptional repression via NKX2.2 during oncogenic
transformation in Ewing's sarcoma.

Owen LA(1), Kowalewski AA, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

EWS/FLI is a master regulator of Ewing's sarcoma formation. Gene expression
studies in A673 Ewing's sarcoma cells have demonstrated that EWS/FLI
downregulates more genes than it upregulates, suggesting that EWS/FLI, and/or its
targets, function as transcriptional repressors. One critical EWS/FLI target,
NKX2.2, is a transcription factor that contains both transcriptional activation
and transcriptional repression domains, raising the possibility that it mediates 
portions of the EWS/FLI transcriptional signature. We now report that microarray 
analysis demonstrated that the transcriptional profile of NKX2.2 consists solely 
of downregulated genes, and overlaps with the EWS/FLI downregulated signature,
suggesting that NKX2.2 mediates oncogenic transformation via transcriptional
repression. Structure-function analysis revealed that the DNA binding and
repressor domains in NKX2.2 are required for oncogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma
cells, while the transcriptional activation domain is completely dispensable.
Furthermore, blockade of TLE or HDAC function, two protein families thought to
mediate the repressive function of NKX2.2, inhibited the transformed phenotype
and reversed the NKX2.2 transcriptional profile in Ewing's sarcoma cells. Whole
genome localization studies (ChIP-chip) revealed that a significant portion of
the NKX2.2-repressed gene expression signature was directly mediated by NKX2.2
binding. These data demonstrate that the transcriptional repressive function of
NKX2.2 is necessary, and sufficient, for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's
sarcoma, and suggest a therapeutic approach to this disease.

PMCID: PMC2291578
PMID: 18414662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 22;105(16):6004-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0710748105. Epub 2008 Apr 14.

Alteration of cyclin D1 transcript elongation by a mutated transcription factor
up-regulates the oncogenic D1b splice isoform in cancer.

Sanchez G(1), Bittencourt D, Laud K, Barbier J, Delattre O, Auboeuf D, Dutertre
M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 685, Institut
Universitaire d'Hématologie, 1, Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France.

Pre-mRNA splicing and polyadenylation are tightly connected to transcription, and
transcriptional stimuli and elongation dynamics can affect mRNA maturation.
However, whether this regulatory mechanism has a physio/pathological impact is
not known. In cancer, where splice variant expression is often deregulated, many 
mutated oncogenes are transcriptional regulators. In particular, the Ewing
sarcoma (EwSa) oncogene, resulting from a fusion of the EWS and FLI1 genes,
encodes a well characterized transcription factor. EWS-FLI1 directly stimulates
transcription of the CCND1 protooncogene encoding cyclin D1a and a less abundant 
but more oncogenic splice isoform, D1b. We show that, although both EWS and
EWS-FLI1 enhance cyclin D1 gene expression, they regulate the D1b/D1a transcript 
ratio in an opposite manner. Detailed analyses of RNA polymerase dynamics along
the gene and of the effects of an inhibitor of elongation show that EWS-FLI1
favors D1b isoform expression by decreasing the elongation rate, whereas EWS has 
opposite effects. As a result, the D1b/D1a ratio is elevated in EwSa cell lines
and tumors. The endogenous D1b protein is enriched in nuclei, where the oncogenic
activity of cyclin D1 is known to occur, and depleting D1b in addition to D1a
results in a stronger reduction of EwSa cell growth than depleting D1a only.
These data show that elevated expression of a splice isoform in cancer can be due
to an alteration of the transcription process by a mutated transcriptional
regulator and provide evidence for a physio/pathological impact of the coupling
between transcription and mRNA maturation.

PMCID: PMC2329709
PMID: 18413612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 2008 Mar;99(3):560-4.

[Case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney].

[Article in Japanese]

Ueno Y(1), Ishikawa M, Tsuruta T, Wajiki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Shinonoi General Hospital.

A 28-year-old woman presented with right flank pain. A large, firm, fixed mass
was palpable in the right side of the abdomen. Computed tomography revealed a
solid mass of the right kidney with extension into the renal vein and inferior
vena cava. The patient underwent right radical nephrectomy with en bloc resection
of the inferior vena cava containing tumor thrombus and right adrenalectomy.
Histologically the tumor consisted of small tumor cells with rosette formation.
Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD99 and NSE. Analysis with
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demonstrated the EWS/FLI1 fusion products
resulting from a chromosomal translocation. These findings were consistent with
primary renal primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). Two months after surgery,
multiple lung, liver and lymph node metastases were found. The patient received 2
cycles of chemotherapy with cisplatin, ifosfamide, etoposide, resulting in a
partial remission. She subsequently received 1 cycle chemotherapy with paclitaxel
and carboplatin, resulting in no response. The metastatic lung and liver diseases
progressed and she died 5 months after diagnosis.

PMID: 18404886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Anticancer Res. 2008 Jan-Feb;28(1A):261-6.

Adhesion to fibronectin induces megakaryocytic differentiation of JAS-REN cells.

Yamada H(1), Sekikawa T, Agawa M, Iwase S, Suzuki H, Horiguchi-Yamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, Jikei University,
School of Medicine, Tokyo 125-8506, Japan. hyamad@jikei.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Binding of integrins to the extracellular matrix elicits various
responses. We have previously reported a megakaryocytic-erythroid cell line
(JAS-R) that showed phenotypic changes after adhesion to plastic dishes. However,
the matrix protein and the mechanism responsible for megakaryocytic
differentiation still remain unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: JAS-REN (erythroid) cells were cultured on dishes coated
with various proteins. The cells were treated with RGDS, a tetrapeptide ligand to
integrins, or phorbol ester (12-o-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, TPA) for 48
hours and then were harvested. Subsequently, the cell surface markers were
analyzed using flow cytometry and gene expression was studied by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The JAS-REN cells adhered to fibronectin-coated dishes, but showed poor 
adhesion to dishes coated with collagen, laminin or poly-D-lysine. The
TPA-stimulated JAS-REN cells showed an increase in the expression of integrin
alphaIIbbeta3 complex (CD41a) and integrin beta3 (CD61), while glycophorin A
(CD235a) expression was decreased. JAS-REN cells that were adherent to
fibronectin-coated dishes also showed a similar pattern of phenotype to
TPA-treated cells, but the changes were not so prominent. RT-PCR revealed that
TPA treatment altered the gene expression profile of JAS-REN cells, making it
similar to that of JAS-RAD (megakaryocytic) cells. The RGDS-treated and
fibronectin adherent JAS-REN cells also showed a mostly similar expression
profile to JAS-RAD cells, but these two stimuli did not alter the gene expression
profile as TPA stimulation did. Transcription factors, FLI1 and GFI1, were
induced by all stimuli.
CONCLUSION: Signals triggered by adhesion to fibronectin result in the induction 
of FLI1 that may play a pivotal role in the lineage shift of JAS-REN cells from
erythroid to megakaryocytic.

PMID: 18383854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Res. 2008 Apr 1;68(7):2176-85. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-1761.

EWS-FLI-1 expression triggers a Ewing's sarcoma initiation program in primary
human mesenchymal stem cells.

Riggi N(1), Suvà ML, Suvà D, Cironi L, Provero P, Tercier S, Joseph JM, Stehle
JC, Baumer K, Kindler V, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) express the EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene generated 
by the chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). Expression of the EWS-FLI-1
fusion protein in a permissive cellular environment is believed to play a key
role in ESFT pathogenesis. However, EWS-FLI-1 induces growth arrest or apoptosis 
in differentiated primary cells, and the identity of permissive primary human
cells that can support its expression and function has until now remained
elusive. Here we show that expression of EWS-FLI-1 in human mesenchymal stem
cells (hMSC) is not only stably maintained without inhibiting proliferation but
also induces a gene expression profile bearing striking similarity to that of
ESFT, including genes that are among the highest ESFT discriminators. Expression 
of EWS-FLI-1 in hMSCs may recapitulate the initial steps of Ewing's sarcoma
development, allowing identification of genes that play an important role early
in its pathogenesis. Among relevant candidate transcripts induced by EWS-FLI-1 in
hMSCs, we found the polycomb group gene EZH2, which we show to play a critical
role in Ewing's sarcoma growth. These observations are consistent with our recent
findings using mouse mesenchymal progenitor cells and provide compelling evidence
that hMSCs are candidate cells of origin of ESFT.

PMID: 18381423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Brain Res Bull. 2008 Mar 28;75(5):619-28. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.10.043. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Functional and developmental analysis of the blood-brain barrier in zebrafish.

Jeong JY(1), Kwon HB, Ahn JC, Kang D, Kwon SH, Park JA, Kim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Neurovascular Coordination Research Center, Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is essential for maintaining brain homeostasis and 
protecting the brain from toxic substances. Breakdown of this barrier results in 
severe brain pathologies, whereas impermeability of the BBB is a major obstacle
for drug delivery to the brain. Despite its importance, our understanding of the 
maturation and modulation of the BBB is limited. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) has
emerged as a useful model organism for studying vertebrate development and
disease mechanisms, as well as for preclinical drug screening. However, the
nature of the BBB has not yet been examined in teleost fish. In this paper, we
report that with the exception of the circumventricular organs, the cerebral
microvessels in zebrafish are impermeable to sulfo-NHS-biotin and horseradish
peroxidase (HRP). Brain endothelial cells show immunoreactivity to Claudin-5 and 
Zonula Occludens-1 (ZO-1), implying the presence of tight junctions in these
cells. The expression of Claudin-5 and ZO-1 was detected in cerebral microvessels
from 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), concomitant with maturation of the BBB, as 
determined by restricted permeability to HRP and various fluorescent tracers.
Real-time analysis of fluorescent tracer leakage in embryonic zebrafish suggests 
that they may be used as an in vivo model for BBB breakdown. Taken together, our 
results show that the endothelial tight junction-based BBB of zebrafish is
similar to that of higher vertebrates and thus, zebrafish may be an excellent
genetic and experimental model organism for studying development and maintenance 
of the BBB.

PMID: 18355638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1525-35. doi: 10.1242/dev.011767. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

The stepwise specification of embryonic stem cells to hematopoietic fate is
driven by sequential exposure to Bmp4, activin A, bFGF and VEGF.

Pearson S(1), Sroczynska P, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Paterson Institute for Cancer Research, Manchester
University, Wilmslow Road, M20 4BX, Manchester, UK.

The differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells offers a powerful approach to
study mechanisms implicated in cell fate decision. A major hurdle, however, is to
promote the directed and efficient differentiation of ES cells toward a specific 
lineage. Here, we define in serum-free media the minimal factor requirement
controlling each step of the differentiation process, resulting in the production
of highly enriched hematopoietic progenitors. Four factors - Bmp4, activin A,
bFGF (Fgf2) and VEGF (VegfA) - are sufficient to drive the selective and
efficient differentiation of mouse ES cells to hematopoiesis. Each of these
factors appears to regulate a step of the process: Bmp4 promotes the very
efficient formation of mesoderm; bFGF and activin A induce the differentiation of
these mesodermal precursors to the hemangioblast fate; and VEGF is required for
the production of fully committed hematopoietic progenitors. The stimulation of
mesodermal precursors by bFGF and activin A switches on very rapidly the
hematopoietic program, allowing us to dissect the molecular events leading to the
formation of the hemangioblast. Runx1, Scl (Tal1) and Hhex expression is
upregulated within 3 hours of stimulation, whereas upregulation of Lmo2 and Fli1 
is observed later. Interestingly, increased expression levels of genes such as
cMyb, Pu.1 (Sfpi1), Gata1 and Gata2 are not observed at the onset of
hemangioblast commitment. This stepwise control of differentiation is extremely
efficient, giving rise to a very high frequency of hematopoietic precursors, and 
provides an optimal system for understanding the molecular machineries involved
in blood progenitor commitment.

PMID: 18339678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Mar;24(3):248-50. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008243248.

[Cellular origin of Ewing's tumor. A corner of the veil is lifted].

[Article in French]

Tirode F, Laud-Duval K, Delattre O.

PMID: 18334171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Biol Pharm Bull. 2008 Mar;31(3):391-4.

Treatment of Ewing's sarcoma using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide to regulate 
the cell cycle.

Asami S(1), Chin M, Shichino H, Yoshida Y, Nemoto N, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University,
7-7-1 Narashinodai, Funabashi, Chiba 274-8555, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant tumors of bone and soft tissue 
in children and young adults. ES belongs to a group of small round cell tumors
(SRCTs) that also includes neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and malignant
lymphoma. However, ES exhibits several specific chimeric genes (EWS-FLI1,
EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-E1AF, and EWS-FEV) caused by chromosomal translocations
that are not shared by other SRCTs. These chimeric genes regulate the expression 
of various other genes; that is, they activate inhibitors of DNA binding 2 (Id2) 
gene expression or they suppress transforming growth factor beta II (TbetaRII)
receptor gene expression. The regulation of these chimeric genes may affect
critical cell signal transductions, such as signals involved in cell cycle and
apoptosis in ES tumor cells. Using an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against a
sequence containing the ATG initiation codon of the EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene that
specifically reacts with the EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG chimeric genes, we were able to
regulate the cell cycle through the down-regulation of Id2. Here, we report that 
treatment with an antisense oligodeoxynucleotide against this chimeric gene was
very useful for inducing the regression of ES tumor growth; thus, this chimeric
gene may be an important target for the treatment of ES patients.

PMID: 18310898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Exp Hematol. 2008 May;36(5):559-67. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2007.12.014. Epub 2008 
Mar 4.

A role for the transcription intermediary factor 2 in zebrafish myelopoiesis.

Zhuravleva J(1), Solary E, Chluba J, Bastie JN, Delva L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, University of Burgundy, Dijon, France.

OBJECTIVE: TIF2 is fused with MOZ in the inv(8)(p11q13) acute myeloid leukemia.
TIF2, member of the p160 family, is a histone acetyl transferase (HAT). Deletion 
of p160 genes were performed in mice. Some observations suggest that p160 family 
members may perform overlapping functions in mice. Therefore, we decided to
choose the zebrafish model to study TIF2. The aim of this study was to
characterize the role of this HAT during embryonic development.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We use antisense, morpholino-modified oligomers to
transiently knockdown tif2 gene, thus determining whether TIF2 plays a role in
zebrafish early development.
RESULTS: We show that tif2 is involved in embryogenesis and in primitive
hematopoiesis. tif2-knockdown zebrafish embryos are smaller than controls, they
demonstrate shorter tails, they display notochord deformation and they exhibit
U-shaped tail somites. A synthetic RNA encoding human TIF2 rescues the
tif2-knockdown phenotype. Analysis of fli1 expression by whole-mount in situ
hybridization indicates normal angioblast specification, but altered localization
of intersomitic vessels. The posterior intermediate cell mass, in which a part of
primitive hematopoiesis occurs, is altered in tif2 morphants and whole-mount in
situ hybridization analyses of l-plastin and mpx expression suggest a specific
inhibition of granulocytic and macrophagic differentiation at late stages.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate an important role for TIF2 in zebrafish primitive
myelopoiesis.

PMID: 18295965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Orthop Res. 2008 Jun;26(6):886-93. doi: 10.1002/jor.20597.

EWS/FLI1 suppresses retinoblastoma protein function and senescence in Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

Hu HM(1), Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, Munro K, Wilcox J, Wu DY, Yang L, Chansky HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Washington, 1660 S. Columbian Way, ORT112, Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

Ewing's Family Tumors (EFTs) most commonly harbor a specific t(11;22)
translocation that generates the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein responsible for
malignant transformation. Many potential downstream targets of EWS/FLI1 have been
identified but a detailed mechanism by which the fusion protein brings about
transformation remains unknown. In this report, we show that depletion of
EWS/FLI1 in Ewing's cell lines results in a senescence phenotype, a marked
increase in expression of the G1/S regulatory proteins p27(kip1) and p57(kip2),
and a significant decrease in cyclin D1 and CDK2. We also demonstrate for the
first time, to our knowledge, that knockdown of EWS/FLI1 leads to
hypophosphorylation and functional activation of the retinoblastoma (pRb) family 
of proteins. Consistent with activation of the pRb proteins, E2F-responsive genes
such as cyclin A are repressed in EWS/FLI1-depleted cells. Together, these
results support the role of EWS/LI1 as an inhibitor of cellular senescence and
implicate the retinoblastoma family of proteins as key mediators of this
inhibition.

(c) 2008 Orthopaedic Research Society.

PMID: 18271016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jan 15;7(2):250-6. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

A transcriptional profiling meta-analysis reveals a core EWS-FLI gene expression 
signature.

Hancock JD(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and The Center for Children,
Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas are characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocations
expressing EWS-ETS fusion proteins, the most common of which is EWS-FLI.(1-5)
EWS-FLI is an oncogenic transcription factor that regulates genes involved in
tumorigenesis.(6,7) Because the Ewing's sarcoma cell of origin remains unknown, a
variety of model systems have been developed to study EWS-FLI fusions,(8-14) and 
multiple microarray experiments describing potential EWS-FLI target genes have
been reported.(8,10,11,13,15-21) Each model has potential benefits and drawbacks,
but a large-scale comparison of these has not been reported. Herein we report a
meta-analysis of the genes that are dysregulated by EWS-FLI in Ewing's sarcoma
model systems. In general, EWS-FLI gain- and loss-of-function models in human
cell types were well correlated to patient-derived tumor samples, while murine
models were not. Using frequency analysis of dysregulated genes across multiple
model systems, we identified a conserved "core" EWS-FLI transcriptional
signature. This signature contained many of the genes known to be involved in the
tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma, and also contained genes that have not 
been previously reported. Comparisons between the core EWS-FLI signature and
published mesenchymal stem cell data support the recent assertion that
mesenchymal stem cells are likely the Ewing's sarcoma precursor cell.(15) These
results demonstrate the utility of using comparative analysis to validate model
systems and emphasize the unique potential of this approach to identify both
oncogenic and background cell signatures.

PMID: 18256529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Apr 22;33(2):159-69. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00127.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Gene Ontology-driven transcriptional analysis of CD34+ cell-initiated
megakaryocytic cultures identifies new transcriptional regulators of
megakaryopoiesis.

Fuhrken PG(1), Chen C, Apostolidis PA, Wang M, Miller WM, Papoutsakis ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Northwestern University,
Evanston, Illinois, USA.

Differentiation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells is an intricate
process controlled in large part at the level of transcription. While some key
megakaryocytic transcription factors have been identified, the complete network
of megakaryocytic transcriptional control is poorly understood. Using global gene
expression microarray analysis, Gene Ontology-based functional annotations, and a
novel interlineage comparison with parallel, isogenic granulocytic cultures as a 
negative control, we closely examined the mRNA level of transcriptional
regulators in megakaryocytes derived from human mobilized peripheral blood
CD34(+) hematopoietic cells. This approach identified 199 differentially
expressed transcription factors or transcriptional regulators. We identified and 
detailed the transcriptional kinetics of most known megakaryocytic transcription 
factors including GATA1, FLI1, and MAFG. Furthermore, many genes with
transcription factor activity or transcription factor binding activity were
identified in megakaryocytes that had not previously been associated with that
lineage, including BTEB1, NR4A2, FOXO1A, MEF2C, HDAC5, VDR, and several genes
associated with the tumor suppressor p53 (HIPK2, FHL2, and TADA3L). Protein
expression and nuclear localization were confirmed in megakaryocytic cells for
four of the novel candidate megakaryocytic transcription factors: FHL2, MXD1,
E2F3, and RFX5. In light of the hypothesis that transcription factors expressed
in a particular differentiation program are important contributors to such a
program, these data substantially expand our understanding of transcriptional
regulation in megakaryocytic differentiation of stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 18252802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Zebrafish. 2005;2(2):113-23. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2005.2.113.

Long-term time-lapse fluorescence imaging of developing zebrafish.

Kamei M(1), Weinstein BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

A variety of different transgenic zebrafish lines have been generated expressing 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) or other fluorescent proteins in different organs
and tissues, permitting dynamic visualization of development of these organs and 
tissues in living animals via time-lapse imaging. Although methods have been
devised for short- to medium-term time-lapse imaging of transgenic zebrafish,
these methods are not suitable for longer term imaging because of poor control
over temperature, evaporation, and anoxia. We describe a new imaging chamber that
provides continuously circulating flow of warm, oxygenated aqueous media. We show
that the chamber can be used for multiphoton time-lapse imaging of developing
blood vessels in the trunk of Fli1-EGFP transgenic zebrafish for 5 days without
developmental delay, loss of viability, or evident reduction in strength of
circulatory flow. This imaging chamber provides an important new tool for
long-term dynamic imaging of transgenic zebrafish.

PMID: 18248171  [PubMed]


144. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2125-37. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00740-07. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Inducible expression of chimeric EWS/ETS proteins confers Ewing's family
tumor-like phenotypes to human mesenchymal progenitor cells.

Miyagawa Y(1), Okita H, Nakaijima H, Horiuchi Y, Sato B, Taguchi T, Toyoda M,
Katagiri YU, Fujimoto J, Hata J, Umezawa A, Kiyokawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, 2-10-1, Okura, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jun;28(11):3882.

Ewing's family tumor (EFT) is a rare pediatric tumor of unclear origin that
occurs in bone and soft tissue. Specific chromosomal translocations found in EFT 
cause EWS to fuse to a subset of ets transcription factor genes (ETS), generating
chimeric EWS/ETS proteins. These proteins are believed to play a crucial role in 
the onset and progression of EFT. However, the mechanisms responsible for the
EWS/ETS-mediated onset remain unclear. Here we report the establishment of a
tetracycline-controlled EWS/ETS-inducible system in human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPCs). Ectopic expression of both EWS/FLI1 and
EWS/ERG proteins resulted in a dramatic change of morphology, i.e., from a
mesenchymal spindle shape to a small round-to-polygonal cell, one of the
characteristics of EFT. EWS/ETS also induced immunophenotypic changes in MPCs,
including the disappearance of the mesenchyme-positive markers CD10 and CD13 and 
the up-regulation of the EFT-positive markers CD54, CD99, CD117, and CD271.
Furthermore, a prominent shift from the gene expression profile of MPCs to that
of EFT was observed in the presence of EWS/ETS. Together with the observation
that EWS/ETS enhances the ability of cells to invade Matrigel, these results
suggest that EWS/ETS proteins contribute to alterations of cellular features and 
confer an EFT-like phenotype to human MPCs.

PMCID: PMC2268432
PMID: 18212050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2008 Feb;47(2):158-64. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kem321.
Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Association of polymorphisms in complement component C3 gene with susceptibility 
to systemic lupus erythematosus.

Miyagawa H(1), Yamai M, Sakaguchi D, Kiyohara C, Tsukamoto H, Kimoto Y, Nakamura 
T, Lee JH, Tsai CY, Chiang BL, Shimoda T, Harada M, Tahira T, Hayashi K, Horiuchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Identification of the genes responsible for systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: All the exons and putative promoter regions of 53 candidate genes
(TNFRSF6/Fas, TNFSF6/FasL, Fli1, TNFSF10/TRAIL, TNFSF12/TWEAK, Bcl-2, PTEN, FADD,
TRADD, CDKN1A, TNFRSF1A/TNFR1, TNFRSF4/OX40, TNFSF4/OX40L, TNFSF5/CD40L,
TNFSF13B/BAFF, ICOS, CTLA4, CD28, FYN, G2A, CR2, PTPRC/CD45, CD22, CD19, Lyn,
PDCD1, PTPN6, TGFB1, TGFB2, TGFB3, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, TGFBR3, CD3Z, DNASE1, APCS,
MERTK, C3, C1QA, C1QB, C1QG, C2, MBL2, IGHM, IL-2, IL-4, IL-10, IFNG, TNFA,
MAN2A1, TNFRSF11A/RANK, TNFRSF11B/OPG, TNFSF11/OPGL) were screened for single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their association with SLE was assessed by
case-control studies. A total of 509 cases and 964 controls of Japanese descent
were enrolled.
RESULTS: A total of 316 SNPs was identified. When analysed in the Japanese
population, the allele frequencies of T at rs7951 and G at rs2230201 of the C3
gene were 0.110 and 0.626, respectively, in SLE patients; significantly higher
than the frequencies of 0.081 and 0.584, respectively, in controls [odds ratio
(OR) = 1.40, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.05-1.86, P = 0.016 and OR=1.19, 95%
CI = 1.01-1.41, P = 0.038, respectively]. The mean serum C3 level of carriers of 
the rs7951 T allele was significantly lower than that of non-carriers of the T
allele in 87 SLE patients whose medical records were available (P = 0.0018).
CONCLUSION: rs7951 T allele of the C3 gene was significantly associated with SLE,
and decreased serum level of C3 seems to be correlated with this allele.

PMID: 18174230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2007;24(2):69-74. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

An infant case of intracranial peripheral-type primitive neuroectodermal tumor
with long-term survival.

Asano K(1), Kikuchi J, Munakata A, Ohkuma H, Kubo O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Hirosaki University, School of Medicine, Zaifu-cho
5, Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8562, Japan. asanoken@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors (S-PNET) that develop in children
have recently been classified into two types: central-type PNET (C-PNET), which
has been reported over the years, and peripheral-type PNET (P-PNET), which
develops intracranially and was referred to as Ewing's sarcoma in the past.
P-PNET is fundamentally a malignant tumor, but the patient reported here
represents a case of long-term survival from onset without recurrence. At the age
of 21 months, a male infant developed a cranial bone deformity and symptoms of
high intracranial pressure. A CT scan revealed a cystic tumor attaching to the
falx, and cyst drainage operation was immediately performed. The intracranial
tumor was then resected. The tumor was an intradural extramedullary tumor, and it
was totally excised with the falx attachment. The tumor was initially diagnosed
as a neuroblastoma, and postoperative treatment consisted of administration of
radiotherapy and chemotherapy using cyclophosphamide and vincristine. Twenty
years have now passed without any recurrence. Recent repeated performance of
histopathological analysis resulted in a diagnosis of P-PNET. In recent years,
studies in molecular biology have demonstrated that P-PNET involves the EWS-FLI1 
chimeric gene, and immunohistochemical staining has shown P-PNET to be MIC2
positive. P-PNET also differs from C-PNET with regard to prognosis, and for this 
reason it is believed that P-PNET and C-PNET should be considered separate
entities. That is, in spite of the fact that P-PNET is a malignant tumor, patient
survival can be comparatively long. Because P-PNET originates intracranially, it 
is fundamentally an intradural extramedullary tumor. For this reason, treatment
should consist of surgical excision that is as complete as possible, followed by 
appropriate radiotherapy and chemotherapy. This approach can be expected to
result in the patient's long-term survival.

PMID: 18095134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2007 Dec;29(12):841-4.

A case of a ewing sarcoma family tumor in the urinary bladder after treatment for
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Osone S(1), Hosoi H, Tanaka K, Tsuchiya K, Iehara T, Morimoto A, Hashida T,
Yamashita M, Kawabata K, Nishijo K, Toguchida J, Hata J, Sugimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto,
Japan.

We report the first case of a tumor of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors arising
from the urinary bladder 3 years after chemotherapy for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. A 16-year-old boy complained of macrohematuria and dysuria during the
posttreatment follow up of his acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Ultrasonography and 
computed tomography revealed a 1-cm sized intravesical tumor. The tumor was
transurethrally resected with no residual tumor at the margin. Histopathologic
analyses revealed a small round blue cell tumor with positive staining for CD99
antibody. EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts were detected in the tumor tissue by
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. These findings support the
diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma family of tumor. After adjuvant multidrug
chemotherapy, the patient has shown no evidence of disease for more than 2 years.

PMID: 18090934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3282-91. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

The EWS/FLI1 oncogenic transcription factor deregulates GLI1.

Zwerner JP(1), Joo J, Warner KL, Christensen L, Hu-Lieskovan S, Triche TJ, May
WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, 
CA, USA.

Ewing family tumors (EFT), classically Ewing's sarcoma and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, share a common class of tumor-specific fusion genes
thought to be key mediators of tumor biology. Here we demonstrate that the most
common Ewing's fusion, EWS/FLI1, produces transcriptional upregulation of GLI1
and its direct transcriptional target PATCHED1 in a model transformation system. 
This deregulation of GLI1 is common to other EWS/ets chimera and depends on the
functional transcriptional regulatory domains. Inhibition of GLI1 via RNAi or via
overexpression of endogenous inhibitors results in a reduction of EWS/FLI1
transformation activity. Activation of GLI1 appears to occur in a
Hedgehog-independent fashion as blockade of Hedgehog signaling has only a modest 
effect on EFT cells. We present evidence that EWS/FLI1 upregulation of cMYC may
play a role in the upregulation of GLI1 in EWS/FLI1-transformed NIH3T3 cells.
Finally, we demonstrate that observations made in a model transformation system
translate to an Ewing cellular background. EFT cell lines express GLI1 and
PATCHED and this expression is EWS/FLI1 dependent. Inhibition of GLI1 expression 
via RNAi results in reduced anchorage-independent growth in an EFT cell line.
GLI1 appears to be a transcriptionally deregulated target of EWS/FLI1 that
mediates a portion of its tumorigenic phenotype.

PMID: 18084326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2007 Dec;5(2):680-5.

Meeting Report:The 7th ESPE Growth Plate Working Group Symposium - EUROGROP June 
27th 2007, Helsinki, Finland.

Miclea RL(1), Phillip M, Sävendahl L, Wit JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

Republished in
    J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Mar;21(3):287-94.

Longitudinal bone growth occurs within the epiphyseal growth plate, a highly
organized biological structure located at the distal ends of the long bones, via 
endochondral bone formation. This developmentally regulated process is finely
tuned through the interaction of circulating systemic hormones and locally
produced peptide growth factors, the net result of which is to trigger changes in
gene expression by growth plate chondrocytes. These molecular events lead to
carefully orchestrated alterations in chondrocyte size, extracellular matrix
components, secreted enzymes, growth factors and receptor expression. These
events finally result in calcification of the matrix, chondrocyte death, vascular
invasion and the completion of endochondral bone formation. Although the past
several years have seen important progress in the identification of numerous
important factors, which, in a complex and integrated network, control
longitudinal bone growth, many of the signaling pathways and their interactions
in the growth plate remain poorly understood. The ESPE Growth Plate Working Group
(EUROGROP) was established in 2000 with the aim of bringing together both basic
and clinical European research groups with an interest in the biology and
pathology of the growth plate. The 7th EUROGROP Symposium was held as an official
ESPE working group of the 46th ESPE Annual Meeting held in Helsinki, Finland,
2007. It enabled researchers, coming from all parts of the world to discuss their
ongoing studies and exchange technical information. The program consisted of
three lectures and four original papers, all followed by attractive discussions. 
This report summarizes the data presented and provides some comments on each of
the presentations.ABBREVIATIONS: 11beta-HSD: 11 Beta-Hydroxysteroid
Dehydrogenase; Agc: Aggrecan; Aln: Alendronate; Asb- 4: Ankyrin Repeat and SOCS
Box-Containing Protein 4; Atf6: Activating Transcription Factor6; BSP:
Bisphosphonates; Calca: Calcitonin, Alpha Cdkn2a: Cyclin-Dependent Kinase
Inhibitor 2A; Col1: Collagen 1; Col2: Collagen 2 Col10: Collagen 10; Dex:
Dexamethasone; Elk1: Member of ETS Oncogene Family; Esr1: Estrogen Receptor 1
(Alpha); Fli1: Friend Leukemia Integration 1; Gabp: GA Repeat Binding Protein;
GC: Glucocorticoids; Ghr: Growth Hormone Receptor; Hif-1alpha: Hypoxia-Inducible 
Factor 1 Alpha; hMSCs: Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells; Igf1: Insulin-Like Growth
Factor 1; Igfbp1: Insulin-Like Growth Factor Binding Protein 1; Igf1r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1-Receptor; Igf2: Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2; Igf2r:
Insulin-Like Growth Factor 2-Receptor; Nfe2l2: Nuclear Factor, Erythroid Derived 
2, Like 2; Nrf1: Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1; Pam: Pamidronate; Prss11: HtrA
Serine Peptidase 1; PTU: Propylthiouracil; Pycard: PYD and CARD Domain
Containing; Rxrg: Retinoid X Receptor Gamma; Tam: Tamoxifen.

PMID: 18084163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 1;13(23):6978-83.

Novel markers of subclinical disease for Ewing family tumors from gene expression
profiling.

Cheung IY(1), Feng Y, Danis K, Shukla N, Meyers P, Ladanyi M, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021, USA. cheungi@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Targeting subclinical disease in the bone marrow is particularly
relevant in metastatic Ewing family tumors (EFT) where cure is difficult.
Genome-wide expression arrays can uncover novel genes differentially expressed in
tumors over normal marrow/blood, which may have potentials as markers of
subclinical disease.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression array data were obtained on 28 EFT tumors
using the Affymetrix U133 gene chip and compared with 10 normal blood samples.
Ten genes with high tumor to blood ratios were identified. Quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR was done to study (a) the dynamic range of detection of rare
tumor cells, (b) the gene expression in normal blood/marrow samples, (c) the gene
expression among EFT tumors, and (d) the detection and prognostic impact of
marker positivity in histology-negative diagnostic marrows of EFT patients.
RESULTS: Five of 10 genes (i.e., six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the
prostate 1 [STEAP1], cyclin D1 [CCND1], NKX2-2 transcription factor [NKX2-2],
plakophilin 1 [PKP1], and transmembrane protein 47 [TMEM47]) were chosen for
further analyses based on their steep linear dynamic range in detecting tumor
cells seeded in normal mononuclear cells and on their homogeneous expression
among EFT tumors. Prognostic effect was evaluated in 35 histology-negative
diagnostic marrows. Marker negativity of STEAP1, CCND1, or NKX2-2, as well as
three markers in combination, was strongly correlated with patient survival as
well as survival without new metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: This gene expression array-based approach identified novel markers
that may be informative at diagnosis for risk group assessment. Their clinical
utility needs to be tested in large patient cohorts.

PMID: 18056173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2008 May-Jun;11(3):239-44. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Translocation (4;19)(q35;q13.1)-associated primitive round cell sarcoma: report
of a case and review of the literature.

Rakheja D(1), Goldman S, Wilson KS, Lenarsky C, Weinthal J, Schultz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Medical Center, and UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. dinesh.rakheja@utsouthwestern.edu

We report the 4th case of a primitive round cell sarcoma with the translocation
(4;19)(q35;q13.1) as the primary cytogenetic abnormality. This undifferentiated
sarcoma shows some features of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor
(ES/PNET), including a diffuse reactivity for FLI1, but it shows only focal and
weak reactivity for CD99 and is negative for a rearrangement of EWS, the
molecular signature of ES/PNET. Recognition of the histopathologic and
cytogenetic features of this entity is necessary to avoid its misdiagnosis as
ES/PNET, especially in small biopsy samples.

PMID: 17990934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Anticancer Res. 2007 Sep-Oct;27(5A):3273-8.

Establishment and characterization of a new Ewing's sarcoma cell line from a
malignant pleural effusion.

Schiavo R(1), Tullio C, La Grotteria M, Andreotti IC, Scarpati B, Romiti L, Bozzi
F, Pedrazzoli P, Siena S.

Author information: 
(1)Falck Division of Medical Oncology, Ospedale Niguarda Ca' Granda, Milan,
Italy. roberta.schiavo@ospedaleniguarda.it

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma cell lines may represent a good in vitro model for
the understanding of tumor biology in this heterogeneous group of diseases. In
the present study, we report the establishment and characterization of a primary 
Ewing's sarcoma cell line (LDS-Falck 01).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: LDS-Falck 01 was generated from a malignant pleural
effusion of a patient with metastatic peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor 
arising from the chest wall. Extensive characterization of the cells was
accomplished using immunocytochemical, RT-PCR and cytogenetic studies.
RESULTS: In vitro LDS-Falck 01 cells had both anchorage-dependent and
-independent growth patterns. Immunocytochemical studies showed that cells were
PAS-, vimentin-, CD99- and NSE-positive, EGFR- and CD117-negative. Cytogenetic
analysis revealed a complex hyperdiploid karyotype with multiple chromosomal
aberrations including an unbalanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12). The EWS/FLI1
chimeric transcript type 1 was detected.
CONCLUSION: This cell line may represent a valid tool for investigating the
biomolecular characteristics of this group of neoplasms and their sensitivity to 
therapeutic agents.

PMID: 17970070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Nov 6;104(45):17692-7. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Gata2, Fli1, and Scl form a recursively wired gene-regulatory circuit during
early hematopoietic development.

Pimanda JE(1), Ottersbach K, Knezevic K, Kinston S, Chan WY, Wilson NK, Landry
JR, Wood AD, Kolb-Kokocinski A, Green AR, Tannahill D, Lacaud G, Kouskoff V,
Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XY, United Kingdom. jpimanda@unsw.edu.au

Conservation of the vertebrate body plan has been attributed to the evolutionary 
stability of gene-regulatory networks (GRNs). We describe a regulatory circuit
made up of Gata2, Fli1, and Scl/Tal1 and their enhancers, Gata2-3, Fli1+12, and
Scl+19, that operates during specification of hematopoiesis in the mouse embryo. 
We show that the Fli1+12 enhancer, like the Gata2-3 and Scl+19 enhancers, targets
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and relies on a combination of Ets, Gata, and
E-Box motifs. We show that the Gata2-3 enhancer also uses a similar cluster of
motifs and that Gata2, Fli1, and Scl are expressed in embryonic day-11.5 dorsal
aorta where HSCs originate and in fetal liver where they multiply. The three HSC 
enhancers in these tissues and in ES cell-derived hemangioblast equivalents are
bound by each of these transcription factors (TFs) and form a fully connected
triad that constitutes a previously undescribed example of both this network
motif in mammalian development and a GRN kernel operating during the
specification of a mammalian stem cell.

PMCID: PMC2077040
PMID: 17962413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Surg Pathol. 2007 Oct;15(4):429-36.

Primitive small cell tumor with epithelial, gangliocytic, neuroendocrine, and
mesenchymal differentiation: report of 2 cases.

Michal M(1), Kazakov DV, Síma R, Vanecek T.

Author information: 
(1)Sikl's Department of Pathology, Charles University, Medical Faculty Hospital, 
Alej Svobody 80, 304 60 Pilsen, Czech Republic. michal@medima.cz

The authors describe 2 tumors that, to the best of their knowledge, are hitherto 
undescribed. The predominant cell type was small round to fusiform dark blue
cells. The dark blue cells formed distinct epithelial cords with gland-like
formations with mucicarmine-positive mucus. Another distinctive component of the 
tumors was a mesenchymal one. The mesenchymal areas appeared benign and could be 
likened to a fibroma having a densely collagenous stroma, or they had spindle
cells set in the myxoid background, rendering a myxoma-like appearance. Another
distinctive feature was ganglion cell differentiation. Mitotic figures, including
atypical forms, were found only in the small cell component. All cells were
immunohistochemically negative for actin, calponin, desmin, HMB45, neurofilament 
protein, CD99/MIC2, Melan A, tyrosinase, serotonin, CD56, Melan A, GFAP, and
S-100 protein. Cytokeratin, synaptophysin, FLI1 protein, and chromogranin
antibodies reacted only in the primitive small round cells, while all the other
components were cytokeratin negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization showed
that the tumors are without the EWSR1 gene translocation and gain 12p.
Ultrastructurally, the cells were endowed with well-formed intercellular
desmosomes membrane-bound secretory in the cytoplasm. Granules were found in the 
cytoplasm. We suggest the name "primitive small cell tumor with epithelial,
gangliocytic, neuroendocrine, and mesenchymal differentiation" for this neoplasm.

PMID: 17913955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 30;282(48):34672-83. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Transforming growth factor-beta regulates DNA binding activity of transcription
factor Fli1 by p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor-dependent acetylation.

Asano Y(1), Czuwara J, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Fli1, a member of Ets transcriptional factors, has been shown to be a negative
regulator of collagen gene expression in dermal fibroblasts. Although Fli1
down-regulation is implicated in pathological matrix remodeling such as cutaneous
fibrosis in scleroderma, very little is known about the post-translational
mechanisms regulating Fli1 function. The aim of this study was to investigate the
role of acetylation, one of the main post-translational regulatory mechanisms, in
regulating Fli1 activity. We initially demonstrated that Fli1 is acetylated by
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 in dermal fibroblasts. An in vivo
acetylation assay using 293T cells revealed that Fli1 is mainly acetylated by the
histone acetyltransferase activity of p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) at lysine
380. Acetylation of Fli1 resulted in a decreased stability of Fli1 protein. More 
importantly, reduced binding of acetylated Fli1 to the human alpha2(I) collagen
(COL1A2) promoter was observed in DNA affinity precipitation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Conversely, a Fli1 K380R mutant that is resistant to
acetylation by PCAF showed increased DNA binding ability. Furthermore, PCAF
overexpression reversed the inhibitory effect of Fli1 on TGF-beta1-mediated
COL1A2 promoter activity. In contrast, the Fli1 K380R mutant had a greater
inhibitory effect on TGF-beta1-induced COL1A2 promoter activity than wild-type
Fli1, and PCAF failed to reverse this effect. These results indicate that
PCAF-dependent acetylation of lysine 380 abrogates repressor function of Fli1
with respect to collagen gene expression. Furthermore, these data strongly
suggest that the TGF-beta-dependent acetylation of Fli1 may represent the
principal mechanism responsible for the TGF-beta-induced dissociation of Fli1
from the collagen promoter.

PMID: 17884818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(22):7918-34. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

EWS/FLI-1 induces rapid onset of myeloid/erythroid leukemia in mice.

Torchia EC(1), Boyd K, Rehg JE, Qu C, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Hartwell Center, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, 332 N. Lauderdale St., Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

EWS/FLI-1 is a chimeric oncogene generated by chromosomal translocation in Ewing 
tumors, a family of poorly differentiated pediatric tumors arising predominantly 
in bone but also in soft tissue. The fusion gene combines sequences encoding a
strong transactivating domain from the EWS protein with the DNA binding domain of
FLI-1, an ETS transcription factor. A related fusion, TLS/ERG, has been found in 
myeloid leukemia. To determine EWS/FLI-1 function in vivo, we engineered mice
with Cre-inducible expression of EWS/FLI-1 from the ubiquitous Rosa26 locus. When
crossed with Mx1-cre mice, Cre-mediated activation of EWS/FLI-1 resulted in the
rapid development of myeloid/erythroid leukemia characterized by expansion of
primitive mononuclear cells causing hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, severe anemia,
and death. The disease could be transplanted serially into naïve recipients. Gene
expression profiles of primary and transplanted animals were highly similar,
suggesting that activation of EWS/FLI-1 was the primary event leading to disease 
in this model. The Cre-inducible EWS/FLI-1 mouse provides a novel model system to
study the contribution of this oncogene to malignant disease in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2169157
PMID: 17875932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9 Suppl 2:S5.

Genetic factors in systemic sclerosis.

Mayes MD(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, University of Texas,
Houston Health Science Center, Fannin, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
maureen.d.mayes@uth.tmc.edu

A number of genetic loci have been identified that appear to be associated with
systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma). There is mounting evidence suggesting that
these genetic associations may in fact be associated with distinct phenotypes in 
SSc based on autoantibody pattern rather than with SSc as a single disease
entity. This may ultimately have implications for approaches to therapy as well
as responses to therapy. The most promising candidate genes are those involved in
pathways that lead to the vascular damage and fibrosis that are the hallmarks of 
this disease. There is uncertainty, however, regarding the nature of the key
pathological mechanisms that link these two disease processes. Recent studies
have focused on Fli1 (friend leukaemia integration 1), a transcription factor
that is found in immune cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells that regulates 
collagen gene function and angiogenesis. Fli1 is dysregulated in SSc skin and
dermal blood vessels, and appears to play a pathological role in SSc skin
fibrosis and vessel degeneration. Whether this dysregulation is due to genetic
polymorphisms in the Fli1 pathway or to epigenetic mechanisms is not clear.

PMCID: PMC2072883
PMID: 17767743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Oncol. 2007 Oct;31(4):803-11.

The mechanism of cross-resistance to proteasome inhibitor bortezomib and
overcoming resistance in Ewing's family tumor cells.

Nakamura T(1), Tanaka K, Matsunobu T, Okada T, Nakatani F, Sakimura R, Hanada M, 
Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Maidashi, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

EWS-Fli1 plays important roles in oncogenesis of Ewing's family tumors (EFTs). We
have reported that EWS-Fli1 inhibits p21(waf1/cip1) and p27(kip1) expressions,
which are degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Bortezomib efficiently
up-regulated p21(waf1/cip1) and p27(kip1) expression, and induced apoptosis
accompanied by the expression of cleaved-PARP, DR4 and activated caspase-8 in EFT
cells. Since most EFTs deaths result from the tumor being resistant to
chemotherapeutic drugs, the effects of novel anti-tumor reagents on
drug-resistant tumors were next investigated. The results demonstrated that the
drug-resistant EFT clones were cross-resistant to bortezomib probably due to the 
over-expression of the efflux pumps, P-glycoprotein and MRP1. We further
investigated whether the efflux pump inhibitors would modulate the effects of
bortezomib. The combination of P-gp-specific or MRP1-specific inhibitors could
enhance the anti-tumor effects of bortezomib on the drug-resistant clones. These 
data suggest that bortezomib might be a substrate of P-gp and MRP1. Although
bortezomib would be effective on the primary EFTs, it is necessary to pay
attention to the resistance to bortezomib in clinical trials for the advanced
cases. The combination of bortezomib and the efflux pump inhibitors might be a
promising method as a novel molecular target therapy for advanced EFTs.

PMID: 17786311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2007 Aug;29(8):561-5.

Periosteal Ewing sarcoma family of tumors of the femur confirmed by molecular
detection of EWS-FLI1 fusion gene transcripts: a case report and review of the
literature.

Hakozaki M(1), Hojo H, Tajino T, Yamada H, Kikuta A, Ito M, Sano H, Mochizuki K, 
Akaihata M, Kikuchi S, Abe M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) comprise common sarcomas in children and
young adults. Such tumors usually occur in the medullary cavity of long bones and
directly invade cortical bone and circumferential soft tissue, including
periosteum. Periosteal ESFT is extremely rare and only a small numbers of cases, 
including cases not confirmed by molecular detection of chimeric fusion gene,
have been reported. We describe herein a case of periosteal ESFT of the femur in 
a 13-year-old boy harboring EWS-FLI1 chimeric fusion gene transcripts detected by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis. This report may provide
an opportunity for further evaluation of the EWS-FLI1 type 1 fusion gene and
detection of prognostic significance in periosteal ESFT.

PMID: 17762498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Blood. 2007 Dec 1;110(12):3871-80. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Novel role for EKLF in megakaryocyte lineage commitment.

Frontelo P(1), Manwani D, Galdass M, Karsunky H, Lohmann F, Gallagher PG, Bieker 
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Megakaryocytes and erythroid cells are thought to derive from a common progenitor
during hematopoietic differentiation. Although a number of transcriptional
regulators are important for this process, they do not explain the bipotential
result. We now show by gain- and loss-of-function studies that erythroid
Krüppel-like factor (EKLF), a transcription factor whose role in erythroid gene
regulation is well established, plays an unexpected directive role in the
megakaryocyte lineage. EKLF inhibits the formation of megakaryocytes while at the
same time stimulating erythroid differentiation. Quantitative examination of
expression during hematopoiesis shows that, unlike genes whose presence is
required for establishment of both lineages, EKLF is uniquely down-regulated in
megakaryocytes after formation of the megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor.
Expression profiling and molecular analyses support these observations and
suggest that megakaryocytic inhibition is achieved, at least in part, by EKLF
repression of Fli-1 message levels.

PMCID: PMC2190608
PMID: 17715392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Oncogene. 2008 Feb 7;27(7):985-96. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

The sensitivity of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours to fenretinide-induced
cell death is increased by EWS-Fli1-dependent modulation of p38(MAPK) activity.

Myatt SS(1), Burchill SA.

Author information: 
(1)Candlelighter's Children's Cancer Research Laboratory, Cancer Research UK
Clinical Centre, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT) are small round cell tumours
characterized by the non-random EWS-ETS gene rearrangements. We have previously
demonstrated that ESFT are highly sensitive to fenretinide-induced death,
effected in part through a reactive oxygen species (ROS)-dependent pathway. Here,
we demonstrate for the first time that the sensitivity of ESFT cells to
fenretinide-induced cell death is decreased following downregulation of the
oncogenic fusion protein EWS-Fli1; siRNA targeting EWS-Fli1 attenuated
fenretinide-induced cell death in cell lines expressing EWS-Fli1, but not
EWS-ERG. This decrease in cell death was independent of the level of ROS produced
following exposure to fenretinide, but was effected through EWS-Fli1-dependent
modulation of p38(MAPK) activity. Furthermore, inhibition of p38(MAPK) activity
and knockdown of EWS-Fli1 reduced fenretinide-induced mitochondrial
permeabilization, cytochrome c release, caspase and PARP cleavage, consistent
with the hypothesis that p38(MAPK) is critical for activation of the death
cascade by fenretinide in ESFT cells. These data demonstrate that expression of
EWS-Fli1 enhances fenretinide-induced cell death in ESFT and that this is
effected at least in part through modulation of p38(MAPK) activity.

PMID: 17700534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):498-509. Epub 2007 Aug 9.

Undifferentiated small round cell sarcomas with rare EWS gene fusions:
identification of a novel EWS-SP3 fusion and of additional cases with the
EWS-ETV1 and EWS-FEV fusions.

Wang L(1), Bhargava R, Zheng T, Wexler L, Collins MH, Roulston D, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):437-40.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) are prototypical primitive small round blue cell
sarcomas arising in bone or extraskeletal soft tissues in children or
adolescents. EFTs show fusions of EWS with a gene of the ETS family of
transcription factors, either EWS-FLI1 (90 to 95%) or EWS-ERG (5 to 10%). Rare
cases with fusions of EWS to other ETS family genes, such as ETV1, E1AF, and FEV,
have been identified, but their clinicopathological similarity to classic EFTs
remains unclear. We report four new cases of EFT-like tumors with rare EWS
fusions, including two with EWS-ETV1, one with EWS-FEV, and a fourth case in
which we cloned a novel EWS-SP3 fusion, the first known cancer gene fusion
involving a gene of the Sp zinc finger family. Analysis of these three new cases 
along with data on nine previously reported cases with fusions of EWS to ETV1,
E1AF, or FEV suggest a strong predilection for extraskeletal primary sites.
EFT-like cases with fusions of EWS to non-ETS translocation partners are also
uncommon but involve the same amino-terminal portion of EWS, which in our novel
EWS-SP3 fusion is joined to the SP3 zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. As these data
further support, these types of EWS fusions are associated with primitive
extraskeletal small round cell sarcomas of uncertain lineage arising mainly in
the pediatric population.

PMCID: PMC1975108
PMID: 17690209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Aug 18;39(4):403-8.

[Comparison and analysis of different dendritic cell-based immunotherapeutic
strategies for Ewing sarcoma: in vitro and in vivo induction on SCID mouse
models].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao H(1), Tang S, Qu HY, Guo W, Li X, Peng CL.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Tumor Center, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing
100044, China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of different immunotherapeutic strategies of
loading dendritic cells (DCs) with the antigen of the Ewing sarcoma in vitro and 
in vivo.
METHODS: DCs were either electrofused with the whole Ewing sarcoma cells A673,
pulsed with lysates of the tumor cell or modified with the characteristic
EWS/FLI1 gene. Then we assessed the capacity of the stimulated cytoxicity T
lymphocyte (CTLs) by the parameter of the interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) secreted
and the cytotoxicity to the A673. In vivo experiment, the human IgG serum
concentrations of the SCID mice were measured to determine the mouse human immune
system reconstitution, and the growths of the inoculated tumor were measured to
assess the anti-tumor effect.
RESULTS: The data revealed that various DC-based strategies could induce specific
immune responses to the tumor, with the hybrids showing superiority to the other 
strategies while there were no significant differences between the sets of the
gene modified DCs and non-manipulated DCs in the cytotoxicity assay to A673
cells. Moreover, there were no significant differences among the sets of the gene
modified DCs, lysate pulsed DCs and non-manipulated in vivo anti-tumor effect
about the tumor volume on the SCID mice.
CONCLUSION: The Ewing sarcoma had good responses to the DC-based immunotherapy
and based on this experiment, we could also conclude that the product of
electrofusion may be an optimal strategy for immunotherapy of Ewing sarcoma.

PMID: 17657269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007 Oct;27(10):2135-41. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Ischemia is not required for arteriogenesis in zebrafish embryos.

Gray C(1), Packham IM, Wurmser F, Eastley NC, Hellewell PG, Ingham PW, Crossman
DC, Chico TJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, University of Sheffield,
UK.

OBJECTIVE: The role of ischemia in collateral vessel development (arteriogenesis)
is a contentious issue that cannot be addressed using mammalian models. To
investigate this, we developed models of arteriogenesis using the zebrafish
embryo, which gains sufficient oxygenation via diffusion to prevent ischemia in
response to arterial occlusion.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We studied gridlock mutant embryos that suffer a permanently
occluded aorta and show that these restore aortic blood flow by collateral
vessels. We phenocopied gridlock mutants by laser-induced proximal aortic
occlusion in transgenic Fli1:eGFP/GATA1:dsRED embryos. Serial imaging showed
these restore aortic blood flow via collateral vessels by recruitment of
preexisting endothelium in a manner similar to gridlocks. Collateral aortic blood
flow in gridlock mutants was dependent on both nitric oxide and myeloid cells.
Confocal microscopy of transgenic gridlock/Fli1:eGFP mutants demonstrated no
aberrant angiogenic response to the aortic occlusion. qPCR of HIF1alpha
expression confirmed the absence of hypoxia in this model system.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that NO and myeloid cell-dependent collateral vessel
development is an evolutionarily ancient response to arterial occlusion and is
able to proceed in the absence of ischemia.

PMCID: PMC2517163
PMID: 17656667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 15;67(14):6675-84.

EWS/FLI1 regulates tumor angiogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma via suppression of
thrombospondins.

Potikyan G(1), Savene RO, Gaulden JM, France KA, Zhou Z, Kleinerman ES, Lessnick 
SL, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of California-Los Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA.

Suppression of the expression of antiangiogenic factors has been closely
associated with multiple malignancies. Thrombospondins 1 and 2 are members of a
family of angiogenic inhibitors that are regulated by several oncogenes. In this 
study, we investigate the role of thrombospondins in Ewing's sarcoma and their
regulation by EWS/ETS fusion oncoproteins. We show that the EWS/FLI1 fusion
suppresses the expression of thrombospondins in both NIH3T3 fibroblasts and
Ewing's sarcoma tumor-derived cell lines. This regulation depends on an intact
EWS/FLI1 DNA-binding domain and may involve direct interactions between EWS/FLI1 
and thrombospondin promoter regions. Forced expression of thrombospondins in
Ewing's sarcoma cell lines inhibited the rate of tumor formation in vivo and
markedly decreased the number of microvessels present in the tumors. These
findings suggest that thrombospondins play a biologically significant role in
tumor vascularization in Ewing's sarcoma and suggest potential therapeutic
strategies for future therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 17638877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):459-63. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Ewing sarcoma with novel translocation t(2;16) producing an in-frame fusion of
FUS and FEV.

Ng TL(1), O'Sullivan MJ, Pallen CJ, Hayes M, Clarkson PW, Winstanley M, Sorensen 
PH, Nielsen TO, Horsman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia Cancer
Agency, 600 W. 10th Ave., Vancouver, BC, Canada, V5Z 4E6.

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Sep;9(4):437-40.

Ewing family tumors are molecularly characterized by expression of chimeric
transcripts generated by specific chromosomal translocations, most commonly
involving fusion of the EWS gene to a member of the ETS family of transcription
factors (including FLI1, ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Approximately 85% of reported
cases of Ewing sarcoma bear an EWS-FLI1 fusion. In rare cases, FUS can substitute
for EWS, with translocation t(16;21)(p11;q24) producing a FUS-ERG fusion with no 
EWS rearrangement. We report a case of Ewing sarcoma, presenting as a
pathological fracture of the distal clavicle in a 33-year-old male, in which
cytogenetic analysis revealed a single t(2;16)(q35;p11) balanced translocation.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization using a commercially available diagnostic
probe was negative for an EWS gene rearrangement; instead, break-apart
fluorescence in situ hybridization probes for FUS and FEV were positive for a
translocation involving these genes. Cloning and sequencing of the breakpoint
region demonstrated an in-frame fusion of FUS to FEV. In conclusion, this
represents the first reported case of Ewing family tumors demonstrating a variant
translocation involving FUS and FEV and highlights the need to consider
alternative permutations of fusion partners for molecular diagnosis of sarcomas.

PMCID: PMC1975098
PMID: 17620387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jan;45(1):1-12. Epub 2007 Jul 2.

Ets factors and a newly identified polymorphism regulate Fli1 promoter activity
in lymphocytes.

Nowling TK(1), Fulton JD, Chike-Harris K, Gilkeson GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Ste 912 CSB, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.
nowling@musc.edu

Fli1 is an Ets family member that is essential for embryonic development.
Increasing evidence suggests modulating Fli1 gene expression impacts lymphocyte
development/function and is an important mediator in the autoimmune disease
lupus. Fli1 is over-expressed in splenic lymphocytes in lupus prone mouse strains
and in PBMCs of lupus patients. Presently, it is unknown how Fli1 gene expression
is controlled in lymphocytes or how it becomes over-expressed in lupus.
Therefore, we examined Fli1 regulation in a murine B cell line and T cell line
and identified several cis-regulatory elements within a 230 bp region that
contribute to Fli1 promoter activity. Ets factors Elf1, Tel and Fli1 bind in
vitro to this region and increase endogenous Fli1 expression when over-expressed 
in a T cell line. In addition, we determined that a microsatellite located
adjacent to the region containing these cis-regulatory elements is polymorphic in
three lupus prone mouse strains and that the length of the microsatellite is
inversely correlated with promoter activity in a T cell line. These results
suggest that several Ets factors, including Fli1 itself, are involved in the
transcriptional regulation of Fli1 in lymphocytes. Furthermore, the presence of a
polymorphic microsatellite in the Fli1 promoter may contribute to increased Fli1 
expression in T cells during lupus disease progression.

PMCID: PMC2045641
PMID: 17606295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2007 Summer;16(2):84-8.

Ewing's sarcoma of the hip presenting as a benign cystic lesion.

Papagelopoulos PJ(1), Mavrogenis AF, Benetos IS, Papaparaskeva K, Galanis EC,
Soucacos PN.

Author information: 
(1)Athens University Medical School, Neo Psychikon, Athens, Greece. pjp@hol.gr

Comment in
    J Surg Orthop Adv. 2007 Winter;16(4):207; author reply 207.

A 14-year-old girl with a Ewing's sarcoma of the left femoral head and neck is
presented. The imaging features mimicked a benign cystic lesion. Biopsy and
molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis. The patient was treated with
chemotherapy, wide tumor resection, and proximal femoral reconstruction using an 
allograft-prosthesis composite. Differential diagnosis, imaging, and pathologic
features of Ewing's sarcoma are discussed.

PMID: 17592716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 6;7:62.

Generation of FGF reporter transgenic zebrafish and their utility in chemical
screens.

Molina GA(1), Watkins SC, Tsang M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh,
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. gam20@pitt.edu <gam20@pitt.edu>

BACKGROUND: Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs) represent a large family of secreted
proteins that are required for proper development and physiological processes.
Mutations in mouse and zebrafish FGFs result in abnormal embryogenesis and
lethality. A key to understanding the precise role for these factors is to
determine their spatial and temporal activity during embryogenesis.
RESULTS: Expression of Dual Specificity Phosphatase 6 (dusp6, also known as Mkp3)
is controlled by FGF signalling throughout development. The Dusp6 promoter was
isolated from zebrafish and used to drive expression of destabilized green
fluorescent protein (d2EGFP) in transgenic embryos (Tg(Dusp6:d2EGFP)). Expression
of d2EGFP is initiated as early as 4 hours post-fertilization (hpf) within the
future dorsal region of the embryo, where fgf3 and fgf8 are initially expressed. 
At later stages, d2EGFP is detected within structures that correlate with the
expression of Fgf ligands and their receptors. This includes the mid-hindbrain
boundary (MHB), pharyngeal endoderm, otic vesicle, hindbrain, and Kupffer's
vesicle. The expression of d2EGFP is under the control of FGF signalling as
treatment with FGF Receptor (FGFR) inhibitors results in the suppression of
d2EGFP expression. In a pilot screen of commercially available small molecules we
have evaluated the effectiveness of the transgenic lines to identify specific FGF
inhibitors within the class of indolinones. These compounds were counter screened
with the transgenic line Tg(Fli1:EGFP)y1, that serves as an indirect read-out for
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) signalling in order to determine the
specificity between related receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). From these assays
it is possible to determine the specificity of these indolinones towards specific
RTK signalling pathways. This has enabled the identification of compounds that
can block specifically the VEGFR or the FGFR signalling pathway.
CONCLUSION: The generation of transgenic reporter zebrafish lines has allowed
direct visualization of FGF signalling within the developing embryo. These FGF
reporter transgenic lines provide a tool to screen for specific compounds that
can distinguish between two conserved members of the RTK family.

PMCID: PMC1904198
PMID: 17553162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2007 Oct;133(10):749-59. Epub 2007 May 25.

Microsatellite instability in Ewing tumor is not associated with loss of mismatch
repair protein expression.

Alldinger I(1), Schaefer KL, Goedde D, Ottaviano L, Dirksen U, Ranft A, Juergens 
H, Gabbert HE, Knoefel WT, Poremba C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Pediatric Surgery,
Heinrich-Heine-University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Only few clinical factors predict the prognosis of patients with Ewing tumors.
Unfavorable outcome is associated with primary metastatic disease, age > 15
years, tumor volume above 200 ml, and the histological response to chemotherapy. 
The aim of this study was to elucidate the prevalence and clinical impact of
microsatellite instability (MSI) together with the relation between MSI and
mismatch repair protein expression in Ewing tumors. DNA from 61 primary Ewing
tumors and 11 Ewing tumor cell lines was extracted and microsatellite analysis
for the detection of instability or loss of heterozygosity was performed for the 
five markers of the Bethesda panel BAT25, BAT26, D5S346, D2S123, and D17S250,
which represents the established marker panel for the analysis of hereditary
non-polyposis colorectal carcinoma (HNPCC) patients. In addition, single
nucleotide repeat regions of the two tumor genes BAX and transforming growth
factor receptor II (TGFBR2) were also included. All of the 61 samples were
suitable for LOH analysis and 55 for the determination of MSI-status. LOH of
these microsatellite markers was detected in 9 of the 61 patients (14.8%). Over
all, genetic instability, i.e. MSI and/or LOH, was detected in 17 tumors (27.9%).
One out of the 11 tumor cell lines (STA ET1) was characterized by instability of 
all the five Bethesda markers, while from primary tumor samples, only one showed 
MSI in more than one microsatellite marker (D5S346 and D17S250, MSI-high). Eight 
of the fifty-five patients (14.5%) showed instability of one microsatellite locus
(MSI-low). No instability was detected in BAT26, D2S123, BAX and TGFBR2. There
was no significant correlation between MSI and loss of expression of mismatch
repair proteins MLH1, MSH2, or MSH6. The impairment of the p53 signaling pathway 
(expression of TP53 and/or MDM2 by immunohistochemistry) was significantly
associated with reduced overall survival (15 of 49 patients (30.6%), P = 0.0410, 
log-rank test). We conclude that MSI is not prevalent in Ewing tumor and that the
nature of instability differs from the form observed in colorectal carcinoma, the
model tumor of MSI. This is documented by the different pattern of MSI (no BAT26 
instability) in Ewing tumors and the lack of a strict correlation between
MSI-high and loss of expression of MSH2, MSH6 and MLH1.

PMID: 17530287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2007 Jun;16(2):108-11.

Primary Ewing sarcoma of the brain: a case report and literature review.

Kazmi SA(1), Perry A, Pressey JG, Wellons JC, Hammers Y, Palmer CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Ewing sarcoma, along with peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor, belongs to 
a tumor family that shares clinicopathologic and molecular genetic features,
including the characteristic chromosomal translocation that results in the fusion
of the EWS gene on 22q12 to either the FLI1 gene on 11q24 or other Ets family
transcription factor gene, such as the ERG gene on 21q22. In contrast, such
translocations are not found in central primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(cPNETs), such as medulloblastoma and supratentorial PNET. Ewing sarcoma has only
rarely been noted to primarily involve the central nervous system-extraosseous
Ewing sarcoma (CNS-EES). We report a case of a 7-year-old girl with an anterior
cranial fossa mass. Pathology showed a primitive small blue cell tumor with focal
Homer Wright rosette formation. The positive membranous immunostaining for CD99
and the EWS-FLI1 fusion demonstrated by fluorescence in situ hybridization
studies confirmed the diagnosis of CNS-EES. Although CNS-EES may look identical
to cPNETs, these tumors differ in histogenesis, molecular characteristics, and
clinical behavior. Demonstration of characteristic translocations by molecular
studies differentiates CNS-EES from cPNET and help clinicians make informed
decisions regarding therapy.

PMID: 17525681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 May 18;7:50.

The role of survivin in angiogenesis during zebrafish embryonic development.

Ma ACh(1), Lin R, Chan PK, Leung JC, Chan LY, Meng A, Verfaillie CM, Liang R,
Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
h0025231@hkusua.hku.hk <h0025231@hkusua.hku.hk>

BACKGROUND: Survivin is the smallest member of the inhibitor of apoptosis (IAP)
gene family. Recently, the zebrafish survivin-1 gene has been cloned, showing
remarkable sequence identity and similarity over the BIR domain compared with
human and mouse survivin gene. Here we investigated the role of survivin in
angiogenesis during zebrafish development. Morpholinos (MOs) targeting the 5'
untranslated region (UTR) (SurUTR) and sequences flanking the initiation codon
(SurATG) of zebrafish survivin-1 gene were injected into embryos at 1-4 cell
stage. Vasculature was examined by microangiography and GFP expression in
Tg(fli1:EGFP)y1 embryos.
RESULTS: In embryos co-injected with SurUTR and SurATG-MOs, vasculogenesis was
intact but angiogenesis was markedly perturbed, especially in the inter-segmental
vessels (ISV) and dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessels (DLAV) of the trunk,
the inner optic circle and optic veins of developing eyes and the sub-intestinal 
vessels. Apoptosis was increased, as shown by TUNEL staining and increase in
caspase-3 activity. Efficacy of SurUTR and SurATG-MOs was demonstrated by
translation inhibition of co-injected 5'UTR survivin:GFP plasmids. The phenotypes
could be recapitulated by splice-site MO targeting the exon2-intron junction of
survivin gene and rescued by survivin mRNA. Injection of human vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) protein induced ectopic angiogenesis and
increased survivin expression, whereas treatment with a VEGF receptor inhibitor
markedly reduced angiogenesis and suppressed survivin expression.
CONCLUSION: Survivin is involved in angiogenesis during zebrafish development and
may be under VEGF regulation.

PMCID: PMC1884147
PMID: 17511868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Transfus Clin Biol. 2007 May;14(1):35-40. Epub 2007 May 17.

[Murine models of platelet diseases].

[Article in French]

Lanza F(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U.311, EFS Alsace, 10 rue Spielmann, 67065 Strasbourg, France.
francois.lanza@efs-alsace.fr

Platelet-related diseases correspond to functional defects or abnormal production
(thrombopoiesis) of hereditary and immunological origins. Recent progress in the 
manipulation of the mouse genome (transgenesis, gene inactivation or insertion)
has resulted in the generation of numerous strains exhibiting defective platelet 
function or production. Some strains reproduce known hereditary diseases
affecting haemostasis (Glanzmann thrombasthenia, Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS)
or thrombopoiesis (Wiscott-Aldrich or May-Hegglin syndrome). More often the
mutated strains have no human equivalent and represent useful models to study:
(i) the role of adhesive or signalling receptors or of signalling proteins in
platelet-dependent haemostasis and thrombosis or; (ii) to study the poorly
characterized mechanisms of thrombopoiesis, which implicate transcription factors
(GATA, Fli1), growth factors and receptors (TPO, cMPL), and cytoskeletal or
contractile proteins (tubulin, myosin). Additional mouse strains result from the 
selection of spontaneous mutants many of which affect intracellular platelet
granules, representing models of storage pool diseases (SPD) such as the Gray
platelet syndrome (alphaSPD) or Hermansky-Pudlack syndrome (deltaSPD). More
recently, a systematic chemical mutagenesis approach has also identified genes
involved in thrombopoiesis and platelet survival. Finally, mouse models of auto- 
or allo-immune thrombocytopenia have been developed to study the mechanisms of
platelet destruction or removal.

PMID: 17500022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cancer. 2007 Jun 25;111(3):192-9.

Cytologic diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor with paired
prospective molecular genetic analysis.

Sanati S(1), Lu DW, Schmidt E, Perry A, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Barnes-Jewish and Saint
Louis Children's Hospitals, Washington University Medical Center, St Louis, MO
63110-1093, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET), since its 
characterization immunophenotypically and cytogenetically, has emerged as one of 
most common sarcomas of childhood. Currently, it is recognized that EWS/PNET can 
occur in any number of extraosseous sites and is one of several distinctive tumor
types with an EWS translocation. In the past, the pathologic diagnosis of
EWS/PNET relied on an open biopsy with the application of various ancillary
studies, ranging from periodic acid-Schiff stain to molecular testing, but the
tumor increasingly is diagnosed on the basis of cytologic specimens alone.
METHODS: The authors report 3 cases of EWS/PNET in patients aged 11 years to 53
years. These 3 patients had tumors that involved the parotid gland, cervical soft
tissue, and pelvis, and were diagnosed by cytologic evaluation of fine-needle
aspiration (FNA) biopsy material alone. The FNA materials also were evaluated
prospectively by fluorescence in situ hybridization and/or reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The results emphasized the diagnostic utility of FNA biopsy material for
morphologic and molecular analysis without compromising conventional cytologic
and immunocytochemical analysis, and that prospective molecular testing of FNA
specimens has utility in routine practice although it is subject to many of the
same limitations that impact molecular analysis when applied to conventional
tissue biopsy specimens.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results demonstrated that molecular genetic techniques
can provide clinically useful ancillary information for FNA specimens when
cytologic features and/or immunophenotype are equivocal on the basis of limited
sampling or secondary changes, such as hemorrhage and/or necrosis.

PMID: 17487851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Cell. 2007 May;11(5):421-9.

Mesenchymal stem cell features of Ewing tumors.

Tirode F(1), Laud-Duval K, Prieur A, Delorme B, Charbord P, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris cedex 05, France.

The cellular origin of Ewing tumor (ET), a tumor of bone or soft tissues
characterized by specific fusions between EWS and ETS genes, is highly debated.
Through gene expression analysis comparing ETs with a variety of normal tissues, 
we show that the profiles of different EWS-FLI1-silenced Ewing cell lines
converge toward that of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Moreover, upon EWS-FLI1
silencing, two different Ewing cell lines can differentiate along the adipogenic 
lineage when incubated in appropriate differentiation cocktails. In addition,
Ewing cells can also differentiate along the osteogenic lineage upon long-term
inhibition of EWS-FLI1. These in silico and experimental data strongly suggest
that the inhibition of EWS-FLI1 may allow Ewing cells to recover the phenotype of
their MSC progenitor.

PMID: 17482132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Sep;85(9):1015-29. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

EWS/FLI-1 oncoprotein subtypes impose different requirements for transformation
and metastatic activity in a murine model.

González I(1), Vicent S, de Alava E, Lecanda F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Adhesion and Metastasis Laboratory, Center for Applied
Medical Research (CIMA), University of Navarra, Pamplona, 31080, Navarra, Spain.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (EWS/PNET) are characterized by
specific chromosomal translocations most often generating a chimeric EWS/FLI-1
gene. Depending on the number of juxtaposed exons assembled, several fusion types
have been described with different incidences and prognoses. To assess the impact
of each fusion type on the specific phenotypic, tumorigenic, and metastatic
features of EWS/PNET, we developed an amenable system using a murine mesenchymal 
multipotent C3H10T1/2 cell line. Upon transduction of EWS/FLI-1, cells acquired
dramatic morphological changes in vitro, including a smaller size and
"neurite-like" membrane elongations. Chimeric fusion proteins conferred oncogenic
properties in vitro, including anchorage-independent growth and an increased rate
of proliferation. Furthermore, EWS/FLI-1 expression blocked mineralization, with 
concomitant repression of osteoblastic genes, and induced a dramatic repression
of the adipocytic differentiation program. Moreover, EWS/FLI-1 promoted an
aberrant neural phenotype by the de novo expression of specific neural genes. The
intramuscular injection of transduced cells led to tumor development and the
induction of overt osteolytic lesions. Analogously, to what was observed in human
tumors, type 2 EWS/FLI-1 cells formed primary tumors in immunodeficient mice with
a higher incidence and a lower latency than cells bearing types 1 and 3 fusions. 
By contrast, cells expressing types 2 and 3 fusions showed specific metastatic
activity with a higher number of macroscopic metastases in soft tissues and
osteolytic lesions in the limbs as compared to type-1-expressing cells.
Therefore, the structure of each oncoprotein strongly influenced its
tumorigenicity and metastagenicity. Thus, this model provides a basis for
understanding the genetic determinants involved in Ewing tumor development and
metastatic activity and represents a cellular system to analyze other
oncoproteins involved in human sarcomagenesis.

PMID: 17453169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 15;13(8):2429-40.

Cholecystokinin down-regulation by RNA interference impairs Ewing tumor growth.

Carrillo J(1), García-Aragoncillo E, Azorín D, Agra N, Sastre A, González-Mediero
I, García-Miguel P, Pestaña A, Gallego S, Segura D, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Patología Molecular de Tumores Sólidos Infantiles, Departamento
de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas A. Sols (CSIC-UAM), Spain.

PURPOSE: Tumors of the Ewing family are characterized by chromosomal
translocations that yield chimeric transcription factors, such as EWS/FLI1, which
regulate the expression of specific genes that contribute to the malignant
phenotype. In the present study, we show that cholecystokinin (CCK) is a new
target of the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and assess its functional role in Ewing tumor 
pathogenesis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Relevant EWS/FLI1 targets were identified using a
combination of cell systems with inducible EWS/FLI1 expression, Ewing tumors and 
cell lines, microarrays, and RNA interference with doxycycline-inducible small
hairpin RNA (shRNA) vectors. A doxycycline-inducible CCK-shRNA vector was stably 
transfected in A673 and SK-PN-DW Ewing cell lines to assess the role of CCK in
cell proliferation and tumor growth.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed that CCK was up-regulated by EWS/FLI1 in
HeLa cells. CCK was overexpressed in Ewing tumors as compared with other
pediatric malignancies such as rhabdomyosarcoma and neuroblastoma, with levels
close to those detected in normal tissues expressing the highest levels of CCK.
Furthermore, EWS/FLI1 knockdown in A673 and SK-PN-DW Ewing cells using two
different doxycycline-inducible EWS/FLI1-specific shRNA vectors down-regulated
CCK mRNA expression and diminished the levels of secreted CCK, showing that CCK
is a EWS/FLI1 specific target gene in Ewing cells. A doxycycline-inducible
CCK-specific shRNA vector successfully down-regulated CCK expression, reduced the
levels of secreted CCK in Ewing cell lines, and inhibited cell growth and
proliferation in vitro and in vivo. Finally, we show that Ewing cell lines and
tumors express CCK receptors and that the growth inhibition produced by CCK
silencing can be rescued by culturing the cells with medium containing CCK.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the hypothesis that CCK acts as an autocrine growth
factor stimulating the proliferation of Ewing cells and suggest that therapies
targeting CCK could be promising in the treatment of Ewing tumors.

PMID: 17438102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Res. 2007 Apr;17(4):286-8.

Ewings family oncoproteins: drunk, disorderly and in search of partners.

Lee KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Kowloon, Hong Kong, SAR China. bokaw@ust.hk

PMID: 17426699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e122.

Signature-based small molecule screening identifies cytosine arabinoside as an
EWS/FLI modulator in Ewing sarcoma.

Stegmaier K(1), Wong JS, Ross KN, Chow KT, Peck D, Wright RD, Lessnick SL, Kung
AL, Golub TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children's 
Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: The presence of tumor-specific mutations in the cancer genome
represents a potential opportunity for pharmacologic intervention to therapeutic 
benefit. Unfortunately, many classes of oncoproteins (e.g., transcription
factors) are not amenable to conventional small-molecule screening. Despite the
identification of tumor-specific somatic mutations, most cancer therapy still
utilizes nonspecific, cytotoxic drugs. One illustrative example is the treatment 
of Ewing sarcoma. Although the EWS/FLI oncoprotein, present in the vast majority 
of Ewing tumors, was characterized over ten years ago, it has never been
exploited as a target of therapy. Previously, this target has been intractable to
modulation with traditional small-molecule library screening approaches. Here we 
describe a gene expression-based approach to identify compounds that induce a
signature of EWS/FLI attenuation. We hypothesize that screening small-molecule
libraries highly enriched for FDA-approved drugs will provide a more rapid path
to clinical application.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A gene expression signature for the EWS/FLI off state was
determined with microarray expression profiling of Ewing sarcoma cell lines with 
EWS/FLI-directed RNA interference. A small-molecule library enriched for
FDA-approved drugs was screened with a high-throughput, ligation-mediated
amplification assay with a fluorescent, bead-based detection. Screening
identified cytosine arabinoside (ARA-C) as a modulator of EWS/FLI. ARA-C reduced 
EWS/FLI protein abundance and accordingly diminished cell viability and
transformation and abrogated tumor growth in a xenograft model. Given the poor
outcomes of many patients with Ewing sarcoma and the well-established ARA-C
safety profile, clinical trials testing ARA-C are warranted.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that a gene expression-based approach to
small-molecule library screening can identify, for rapid clinical testing,
candidate drugs that modulate previously intractable targets. Furthermore, this
is a generic approach that can, in principle, be applied to the identification of
modulators of any tumor-associated oncoprotein in the rare pediatric
malignancies, but also in the more common adult cancers.

PMCID: PMC1851624
PMID: 17425403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Clin Transl Oncol. 2007 Mar;9(3):130-44.

Molecular pathology in sarcomas.

de Alava E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer-IBMCC,
Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain. edealava@usal.es

Bone and soft tissue sarcomas are an infrequent group of tumours. Their
prevalence is 4 in 100,000 people/year, making the disease quite rare. Some of
these tumours, such as synovial sarcoma, Ewing tumour and osteosarcoma, are more 
usual in adolescents or in young adults; there are, though, some neoplasias such 
as leiomyosarcoma or liposarcoma that are more frequent in patients over 55
years. There are more than a hundred different types of sarcomas from the
histological point of view. This is the main limitation at the time of finding
major clinic essays on patients with specific types of sarcomas. From the
molecular point of view, these neoplasias are grouped into two main types: (a)
sarcomas showing specific genetic alterations and relatively simple karyotypes,
and translocations which originate gene fusions (e.g., EWS-FLI1 in Ewing tumour);
or specific genetic mutations (e.g., c-kit in the gastrointestinal stromal
tumour), and (b) sarcomas showing unspecific gene alterations and very complex
karyotypes, and very numerous gains and losses. This review describes diverse
types of molecular alterations as well, their utility in the clinical domain, as 
well as implications for the pathologist in translational research in sarcomas.

PMID: 17403624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Leuk Res. 2007 Nov;31(11):1537-43. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Segregation of megakaryocytic or erythroid cells from a megakaryocytic leukemia
cell line (JAS-R) by adhesion during culture.

Yamada H(1), Sekikawa T, Iwase S, Arakawa Y, Suzuki H, Agawa M, Akiyama M, Takeda
N, Horiguchi-Yamada J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of DNA Medicine, The Jikei
University, School of Medicine, 3-25-8 Nishi-Shinbashi, Tokyo, Japan.
hyamad@jikei.ac.jp

Adhesion is one of the important biologic characteristics of leukemic cells. We
previously reported a new megakaryocytic-erythroid cell line, JAS-R. In this
study, JAS-R cells were segregated into two types by the differences of
attachment to culture dishes. One type (designated as JAS-RAD cells) adhered to
the substratum of the culture dishes, while the other (JAS-REN cells) grew as a
single-cell suspension. Adhesion of JAS-RAD was inhibited by treatment with RGDS 
oligopeptide. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that JAS-RAD cells had high
expression of CD41a and CD61 versus low CD235a expression, and JAS-REN showed low
expression of CD41a, and CD61, and high CD235a. The two phenotypes were
reciprocally exchangeable by selecting adherent or suspended cells from each type
of culture. Microarray analysis and RT-PCR revealed that JAS-RAD cells expressed 
four major alpha-granule genes and JAS-REN cells expressed beta-globin.
Interestingly, erythropoietin was only secreted by JAS-RAD cells. With regard to 
transcription factors, it was shown that GFI1, FLI1 and RUNX1 were strongly
expressed in JAS-RAD cells while GATA1, FOG1 and NFE2 were equally expressed by
both types. These findings indicate that adhesion via integrins is related to the
phenotypic shift of JAS-R cells between megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages.

PMID: 17383723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2007 May;39(10):589-94. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

Ewing Sarcoma tumor cells express CD34: implications for autologous stem cell
transplantation.

Yaniv I(1), Stein J, Luria D, Cohen IJ, Liberzon E, Manor S, Grunshpan A,
Sverdlov Y, Kodman Y, Issakov J, Feinmesser M, Zaizov R, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, 
Petah Tikva 49202, Israel.

The significance of tumor cell contamination in marrow and peripheral blood stem 
cell (PBSC) collections of patients with solid tumors remains controversial.
Various methods have been developed to purge tumor cells from autologous stem
cell products, including CD34+ selection. PBSC harvests from patients with Ewing 
family of tumors (EFT) were analyzed for contaminating tumor cells prior and
after CD34+ selection using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and flow cytometry (FC) analyzes. The expression of CD34 was studied by 
RT-PCR and FC in 14 primary tumors and 13 PBSC harvests, respectively. Tumor
cells were identified in the harvests by both methods. In two patients,
contaminating tumor cells were evident by RT-PCR only after positive selection.
FC analysis confirmed a higher level of tumor cells in the CD34+ fraction. In an 
attempt to explore this finding, expression of CD34 was detected in 93% of
primary tumors and 67% of contaminated harvests. As CD34 is expressed on EFT
cells, these cells may be enriched following CD34+ selection of harvests,
although the total number of tumor cells is reduced. Other methods of purging,
rather than CD34+ selection, should be explored in patients with EFT undergoing
autologous stem cell transplantation.

PMID: 17369866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Dev Biol. 2007 May 1;305(1):40-51. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Transcription factor ERG and joint and articular cartilage formation during mouse
limb and spine skeletogenesis.

Iwamoto M(1), Tamamura Y, Koyama E, Komori T, Takeshita N, Williams JA, Nakamura 
T, Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Pacifici M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. masahiro.iwamoto@jefferson.edu

Articular cartilage and synovial joints are critical for skeletal function, but
the mechanisms regulating their development are largely unknown. In previous
studies we found that the ets transcription factor ERG and its
alternatively-spliced variant C-1-1 have roles in joint formation in chick. Here,
we extended our studies to mouse. We found that ERG is also expressed in
developing mouse limb joints. To test regulation of ERG expression, beads coated 
with the joint master regulator protein GDF-5 were implanted close to incipient
joints in mouse limb explants; this led to rapid and strong ectopic ERG
expression. We cloned and characterized several mammalian ERG variants and
expressed a human C-1-1 counterpart (hERG3Delta81) throughout the cartilaginous
skeleton of transgenic mice, using Col2a1 gene promoter/enhancer sequences. The
skeletal phenotype was severe and neonatal lethal, and the transgenic mice were
smaller than wild type littermates and their skeletons were largely
cartilaginous. Limb long bone anlagen were entirely composed of chondrocytes
actively expressing collagen IX and aggrecan as well as articular markers such as
tenascin-C. Typical growth plates were absent and there was very low expression
of maturation and hypertrophy markers, including Indian hedgehog, collagen X and 
MMP-13. The results suggest that ERG is part of molecular mechanisms leading
chondrocytes into a permanent developmental path and become joint forming cells, 
and may do so by acting downstream of GDF-5.

PMCID: PMC2104487
PMID: 17336282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mod Pathol. 2007 Mar;20(3):397-404.

Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other round blue cell tumors using a RT-PCR 
translocation panel on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues.

Lewis TB(1), Coffin CM, Bernard PS.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development, The ARUP Institute for Clinical and Experimental
Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is a common malignancy of bone and soft tissue that occurs most
often in children and young adults. Differentiating Ewing's sarcoma from other
round blue cell tumors can be a diagnostic challenge because of their similarity 
in histology and clinical presentation. Thus, ancillary molecular tests for
detecting disease-defining translocations are important for confirming the
diagnosis. We analyzed 65 round blue cell tumors, including 53 Ewing's sarcoma
samples from 50 unique cases. Samples were processed for RNA from archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Real-time RT-PCR assays specific 
for Ewing's sarcoma (EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, EWS-ETV1, EWS-ETV4, and EWS-FEV),
synovial sarcoma (SYT-SSX1 and SYT-SSX2), and rhabdomyosarcoma (PAX3-FKHR and
PAX7-FKHR) were tested across the samples. The translocation panel had a
sensitivity of 81% (43 out of 53 samples) for diagnosing Ewing's sarcoma when
using the histological criteria as the 'gold' standard. None of the Ewing's
specific translocations were found in the non-Ewing's samples (100% specificity).
Of the 43 samples with translocations detected, 26 (60%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 1
translocation, 13 (30%) had an EWS-FLI1 type 2 translocation, 3 (7%) had an
EWS-ERG translocation, 1 had an EWS-ETV1 translocation, and 1 sample had both an 
EWS-FLI1 type 1 and type 2 translocation. Our real-time RT-PCR assay for
detecting sarcoma translocations has high sensitivity and specificity for Ewing's
sarcoma and has clinical utility in differentiating small round blue cell tumors 
in the clinical lab.

PMID: 17334332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Exp Hematol. 2007 Mar;35(3):368-73.

The role of phospholipase C gamma 1 in primitive hematopoiesis during zebrafish
development.

Ma AC(1), Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVES: Phospholipase C (PLC) gamma 1 has been shown to mediate signal
transduction of tyrosine kinases and affect function of hematopoietic cells.
However, its role in hematopoiesis during embryonic development is currently
unclear. In this study, we examined this issue using morpholino (MO) gene
knockdown in zebrafish embryos
METHODS: MO targeting at the exon-1-intron-1 junction of zebrafish PLC-gamma1 was
injected into embryos at the one- to four-cell stage (referred herein
zPLC-gamma1(MO) embryos). Primitive hematopoiesis was examined quantitatively by 
flow cytometry in Tg(gata1:GFP) embryos and by real-time quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction at 18 hours-post-fertilization (hpf), before the onset of
circulation. The embryos were also treated with receptor inhibitors of vascular
endothelial growth factor, fibroblast growth factor, and platelet-derived growth 
factor at 25, 1, and 30 micromol/L, respectively, from one cell until 48 hpf.
RESULTS: Erythropoiesis was reduced in zPLC-gamma1(MO) embryos, as shown by the
reduction in gata1(+) cells (wild-type: 4.32% +/- 0.10% vs zPLC-gamma1(MO): 2.38%
+/- 0.11%, p = 0.021) and gata1 and alpha-embryonic hemoglobin expression [0.47
+/- 0.06-fold (p = 0.013) and 0.46 +/- 0.04-fold (p = 0.013)]. Expression of scl,
lmo-2 (early hematopoietic progenitors), pu.1, and l-plastin (myelomonocytic
lineages) as well as fli1 (vascular progenitors) were unaffected. Fli1(+) cells
in Tg(fli1:GFP) embryos were also unaffected by zPLC-gamma1(MO). When embryos
were incubated with receptor inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGFRTKI), fibroblast growth factor (SU5402), or platelet-derived growth factor 
(AG1296), only VEGFRTKI reduced erythropoiesis [VEGFRTKI: 2.10% +/- 0.07% (p =
0.021) vs SU5402: 4.08% +/- 0.12% (p = 0.248) vs AG1296: 4.12% +/- 0.14% (p =
0.149)].
CONCLUSION: PLC-gamma1 is involved in the regulation of primitive hematopoiesis
in zebrafish embryos, which is distinct from its later effect on vascular
formation.

PMID: 17309817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2007 Feb;37(2):79-89. Epub 2007 Feb 1.

Diagnosis and treatment of Ewing's sarcoma.

Iwamoto Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan. yiwamoto@ortho.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Ewing's sarcoma is a small round-cell tumor typically arising in the bones,
rarely in soft tissues, of children and adolescents. Ewing's sarcoma has retained
the most unfavorable prognosis of all primary musculoskeletal tumors. Prior to
the use of multi-drug chemotherapy, long-term survival was less than 10%. The
development of multi-disciplinary therapy with chemotherapy, irradiation, and
surgery has increased current long-term survival rates in most clinical centers
to greater than 50%. In addition, the preferred method of tumor resection has
changed; limb salvage has nearly replaced amputation of the affected limb. Limb
salvage procedures can be performed in place of amputation without compromising
patient survival rates. Recent studies have revealed that the pathognomonic
translocations involving the EWS gene on chromosome 22 and an ETS-type gene,
which is most commonly the Fli1 gene on chromosome 11, are implicated in more
than 95% of Ewing's sarcomas, primitive neuroectodermal tumors and Askin's
tumors. Therefore, these lesions have become regarded as a single entity, dubbed 
the Ewing's family of tumors. RT-PCR to detect EWS-ETS gene arrangements is
widely used to confirm the diagnosis of Ewing's family of tumors. Experimental
results suggest that inhibition of the signaling pathway downstream of the
EWS-ETS gene may lead to the development of molecularly targeted therapy in the
future.

PMID: 17272319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cancer Lett. 2007 Aug 28;254(1):1-10. Epub 2007 Jan 23.

The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Sarcomas account for less than 10% of all human malignancies that are believed to
originate from as yet poorly defined mesenchymal progenitor cells. They
constitute some of the most aggressive adult and childhood cancers in that they
have a high metastatic proclivity and are typically refractory to conventional
chemo- and radiation therapy. Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family
tumors (ESFT) and the second most common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy of
children and young adults. It is associated in 85% of cases with the
t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation that generates fusion of the 5'
segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of the ETS family gene FLI-1. The
resulting EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is believed to behave as an aberrant
transcriptional activator that contributes to ESFT development by altering the
expression of its target genes in a permissive cellular environment. Although
ESFTs are among the best studied sarcomas, the mechanisms involved in
EWS-FLI-1-induced transformation require further elucidation and the primary
cells from which ESFTs originate need to be identified. This review will
highlight some of the most recent discoveries in the field of Ewing sarcoma
biology and origins.

PMID: 17250957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 9;104(2):479-84. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Multiple aromatic side chains within a disordered structure are critical for
transcription and transforming activity of EWS family oncoproteins.

Ng KP(1), Potikyan G, Savene RO, Denny CT, Uversky VN, Lee KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear
Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, S.A.R. China.

Chromosomal translocations involving the N-terminal approximately 250 residues of
the Ewings sarcoma (EWS) oncogene produce a group of EWS fusion proteins (EFPs)
that cause several distinct human cancers. EFPs are potent transcriptional
activators and interact with other proteins required for mRNA biogenesis,
indicating that EFPs induce tumorigenesis by perturbing gene expression. Although
EFPs were discovered more than a decade ago, molecular analysis has been greatly 
hindered by the repetitive EWS activation domain (EAD) structure, containing
multiple degenerate hexapeptide repeats (consensus SYGQQS) with a conserved
tyrosine residue. By exploiting total gene synthesis, we have been able to
systematically mutagenize the EAD and determine the effect on transcriptional
activation by EWS/ATF1 and cellular transformation by EWS/Fli1. In both assays,
we find the following requirements for EAD function. First, multiple tyrosine
residues are essential. Second, phenylalanine can effectively substitute for
tyrosine, showing that an aromatic ring can confer EAD function in the absence of
tyrosine phosphorylation. Third, there is little requirement for specific peptide
sequences and, thus, overall sequence composition (and not the degenerate
hexapeptide repeat) confers EAD activity. Consistent with the above findings, we 
also report that the EAD is intrinsically disordered. However, a sensitive
computational predictor of natural protein disorder (PONDR VL3) identifies
potential molecular recognition features that are tyrosine-dependent and that
correlate well with EAD function. In summary we have uncovered several molecular 
features of the EAD that will impact future studies of the broader EFP family and
molecular recognition by complex intrinsically disordered proteins.

PMCID: PMC1766410
PMID: 17202261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Exp Hematol. 2007 Jan;35(1):96-107.

Stem cell continuum: directed differentiation hotspots.

Colvin GA(1), Dooner MS, Dooner GJ, Sanchez-Guijo FM, Demers DA, Abedi M,
Ramanathan M, Chung S, Pascual S, Quesenberry PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Roger Williams Medical Center, Providence, RI
02908-4735, USA. gcolvin@rwmc.org

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the technique of stem
cell-directed differentiation in the context of cell-cycle position. The
hypothesis was that stem cells would have different sensitivities to an identical
inductive signal through cell-cycle transit and that this would affect the
outcome of its progeny.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Differentiation of murine marrow
lineage(negative)rhodamine-123(low-)Hoechst-33342(low) (LRH) stem cells was
determined at different points in cell cycle under stimulation by thrombopoietin,
flt3 ligand, and steel factor. LRH stem cells were subcultured in granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and 
steel factor at different points in cell cycle and differentiation determined 14 
days later.
RESULTS: There was a significant, reproducible, and pronounced reversible
increase in differentiation to megakaryocytes in early S-phase and to
nonproliferative granulocytes in mid S-phase. Megakaryocyte hotspots also were
seen on a clonal basis. Elevations of the transcription factor FOG-1 were seen at
the hotspot along with increases in Nfe2 and Fli1.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that the potential of marrow stem cells to differentiate
changes reversibly with cytokine-induced cell-cycle transit, suggesting that stem
cell regulation is not based on the classic hierarchical model, but instead on a 
functional continuum. We propose that there is a tight linkage of commitment to a
lineage and a particular phase of cell cycle. Thus, windows of vulnerability for 
commitment can open and close depending on the phase of cell cycle. These data
indicate that stem cell differentiation occurs on a cell-cycle-related continuum 
with fluctuating windows of transcriptional opportunity.

PMID: 17198878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Med Mol Morphol. 2006 Dec;39(4):221-5. Epub 2006 Dec 21.

Askin tumor with metastasis to the scalp: a histochemical, immunohistochemical
and ultrastructural study.

Kuroda N(1), Takahashi T, Moriki T, Okanoue Y, Mizobuchi H, Miyazaki E, Hayashi
Y, Lee GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Kochi Red Cross Hospital,
2-13-51 Shin-honmachi, Kochi City, Kochi, 780-8562, Japan.

A 29-year-old woman presented with facial edema, and imaging disclosed a tumor
extending from the anterior chest wall to the anterosuperior aspect of the
mediastinum. Transbronchial cytology of the primary tumor and biopsy of the
metastatic scalp lesion were performed. Histologically, the tumor consisted of
closely packed small round cells. The neoplastic cells generally had round
nuclei, finely dispersed chromatin, and small to prominent nucleoli.
Histochemically, the cytoplasm of the neoplastic cells contained abundant
glycogen and stained with Grimelius silver. Immunohistochemically, the neoplastic
cell membranes reacted with CD99 (MIC2) and the neoplastic nuclei reacted with
Fli-1, but various other markers, including lymphocyte and skeletal muscle
markers, were not detected. No neoplastic cells were also reactive for
chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and neurofilament. Ultrastructurally, some
neoplastic cells had delicate cytoplasmic processes and contained membrane-bound 
dense core granules in the cytoplasm. Even if results are immunohistochemically
negative for neuroendocrine markers, the combination of immunohistochemistry of
CD99 (MIC2) and Fil-1 may be useful in diagnosing Askin tumor or its metastatic
lesion.

PMID: 17187186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Dec 18;38(6):623-7.

[Construction of recombinant adenoviral vector containing gene of EWS-FLI1 and
antitumor immunity of its modified dentritic cell in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Qu HY(1), Guo W, He XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Soft Tissue and Bone Tumor Therapeutic Center, Peking University People's
Hospital, Bejjing, China. wwwqhy@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To construct an adenoviral vector containing cDNA of EWS-FLI1 and
detect its expression in peripheral blood mononeuclear cell(PBMC). To Investigate
the antitumor immunity in vitro of the EWS-FLI1 gene modified-dendritic cells.
METHODS: The EWS-FLI1 cDNA in plasmid Pec1/ EWS-FLI1 was digested and subcloned
into the shuttle plasimid padtrack-cmv. The shuttle plasmid and the bone plasmid 
pADeasy-1 were cotransformed into BJ5183 cells. The recombinant plasmid was
generated by homologous recombination in BJ5183 cells. The positive clone was
obtained by digestion and electrophoresis. Transforming the recombinant plasmid
into "293 cells" by lipofectamine method. Adenoviruses with high titer and purity
were obtained by amplifying in the"293 cells" on a large scale and
ultra-centrifugation in CsCL step gradient solutions. The cytotoxic activity of
stimulated T cells to Ewing sarcoma cells was detected by (51)Cr release assay.
RESULTS: PCR showed that the adenovirus contained EWS-FLI1 cDNA. After the PBMC
were transfected by Ad EWS-FLI1, the EWS-FLI1 mRNA was detected by RT-PCR. The
antigen-specific CTL was induced successfully by the EWS-FLI1 gene modified-DC.
The vigorous antigen-specific CTL response against A673 cells was detected by
(51)Cr release assay. The killing percentage was 35.18%+/-0.0128% at
effector-target ratio 40:1, which was more efficient than that of the control.
CONCLUSION: The recombinant adenovirus was successfully constructed and could
efficient express EWS-FLI1 in PBMC. After T lymphocytes were stimulated by DCs
modified with EWS-FLI1 gene, the specific CTL response against Ewing's sarcoma
cell line A 673 in vitro was observed successfully. (51)Cr release assay showed
that there was significant difference between the experimental group and the
control group.

PMID: 17173084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Histopathology. 2006 Dec;49(6):569-75.

Diagnostic utility of FLI-1 monoclonal antibody and dual-colour, break-apart
probe fluorescence in situ (FISH) analysis in Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumour (EWS/PNET). A comparative study with CD99 and FLI-1
polyclonal antibodies.

Mhawech-Fauceglia P(1), Herrmann F, Penetrante R, Beck A, Sait S, Block AM,
Odunsi K, Fisher J, Balos L, Cheney RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. pmhawech1@yahoo.com

AIMS: To compare the sensitivity and specificity of the recently commercially
available FLI-1 monoclonal (FLI-1m) antibody with the currently used antibodies
[CD99 and FLI-1 polyclonal (FLI-1p)] in the diagnosis of Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (EWS/PNET) and to determine the
diagnostic value of the EWSR1 (22q12) dual-colour, break-apart rearrangement
probe fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-three cases of well-documented EWS/PNET and 15
non-EWS/PNET cases were retrieved from the archival files. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) for FLI-1p, FLI-1m and FISH analysis was performed.
RESULTS: The most sensitive and specific test panel for the diagnosis of EWS/PNET
is the combination of CD99 and FLI-1p. FISH had a very high specificity (100%)
but only a moderate sensitivity (50%).
CONCLUSION: The combination of CD99 and FLI-1p is the method of choice for the
diagnosis of EWS/PNET. EWRS1 (22q12) dual-colour, break-apart rearrangement probe
FISH should be used as a confirmatory test in addition to CD99 and FLI1-p due to 
its high specificity.

PMID: 17163841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2006 Nov-Dec;9(6):488-95.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors in unusual sites: confirmation by rt-PCR.

Ahmed AA(1), Nava VE, Pham T, Taubenberger JK, Lichy JH, Sorbara L, Raffeld M,
Mackall CL, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Ewing sarcoma family tumors originating in the palate or adrenal gland are
extremely rare and may cause difficulty in diagnosis. More common tumors primary 
to these sites need to be excluded before one arrives at the correct diagnosis.
We have recently diagnosed 2 such cases. The 1st case was that of a 24-year-old
woman who presented with a swelling in the right side of the hard palate. The 2nd
case was diagnosed in a 28-year-old woman who presented with a mass in the right 
adrenal gland. In both cases, the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors was
confirmed by immunohistochemical studies and reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR). The hard palate case is the 1st and the adrenal gland
the 3rd case of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors arising in these sites, in which
the diagnosis was confirmed by RT-PCR and/or cytogenetics. Accurate diagnosis of 
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors is crucial for the management of patients, and
when found in such rare locations, diagnosis should be supported by
immunohistochemical and/or molecular genetic studies.

PMID: 17163788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;587:99-113.

From morphological to molecular diagnosis of soft tissue tumors.

Miettinen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soft Tissue Pathology, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
Washington, DC, USA.

Cytogenetic discoveries of balanced translocations in soft tissue tumors have
opened the way to molecular genetic definition of these translocations as gene
fusions from the late 1980s. Many sarcomas are known to have such fusions, and
the demonstration of the fusion transcripts in tumor tissue is of great value in 
specific diagnosis of synovial sarcoma (SYT-SSX), Ewing sarcoma (EWS-Fli1), clear
cell sarcoma (EWS-ATF1), myxoid liposarcoma (FUS-CHOP), and other sarcomas. These
translocations are believed to be disease-specific and pathogenetic forces,
despite occasional observations to the contrary. Demonstration of SYT-SSX and
EWS-ATF1 fusion assists in the diagnosis of synovial and clear cell sarcomas in
unusual locations, such as the gastrointestinal tract, where these tumors occur
with low frequency. Demonstration of sarcoma translocations and their fusion by
different assays is well established; use of in situ hybridization is limited by 
availability of specific probes. In two exceptional instances, the same
translocation and gene fusion occurs in two unrelated diseases: ETV6-NTRK fusion 
in infantile fibrosarcoma and secretory carcinoma of the breast, and ALK-TPM3
fusion in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and large cell anaplastic lymphoma. 
Thus, the target cell of the genetic change is an important factor to define the 
resulting disease. Activating mutations in two related receptor tyrosine kinases 
(RTKs), KIT, and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA) is
central to the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs), and
countering the mutational activation by specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors, such
as Imatinib mesylate, is now standard treatment for metastatic GISTs. KIT exon 11
mutations (in frame deletions, point mutations, and duplications) occur in GISTs 
of all locations, whereas a characteristic exon 9 insertion-duplication AY502-503
is nearly specific for intestinal vs gastric tumors. In contrast, PDGFRA
mutations are nearly specific for gastric GISTs, especially those with
epithelioid morphology. Mutation type influences therapy responsiveness, but
fortunately very few GISTs carry primarily Imatinib-resistant mutations.
Secondary drug resistance acquired during Imatinib treatment based on new,
Imatinib-resistant mutations is a major problem limiting treatment success. Loss 
of NF2 tumor suppressor gene in a biallelic fashion is believed to be central in 
the pathogenesis of neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) associated and sporadic schwannomas
and meningiomas. The mechanism includes nonsense or missense mutation in NF2
gene, and loss of the other NF2 allele as a part of losses in chromosome 22q.
Schwannoma types may differ in their pathogenesis: gastrointestinal schwannomas
lack NF2 changes suggesting a different pathogenesis. Intraneural and sclerosing 
perineuriomas display similar NF2 gene alterations as seen in meningioma,
indicating a similar pathogenesis and molecular homology. Specific viral
sequences of human herpesvirus 8 (HHV8) are diagnostic markers for Kaposi sarcoma
(KS), and are absent in angiosarcoma. Despite discovery on simian virus SV40
sequences in mesothelioma as a possible pathogenetic factor, recent studies
suggest that the presence of these sequences may be artifactual and based on
common presence of some SV40 sequences as PCR contaminants.

PMID: 17163160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;587:41-52.

EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma: real targets and collateral damage.

Ban J(1), Siligan C, Kreppel M, Aryee D, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, Kinderspitalgasse 9, A1190 Vienna,
Austria.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) are a clinically and scientifically very 
demanding group of tumors in children and young adults with still unknown
histogenesis. The rate-limiting oncogenic mutation in this disease has been
identified as a chromosomal translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), that leads to the
expression of a chimeric transcription factor, EWS-FLI1. We have studied the
downstream pathway of EWS-FLI1 by a dual strategy including the isolation of
direct target genes from ESFT chromatin and the monitoring of transcriptomic
changes after silencing of EWS-FLI1 by RNA interference. This study has lead to
the identification of several directly EWS-FLI1-regulated genes and the
characterization of their genomic distribution. By comparing several ESFT cell
lines, not only variation in overall gene expression patterns downstream of
EWS-FLIl was observed, but also differential regulation of directly
EWS-FLI1-bound genes. Interestingly, there was variation between members of the
same functional gene families. Studies on CD99, another diagnostic hallmark of
ESFT, in relation to EWS-FLI1 provided additional evidence for context dependence
of fusion protein function. Together, our study represents a first approach to
the separation of essential molecular consequences from noise generated by the
EWS-FLI1 gene rearrangement in ESFT.

PMID: 17163154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2008 Mar;50(3):703-6.

SK-NEP-1 and Rh1 are Ewing family tumor lines.

Smith MA(1), Morton CL, Phelps D, Girtman K, Neale G, Houghton PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA. smithm@ctep.nci.nih.gov

The utility of preclinical models of childhood cancers is contingent upon
reliably classifying them with their corresponding clinical counterparts.
Molecular tools such as gene expression profiling allow researchers to confirm
the similarity between clinical tumors and preclinical models. We describe the
use of gene expression profiling to show that SK-NEP-1, a cell line previously
thought to represent anaplastic Wilms tumor, is instead related to Ewing sarcoma.
RT-PCR confirmed that SK-NEP-1 expresses EWS-FLI1 gene fusion transcripts
characteristic of Ewing sarcoma, and DNA sequencing demonstrated the joining of
exon 7 of EWS with exon 5 of FLI1 for these transcripts. Rh1, which was
previously categorized as an alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma cell line, also has a gene
expression profile suggestive of Ewing sarcoma and expresses EWS-FLI1 fusion
transcripts in which exon 7 of EWS is joined with exon 6 of FLI1. These examples 
illustrate the importance of molecularly characterizing pediatric preclinical
models used for testing new agents.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17154184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006 Dec;130(12):1813-8.

Comparative analysis of routine histology, immunohistochemistry, reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and fluorescence in situ hybridization
in diagnosis of Ewing family of tumors.

Jambhekar NA(1), Bagwan IN, Ghule P, Shet TM, Chinoy RF, Agarwal S, Joshi R,
Amare Kadam PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, 8th Floor, Annex Building,
Parel, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 4000012. najambhekap@rediffmail.com

CONTEXT: The Ewing family of tumors are often difficult to distinguish from other
malignant small round cell tumors, but more than 90% have EWS-FLI1 chimeric
transcript, which acts as a potential molecular diagnostic marker.
OBJECTIVE: To do a comparative analysis of 32 cases with EWS-FLI1: Ewing family
of tumors (n = 30), desmoplastic small round cell tumor (n = 1), and
undifferentiated sarcoma (n = 1).
DESIGN: The initial diagnosis was made on core biopsy (n = 22) and open biopsy (n
= 4) specimens by using morphology and immunohistochemistry and on fine-needle
aspiration cytology ([FNAC], n = 6) specimens. EWS-FLI1 was detected by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction on all 32 fresh FNAC samples and by
fluorescence in situ hybridization on 16 paraffin blocks.
RESULTS: The 19 male and 13 female patients had bone (n = 19) or soft tissue (n =
13) tumors. Histologic groups were typical Ewing sarcoma (n = 15), atypical Ewing
sarcoma (n = 4), Askin Rosai tumors (n = 5), desmoplastic small round cell tumor 
(n = 1), undifferentiated sarcoma (n = 1), and cases diagnosed as malignant small
round cell tumors on FNAC (n = 6). All tumors except desmoplastic small round
cell tumor and undifferentiated sarcoma were CD99 positive. EWS-FLI1 by reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction was noted in 15 cases of typical Ewing
sarcoma, 4 cases of atypical Ewing sarcoma, 5 cases of Askin Rosai tumor, and no 
cases of desmoplastic small round cell tumor or undifferentiated sarcoma. With
use of fluorescence in situ hybridization, EWS break was detected in 10 of 11
paraffin blocks used and was negative in desmoplastic small round cell tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: The excellent correlation of routine histologic findings in Ewing
family of tumors with results on immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ
hybridization on archival material and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction on fresh FNAC specimens underscores that the traditional observation on 
routine histologic examination is a time-tested tool. The diagnosis of Ewing
family of tumors can be validated on archival material or fresh biopsy samples,
including those obtained by FNAC.

PMID: 17149955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Hum Pathol. 2007 Feb;38(2):205-11. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Immunohistochemistry of primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney: a
potential source of confusion? A study of 30 cases from the National Wilms Tumor 
Study Pathology Center.

Ellison DA(1), Parham DM, Bridge J, Beckwith JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arkansas Children's Hospital, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. ellisondalea@uams.edu

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) is a rare
primary tumor of the kidney with morphologic features similar to those of other
primitive tumors. Previous studies have shown that these tumors frequently stain 
positively with immunostains against CD99 and FLI-1 and negatively with stains
against WT-1, suggesting that these markers may be used for the distinction
between Wilms tumor and pPNET. We present 30 cases of primary malignant
neuroepithelial tumor with immunohistochemical profiles and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis and show that immunophenotypic
overlap exists between Wilms tumor and pPNET. A subset of 30 neuroepithelial
tumors from the National Wilms Tumor Study originally categorized as putative
pPNETs of the kidney was stained with FLI-1, WT-1, and thyroid transcription
factor-1. Bicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization studies were performed on 19
of the cases. Other data on these tumors were available from a previous study (Am
J Surg Pathol 2001;25:133). Of 7 primary tumors that had the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcript by RT-PCR, 6 exhibited strong immunopositivity for FLI-1. Nine that
were negative by RT-PCR stained positively with the FLI-1 stain. Five
fusion-negative cases stained with both FLI-1 and WT-1. Three fusion-negative
cases were negative for FLI-1 but positive for WT-1. Five fusion-negative cases
were negative for both FLI-1 and WT-1. Of the 30 cases, 29 were positive for
CD99. Seven cases that were negative for the EWS-FLI-1 fusion by RT-PCR were
positive by fluorescence in situ hybridization. All cases were negative for
thyroid transcription factor-1. Reliance upon immunohistochemistry as the sole
means of ancillary diagnosis in renal pPNET can lead to confusing results. We
recommend molecular fusion studies for clarification of primitive renal tumors
with unexpected immunophenotypic results.

PMID: 17134738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Oct;35(10):634-6.

[Multiplex RT-PCR assay for detecting fusion genes of soft tissue small round
cell tumors using paraffin-embedded and formalin-fixed tissue].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi Y, Chang B, Pang LJ, Liu CX, Hu WH, Li HA, Jiang JF, Gao JF, Wei JY, Li F.

PMID: 17134577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):772-83. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Combinatorial function of ETS transcription factors in the developing
vasculature.

Pham VN(1), Lawson ND, Mugford JW, Dye L, Castranova D, Lo B, Weinstein BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development/NIH, Building 6B, Room 309, 6 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Members of the ETS family of transcription factors are among the first genes
expressed in the developing vasculature, but loss-of-function experiments for
individual ETS factors in mice have not uncovered important early functional
roles for these genes. However, multiple ETS factors are expressed in spatially
and temporally overlapping patterns in the developing vasculature, suggesting
possible functional overlap. We have taken a comprehensive approach to exploring 
the function of these factors during vascular development by employing the
genetic and experimental tools available in the zebrafish to analyze four ETS
family members expressed together in the zebrafish vasculature; fli1, fli1b,
ets1, and etsrp. We isolated and characterized an ENU-induced mutant with defects
in trunk angiogenesis and positionally cloned the defective gene from this
mutant, etsrp. Using the etsrp morpholinos targeting each of the four genes, we
show that the four ETS factors function combinatorially during vascular and
hematopoietic development. Reduction of etsrp or any of the other genes alone
results in either partial or no defects in endothelial differentiation, while
combined reduction in the function of all four genes causes dramatic loss of
endothelial cells. Our results demonstrate that combinatorial ETS factor function
is essential for early endothelial specification and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1859867
PMID: 17125762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;12(22):6781-90.

Combined transcriptional and translational targeting of EWS/FLI-1 in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Mateo-Lozano S(1), Gokhale PC, Soldatenkov VA, Dritschilo A, Tirado OM, Notario
V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
V.T. Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington,
District of Columbia 20057-1482, USA.

PURPOSE: To show the efficacy of targeting EWS/FLI-1 expression with a
combination of specific antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin for the control 
of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cell proliferation in vitro and the treatment of mouse
tumor xenografts in vivo.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: EWS cells were simultaneously exposed to EWS/FLI-1-specific 
antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin for various time periods. After
treatment, the following end points were monitored and evaluated: expression
levels of the EWS/FLI-1 protein, cell proliferation, cell cycle distribution,
apoptotic cell death, caspase activation, and tumor growth in EWS xenografts
implanted in nude mice.
RESULTS: Simultaneous exposure of EWS cells in culture to an EWS/FLI-1-targeted
suppression therapy using specific antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin
resulted in the activation of a caspase-dependent apoptotic process that involved
the restoration of the transforming growth factor-beta-induced proapoptotic
pathway. In vivo, individual administration of either antisense oligonucleotides 
or rapamycin significantly delayed tumor development, and the combined treatment 
with antisense oligonucleotides and rapamycin caused a considerably stronger
inhibition of tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent administration of EWS/FLI-1 antisense oligonucleotides
and rapamycin efficiently induced the apoptotic death of EWS cells in culture
through a process involving transforming growth factor-beta. In vivo experiments 
conclusively showed that the combined treatment with antisense oligonucleotides
and rapamycin caused a significant inhibition of tumor growth in mice. These
results provide proof of principle for further exploration of the potential of
this combined therapeutic modality as a novel strategy for the treatment of
tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family.

PMID: 17121899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Nov;4(11):851-9.

NR0B1 is required for the oncogenic phenotype mediated by EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Kinsey M(1), Smith R, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.

A number of solid tumors, such as alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma,
and myxoid liposarcoma, are associated with recurrent translocation events that
encode fusion proteins. Ewing's sarcoma is a pediatric tumor that serves as a
prototype for this tumor class. Ewing's sarcomas usually harbor the
(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. The t(11;22) encodes the EWS/FLI fusion
oncoprotein. EWS/FLI functions as an aberrant transcription factor, but the key
target genes that are involved in oncogenesis are largely unknown. Although some 
target genes have been defined, many of these have been identified in
heterologous model systems with uncertain relevance to the human disease. To
understand the function of EWS/FLI and its targets in a more clinically relevant 
system, we used retroviral-mediated RNAi to "knock-down" the fusion protein in
patient-derived Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. By combining transcriptional
profiling data from three of these lines, we identified a conserved
transcriptional response to EWS/FLI. The gene that was most reproducibly
up-regulated by EWS/FLI was NR0B1. NR0B1 is a developmentally important orphan
nuclear receptor with no previously defined role in oncogenesis. We validated
NR0B1 as an EWS/FLI-dysregulated gene and confirmed its expression in primary
human tumor samples. Functional studies revealed that ongoing NR0B1 expression is
required for the transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. These studies define a
new role for NR0B1 in oncogenic transformation and emphasize the utility of
analyzing the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMID: 17114343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 15;66(22):10658-63.

TMPRSS2:ERG fusion by translocation or interstitial deletion is highly relevant
in androgen-dependent prostate cancer, but is bypassed in late-stage androgen
receptor-negative prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), van Marion R, van Dekken H, Jenster G, van Weerden WM, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Recently, a unique fusion between the prostate-specific, androgen-regulated
TMPRSS2 gene and the ETS genes ERG, ETV1, or ETV4 has been described in clinical 
prostate cancer. We investigated mechanisms of expression of four ETS genes, ERG,
ETV1, ETV4, and FLI1, in 11 xenografts representing different stages of prostate 
cancer. All five androgen-dependent xenografts showed as major transcript
overexpression of two splice variants of TMPRSS2:ERG, linking TMPRSS2 exon 1 or 2
sequences to ERG exon 4. In one of two androgen-sensitive xenografts, fusion
transcripts of TMPRSS2 and ETV1 were detected. Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization and interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization indicated both
interstitial deletions and translocations as mechanisms of TMPRSS2:ERG gene
fusion. Importantly, TMPRSS2 to ERG fusions were also observed in three of four
androgen-independent, androgen receptor (AR)-negative xenografts and in two
AR-negative clinical prostate cancer specimens; however, the fusion gene was not 
expressed. In almost all AR-negative tumor samples, overexpression of wild-type
ETV4 or FLI1 was detected. Combined, our observations indicate a key role of
fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS genes in most androgen-regulated prostate cancers,
which might be bypassed by androgen-independent expression of wild-type ETS
factors in late-stage disease.

PMID: 17108102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Br J Cancer. 2006 Nov 20;95(10):1326-33. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Incidence and prognostic value of tumour cells detected by RT-PCR in peripheral
blood stem cell collections from patients with Ewing tumour.

Vermeulen J(1), Ballet S, Oberlin O, Peter M, Pierron G, Longavenne E, Laurence
V, Kanold J, Chastagner P, Lejars O, Blay JY, Marec-Berard P, Michon J, Delattre 
O, Schleiermacher G.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Pédiatrique, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

To retrospectively evaluate the incidence of tumour cell contamination of
peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) collections and to correlate these data with
the clinical outcome after high-dose chemotherapy (HDCT) with stem cell rescue in
patients with a high-risk Ewing tumour. Peripheral blood stem cell collections
obtained from 171 patients were analysed. Tumour contamination was assessed by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The files of 88
patients who underwent HDCT followed by PBSC reinfusion were reviewed in detail, 
and their outcome compared to the PBSC RT-PCR results. Seven of 88 PBSC
collections (8%) contained tumour cells as detected by RT-PCR. Peripheral blood
stem cells were collected after a median of five cycles of chemotherapy. No
clinical factor predictive of tumour cell contamination of PBSC harvest could be 
identified. Event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS) of the whole
study population were 45.3 % and 51.8 % at 3 years from the date of the graft,
respectively. Forty-five patients relapsed with a median time of 15 months after 
graft, only four of whom had tumour cell contamination of the PBSC harvest.
Tumour cell contamination of PBSC collection is rare and does not seem to be
associated with a significantly poorer EFS or OS in this high-risk population.

PMCID: PMC2360590
PMID: 17088915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):732-42. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Importance of receptor usage, Fli1 activation, and mouse strain for the stem cell
specificity of 10A1 murine leukemia virus leukemogenicity.

Rodenburg M(1), Fischer M, Engelmann A, Harbers SO, Ziegler M, Löhler J, Stocking
C.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut, Hamburg, Germany.

Murine leukemia viruses (MuLV) induce leukemia through a multistage process, a
critical step being the activation of oncogenes through provirus integration.
Transcription elements within the long terminal repeats (LTR) are prime
determinants of cell lineage specificity; however, the influence of other
factors, including the Env protein that modulates cell tropism through receptor
recognition, has not been rigorously addressed. The ability of 10A1-MuLV to use
both PiT1 and PiT2 receptors has been implicated in its induction of blast cell
leukemia. Here we show that restricting receptor usage of 10A1-MuLV to PiT2
results in loss of blast cell transformation capacity. However, the pathogenicity
was unaltered when the env gene is exchanged with Moloney MuLV, which uses the
Cat1 receptor. Significantly, the leukemic blasts express erythroid markers and
consistently contain proviral integrations in the Fli1 locus, a target of Friend 
MuLV (F-MuLV) during erythroleukemia induction. Furthermore, an NB-tropic variant
of 10A1 was unable to induce blast cell leukemia in C57BL/6 mice, which are also 
resistant to F-MuLV transformation. We propose that 10A1- and F-MuLV actually
induce identical (erythro)blastic leukemia by a mechanism involving Fli1
activation and cooperation with inherent genetic mutations in susceptible mouse
strains. Furthermore, we demonstrate that deletion of the Icsbp tumor suppressor 
gene in C57BL/6 mice is sufficient to confer susceptibility to 10A1-MuLV leukemia
induction but with altered specificity. In summary, we validate the significance 
of the env gene in leukemia specificity and underline the importance of a complex
interplay of cooperating oncogenes and/or tumor suppressors in determining the
pathogenicity of MuLV variants.

PMCID: PMC1797452
PMID: 17079317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Blood. 2007 Mar 1;109(5):1908-16. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

The paralogous hematopoietic regulators Lyl1 and Scl are coregulated by Ets and
GATA factors, but Lyl1 cannot rescue the early Scl-/- phenotype.

Chan WY(1), Follows GA, Lacaud G, Pimanda JE, Landry JR, Kinston S, Knezevic K,
Piltz S, Donaldson IJ, Gambardella L, Sablitzky F, Green AR, Kouskoff V, Göttgens
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors are key regulators of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), yet 
the molecular mechanisms that control their expression are largely unknown.
Previously, we demonstrated that expression of Scl/Tal1, a transcription factor
required for the specification of HSCs, is controlled by Ets and GATA factors.
Here we characterize the molecular mechanisms controlling expression of Lyl1, a
paralog of Scl also required for HSC function. Two closely spaced promoters
directed expression to hematopoietic progenitor, megakaryocytic, and endothelial 
cells in transgenic mice. Conserved binding sites required for promoter activity 
were bound in vivo by GATA-2 and the Ets factors Fli1, Elf1, Erg, and PU.1.
However, despite coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 by the same Ets and GATA factors,
Scl expression was initiated prior to Lyl1 in embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation assays. Moreover, ectopic expression of Scl but not Lyl1 rescued 
hematopoietic differentiation in Scl-/- ES cells, thus providing a molecular
explanation for the vastly different phenotypes of Scl-/- and Lyl1-/- mouse
embryos. Furthermore, coregulation of Scl and Lyl1 later during development may
explain the mild phenotype of Scl-/- adult HSCs.

PMID: 17053063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9937-47.

Caveolin-1 (CAV1) is a target of EWS/FLI-1 and a key determinant of the oncogenic
phenotype and tumorigenicity of Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Tirado OM(1), Mateo-Lozano S, Villar J, Dettin LE, Llort A, Gallego S, Ban J,
Kovar H, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family (ESFT), such as Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) and
primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), are highly aggressive malignancies
predominantly affecting children and young adults. ESFT express chimeric
transcription factors encoded by hybrid genes fusing the EWS gene with several
ETS genes, most commonly FLI-1. EWS/FLI-1 proteins are responsible for the
malignant phenotype of ESFT, but only few of their transcriptional targets are
known. Using antisense and short hairpin RNA-mediated gene expression knockdown, 
array analyses, chromatin immunoprecipitation methods, and reexpression studies, 
we show that caveolin-1 (CAV1) is a new direct target of EWS/FLI-1 that is
overexpressed in ESFT cell lines and tumor specimens and is necessary for ESFT
tumorigenesis. CAV1 knockdown led to up-regulation of Snail and the concomitant
loss of E-cadherin expression. Consistently, loss of CAV1 expression inhibited
the anchorage-independent growth of EWS cells and markedly reduced the growth of 
EWS cell-derived tumors in nude mice xenografts, indicating that CAV1 promotes
the malignant phenotype in EWS carcinogenesis. Reexpression of CAV1 or E-cadherin
in CAV1 knockdown EWS cells rescued the oncogenic phenotype of the original EWS
cells, showing that the CAV1/Snail/E-cadherin pathway plays a central role in the
expression of the oncogenic transformation functions of EWS/FLI-1. Overall, these
data identify CAV1 as a key determinant of the tumorigenicity of ESFT and imply
that targeting CAV1 may allow the development of new molecular therapeutic
strategies for ESFT patients.

PMID: 17047056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 15;66(20):9862-9.

Single-chain antibodies to the EWS NH(2) terminus structurally discriminate
between intact and chimeric EWS in Ewing's sarcoma and interfere with the
transcriptional activity of EWS in vivo.

Aryee DN(1), Kreppel M, Bachmaier R, Uren A, Muehlbacher K, Wagner S, Breiteneder
H, Ban J, Toretsky JA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, Austria.

The chimeric protein EWS-FLI1, arising from chromosomal translocation in Ewing's 
sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), acts as an aberrant tumorigenic transcription
factor. The transforming activity of EWS-FLI1 minimally requires an ETS DNA
binding domain and the EWS NH(2) terminus. Proteins interacting with the EWS
portion differ between germ-line and chimeric EWS despite their sharing identical
sequences in this domain. We explored the use of the phage display technology to 
isolate anti-EWS-FLI1 specific single-chain antibody fragments (scFvs). Using
recombinant EWS-FLI1 as bait, 16 independent specific antibody clones were
isolated from combinatorial phage display libraries, of which six were
characterized in detail. Despite differing in their complementarity-determining
region sequences, all six scFvs bound to the same epitope spanning residues 51 to
75 within the shared minimal transforming EWS domain. Whereas all six scFvs bound
efficiently to cellular EWS, reactivity with ESFT-expressed EWS-FLI1 was weak and
restricted to denatured protein. One scFv, scFv-I85, when expressed as an
intrabody, efficiently suppressed EWS-dependent coactivation of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4- and OCT4-mediated transcription in vivo but no effect on known 
EWS-FLI1 target genes was observed. These data suggest that a prominent EWS
epitope exposed on recombinant EWS-FLI1 structurally differs between germ-line
and chimeric EWS in mammalian cells and that this region is functionally involved
in the transcriptional activity of EWS. Thus, we have generated a tool that will 
prove useful to specifically differentiate between normal and rearranged EWS in
functional studies.

PMID: 17047047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Future Oncol. 2006 Oct;2(5):659-65.

Novel approaches for the management of patients with Ewing sarcoma.

Avigad S(1), Yaniv I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Schneider Children's 
Medical Center of Israel, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University,
Petah-Tikva, Israel. savigad@post.tan.ac.il

The concepts of tailored therapy according to genetic profiling and response
based on minimal residual disease evaluation during therapy are attracting
increasing interest in modern clinical oncology. Children with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia are being stratified to various treatment arms with
different intensities according to the genetic characteristics of their leukemia 
and their response to therapy as measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Our ability to quickly identify patients with Ewing sarcoma who have a poor
prognosis, and to offer them aggressive therapeutic modalities, such as stem cell
transplantation, may result in an improved cure rate. Based on the knowledge
gained by gene expression profiling and gene silencing techniques we can expect
the emergence of new specific drugs that will target malignant cells without
causing damage to normal tissue, resulting in improved cancer therapy.

PMID: 17026457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9786; author reply 9786.

CD99-positive "Ewing's sarcoma" from mouse-bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
progenitor cells?

Kovar H, Bernard A.

Comment on
    Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11459-68.

PMID: 17018640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Virchows Arch. 2006 Nov;449(5):579-84. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma with EWS-FLI1 fusion gene: a case report.

Fujii H(1), Honoki K, Enomoto Y, Kasai T, Kido A, Amano I, Kumamoto M, Morishita 
T, Mii Y, Nonomura A, Takakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho,
Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan.

Recent studies have advocated the genotypic and phenotypic delineation of a novel
Ewing's sarcoma histologic variant showing epithelial features defined as
"adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma". We described an 18-year-old girl with a
primary small round-cell sarcoma of the right tibia showing polyphenotypic
differentiation with epithelioid features. The neoplastic cells had mainly round 
or oval nuclei with fine chromatin with a portion of epithelial arrangements. The
immunohistochemical analysis showed the epithelial markers of cytokeratin 5/6/18,
AE1/AE3, and cytokeratin high molecular weight were stained especially in the
foci with epithelioid features, as well as MIC2, S100, and NSE. The diagnosis of 
the lesion was confirmed as Ewing's sarcoma by the presence of the EWS-FLI1
fusion transcript, and could be defined as the so-called "adamantinoma-like
Ewing's sarcoma". After wide excision and high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral 
blood stem cell transfusion, the patient has been well and continuously
event-free for 3 years since the initial diagnosis.

PMID: 17016721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Jan;210(1):167-76.

Opposite effect of corticosteroids and long-acting beta(2)-agonists on serum- and
TGF-beta(1)-induced extracellular matrix deposition by primary human lung
fibroblasts.

Goulet S(1), Bihl MP, Gambazzi F, Tamm M, Roth M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Pulmonary Cell Research, University Hospital Basel,
Basel, Switzerland.

Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) are characterized by
chronic airway inflammation and major structural lung tissue changes including
increased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition. Inhaled corticosteroids and
long-acting beta(2)-agonists (LABA) are the basic treatment for both diseases,
but their effect on airway remodeling remains unclear. In this study, we
investigated the effect of corticosteroids and LABA, alone or in combination, on 
total ECM and collagen deposition, gene expression, cell proliferation, and IL-6,
IL-8, and TGF-beta(1) levels by primary human lung fibroblasts. In our model,
fibroblasts in 0.3% albumin represented a non-inflammatory condition and
stimulation with 5% FCS and/or TGF-beta(1) mimicked an inflammatory environment
with activation of tissue repair. FCS (5%) increased total ECM, collagen
deposition, cell proliferation, and IL-6, IL-8, and TGF-beta(1) levels. In 0.3%
albumin, corticosteroids reduced total ECM and collagen deposition, involving the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and downregulation of collagen, heat shock protein
47 (Hsp47), and Fli1 mRNA expression. In 5% FCS, corticosteroids increased ECM
deposition, involving upregulation of COL4A1 and CTGF mRNA expression. LABA
reduced total ECM and collagen deposition under all conditions partly via the
beta(2)-adrenergic receptor. In combination, the drugs had an additive effect in 
the presence or absence of TGF-beta(1) further decreasing ECM deposition in 0.3% 
albumin whereas counteracting each other in 5% FCS. These data suggest that the
effect of corticosteroids, but not of LABA, on ECM deposition by fibroblasts is
altered by serum. These findings imply that as soon as airway inflammation is
resolved, long-term treatment with combined drugs may beneficially reduce
pathological tissue remodeling.

PMID: 17013807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 15;299(2):551-62. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Global analysis of hematopoietic and vascular endothelial gene expression by
tissue specific microarray profiling in zebrafish.

Covassin L(1), Amigo JD, Suzuki K, Teplyuk V, Straubhaar J, Lawson ND.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Lazare Research Building, Room 617, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 
01605, USA.

In this study, we utilize fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS) of cells from
transgenic zebrafish coupled with microarray analysis to globally analyze
expression of cell type specific genes. We find that it is possible to isolate
cell populations from Tg(fli1:egfp)(y1) zebrafish embryos that are enriched in
vascular, hematopoietic and pharyngeal arch cell types. Microarray analysis of
GFP+ versus GFP- cells isolated from Tg(fli1:egfp)(y1) embryos identifies genes
expressed in hematopoietic, vascular and pharyngeal arch tissue, consistent with 
the expression of the fli1:egfp transgene in these cell types. Comparison of
expression profiles from GFP+ cells isolated from embryos at two different time
points reveals that genes expressed in different fli1+ cell types display
distinct temporal expression profiles. We also demonstrate the utility of this
approach for gene discovery by identifying numerous previously uncharacterized
genes that we find are expressed in fli1:egfp-positive cells, including new
markers of blood, endothelial and pharyngeal arch cell types. In parallel, we
have developed a database to allow easy access to both our microarray and in situ
results. Our results demonstrate that this is a robust approach for
identification of cell type specific genes as well as for global analysis of cell
type specific gene expression in zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC1779954
PMID: 16999953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2006 Oct;25(4):373-7.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the uterus: a case report and review of
literature.

Varghese L(1), Arnesen M, Boente M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Allina Hospitals and Clinics Pathology Associates,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. varg0053@umn.edu

A case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the uterine corpus of a
43-year-old woman is presented. The tumor mass was 13.3 cm and extended to the
uterine serosa, endocervical stroma, and left adnexa. Histologically, the tumor
was composed of small blue cells with scant cytoplasm, indistinct cell borders,
hyperchromatic round nuclei, and inconspicuous nucleoli focally forming
pseudorosettes, suggestive of neuroectodermal origin. The tumor cells displayed
strong immunoreactivity for CD99 and FLI1. Cytogenetic fluorescence in situ
hybridization study revealed presence of an EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. To the best of 
our knowledge, this is the first case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the
uterus with diagnosis confirmed by FLI1 immunohistochemical labeling and
demonstration of t (11; 22) by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 16990715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2006 Oct 15;454(2):146-54. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

N-terminal acylation of the SV40 nuclear localization signal peptide enhances its
oligonucleotide binding and membrane translocation efficiencies.

Laczkó I(1), Váró G, Bottka S, Bálint Z, Illyés E, Vass E, Bertrand JR, Malvy C, 
Hollósi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics, Biological Research Center, Szeged, Hungary.
laczko@nucleus.szbk.u-szeged.hu

Octanoyl and palmitoyl groups were coupled to the N-terminus of an analog of the 
SV40 nuclear localization signal peptide, SV126-133(Ser128), to study the effect 
of the fatty acid chain length on the complex formation with a single-stranded
antisense oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) and on the cellular uptake of the complex.
The strongest binding affinity was observed for the palmitoylated peptide,
indicating the better accessibility of the positively charged lysyl and arginyl
side-chains to the phosphate groups due to the turn structures stabilized by the 
palmitoyl group. On increase of the peptide to ODN molar ratio (rM), gradual
unstacking of the bases was observed, the maximal rate being reached at rM=10. At
rM>10 restacking of the nucleotide bases was detected and the ODN was completely 
encapsulated in a liposome-like structure made up of palmitoylated peptides. Cell
translocation experiments revealed a highly efficient cell transport of the ODN
by palmitoylated SV40 peptide at rM>10.

PMID: 16987492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Cycle. 2006 Sep;5(18):2049-53. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

Identification of target genes in their native cellular context: an analysis of
EWS/FLI in Ewing's sarcoma.

Owen LA(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is the second most common tumor of bone in children and young
adults, and requires highly intensive chemotherapy along with surgery and/or
radiation for successful treatment. Because these therapies are associated with
significant short- and long-term side effects, new therapeutic approaches are
needed. Most cases of Ewing's sarcoma contain somatic translocations between
chromosomes 11 and 22 that result in the t(11;22)(q24;q12). This translocation
encodes the EWS/FLI fusion protein. EWS/FLI formation appears to be the critical 
oncogenic event in the development of Ewing's sarcoma. It is hoped that an
in-depth understanding of the mechanism that EWS/FLI uses to cause oncogenic
transformation will result in new therapies for this disease. Unfortunately, this
hope has not been realized. One difficulty has been the lack of an appropriate
model system in which to study the fusion oncoprotein. We recently described and 
validated the use of retroviral RNA interference approaches to study EWS/FLI in
Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. We now put this model into a historical context, and 
describe the benefits (both perceived and observed) of this model over previous
approaches using heterologous cell types.

PMID: 16969112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Oncogene. 2007 Mar 15;26(12):1802-10. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Ewing's sarcoma fusion protein, EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 protein induce PLD2 but not
PLD1 gene expression by binding to an ETS domain of 5' promoter.

Kikuchi R(1), Murakami M, Sobue S, Iwasaki T, Hagiwara K, Takagi A, Kojima T,
Asano H, Suzuki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University School of
Health Sciences, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan.

It was reported that short interfering RNA (siRNA) of EWS/Fli-1 downregulated
phospholipase D (PLD)2 in Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cell line, suggesting that PLD2
is the target of aberrant transcription factor, EWS/Fli-1. Here, we further
investigated the regulation of PLD2 gene expression by EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 in
another EWS cell line, and also in EWS/Fli-1- or Fli-1-transfected cell line.
EWS/Fli-1- or Fli-1-overexpressed cells showed higher PLD2 but not PLD1 protein
expression and enhanced cell proliferation as compared to mock transfectant. The 
treatment of these cells with 1-butanol or siRNA of PLD2 inhibited cell growth,
suggesting the pivotal role of PLD in cell growth promotion. PLD2 but not PLD1
mRNA level was also increased in EWS/Fli-1 or Fli-1-transfectants. After
determining the transcription initiation points, we cloned the 5' promoter of
both PLD1 and PLD2 and analysed promoter activities. Results showed that
EWS/Fli-1 and Fli-1 increase PLD2 gene expression by binding to an erythroblast
transformation-specific domain (-126 to -120 bp from the transcription initiation
site) of PLD2 promoter, which is the minimal and most powerful region.
Electrophoresis mobility shift assay using truncated proteins showed that both
DNA-binding domain and trans-activating domain were necessary for the enhanced
gene expression of PLD2.

PMID: 16964281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2006 May-Jun;9(3):229-33.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor with postchemotherapy
neuroblastoma-like differentiation.

Weissferdt A(1), Neuling K, English M, Arul S, McMullan D, Ely A, Bründler MA,
Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Birmingham Children's Hospital, Department of Histopathology, West Midlands,
UK. aweissferdt@doctors.org.uk

We report the case of an 11-year-old girl with a retroperitoneal tumor in the
left upper quadrant. The girl was admitted to hospital with weight loss and a
painless abdominal mass that on biopsy was diagnosed as a peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma (pPNET/EWS) of the soft tissue. The patient
underwent chemotherapy followed by surgical resection of the tumor 5 months after
diagnosis. The posttreatment residual viable tumor showed a morphologic
appearance resembling a neuroblastoma. Interphase and metaphase fluorescent in
situ hybridization (FISH) studies performed on the pretreatment and posttreatment
samples showed the presence of a t(11;22) rearrangement resulting in EWSR1/FLI1
gene fusion consistent with pPNET/EWS in both specimens. This case is unusual in 
the sense of showing the typical gene fusion for pPNET/EWS both in the pretherapy
sample with the typical morphological appearance of this tumor and in the
posttherapy specimen showing neural differentiation suggestive of a
neuroblastoma.

PMID: 16944972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Clin Pathol. 2007 Jun;60(6):694-700. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Friend leukaemia integration-1 expression in malignant and benign tumours: a
multiple tumour tissue microarray analysis using polyclonal antibody.

Mhawech-Fauceglia P(1), Herrmann FR, Bshara W, Odunsi K, Terracciano L, Sauter G,
Cheney RT, Groth J, Penetrante R, Mhawech-Fauceglia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Roswell Park Cancer
Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263, USA. pmhawech1@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Friend leukaemia integration-1 (FLI-1) antibody is a useful marker
for Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumour (EWS/PNET) and vascular
tumours. However, it is also expressed in subsets of lymphoblastic lymphoma,
Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) and desmoplastic small round cell tumour (DSRCT).
AIM: To determine expression of FLI-1 in various benign and malignant neoplasms, 
by immunohistochemical analysis on 4323 tumours using multiple tumour
microarrays, as well as on whole sections.
RESULTS: FLI-1 was expressed in 46/62 EWS/PNETs, 2/3 olfactory neuroblastomas,
7/102 small cell carcinomas of the lung, 10/34 MCCs, 1/14 rhabdomyosarcoma,
19/132 non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, 2/3 DSRCTs, and in 53/74 benign and malignant
vascular tumours. In addition, 27/508 squamous cell carcinomas, 19/837
adenocarcinomas, 10/400 urothelial bladder cancers, 1/40 basal cell carcinomas,
3/29 liposarcomas, 1/40 glioblastoma multiforme and 9/29 medullar carcinomas of
the breast expressed FLI-1. The sensitivity and specificity of FLI-1 to
distinguish EWS/PNET from all types of malignancies were 74.2% and 96.0%,
respectively. Finally, the sensitivity and specificity of FLI-1 to distinguish
EWS/PNET from other small round cell tumours (SRCTs) were 74.2% and 91.6%,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: This study was the first to show that FLI-1 can be seen in a variety 
of solid tumours, some of which had never been explored before. This finding
should be kept in mind, especially when using FLI-1 as a marker for finding the
primary origin of poorly differentiated metastatic tumour. Finally, despite the
expression of FLI-1 in numerous malignancies, it is still considered to be highly
sensitive and specific in distinguishing EWS/PNET from other tumour types in
general and from other SRCTs in particular.

PMCID: PMC1955051
PMID: 16917000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Urology. 2006 Aug;68(2):257-62.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor: rare, highly aggressive differential diagnosis
in urologic malignancies.

Ellinger J(1), Bastian PJ, Hauser S, Biermann K, Müller SC.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Urologie, Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Rheinische
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a highly
aggressive neoplasm belonging to the Ewing family of tumors. It is characterized 
by the expression of MIC2 and neural markers (eg, neuron-specific enolase,
synaptophysin, S-100, vimentin, Leu-7), and the presence of the EWS-FLI1
translocation.
METHODS: We performed a MEDLINE search for PNET in urologic malignancies.
Additionally, we report on 2 cases of renal and 1 case of bladder PNET. The data 
obtained by reviewing patients with renal PNET were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier
analysis.
RESULTS: Renal PNET is diagnosed in young adults (median age 24 years). In
contrast, the incidence of bladder PNET seems to be dependent on a defective
immune mechanism. Patients often present with pain (84%), palpable tumor (60%),
and hematuria (38%). The radiologic findings are uncharacteristic; therefore, the
diagnosis should be based on the histologic and immunohistochemistry findings.
Renal and bladder PNET are both often diagnosed at an advanced stage and,
therefore, the prognosis is poor, despite aggressive multimodal treatment
(surgery, polychemotherapy, radiotherapy). We identified palpable tumor masses
(log-rank test, P = 0.0027) and synaptophysin expression (log-rank test, P =
0.0422) as prognostic unfavorable markers for renal PNET.
CONCLUSIONS: Renal PNET should be considered in young patients who present with
the classic triad of renal cancer, hematuria, and pain and palpable tumor. Once
PNET is diagnosed, multimodal treatment (radical surgery, multidrug chemotherapy,
radiotherapy) must be initiated. Despite this, the prognosis is poor if distant
metastases are present. Furthermore, palpable tumor masses and synaptophysin
expression are associated with a shorter cancer-specific survival.

PMID: 16904430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Jul;5(6):377-82. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Regulation of Fli1 gene expression and lupus.

Nowling TK(1), Gilkeson GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Ste 912 CSB, Charleston, SC 29425, United
States.

Ets transcription factors function throughout development in such varied
processes as cellular proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and migration.
Many have been implicated to play important roles in hematopoiesis,
vasculogenesis/angiogenesis and myogenesis. Fli1 is an Ets family member that is 
essential for development and increasing evidence suggests modulating Fli1 gene
expression impacts lymphocyte function and is important in the autoimmune disease
lupus. Presently, it is unknown how Fli1 gene expression is controlled in
lymphocytes. Identifying upstream regulators of Fli1 in lymphocytes will be
critical for understanding lymphocyte development and the consequences of
dysregulation and may be of value in developing future treatments for lupus.

PMID: 16890890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Int J Oncol. 2006 Sep;29(3):689-93.

Participation of nuclear localization signal 2 in the 3'-ETS domain of FLI1 in
nuclear translocation of various chimeric EWS-FLI1 oncoproteins in Ewing tumor.

Honsei N(1), Ikuta T, Kawana K, Kaneko Y, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Clinical Oncology, Saitama Cancer Center, Ina, Saitama 
362-0806, Japan.

A t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in 90% of Ewing's sarcoma, and
results in the formation of the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene encoding an oncogenic
transcription factor. To clarify the function of chimeric EWS-FLI1 proteins, an
identification of a nuclear localization signal (NLS) in the EWS, FLI1 and
EWS-FLI1 proteins is important because the chimeric oncoprotein may lose or gain 
NLS function different from native proteins resulting in different subcellular
localization, and in deregulated gene expression. Furthermore, some studies
reported that patients with one type of fusion gene ('type 1') had better overall
survival than those with other types, suggesting that functional differences may 
be present among various fusion proteins. There has been only one study reporting
a NLS in EWS, but none reporting those in FLI1 and EWS-FLI1. To clarify the
molecular mechanisms of Ewing tumor development, we first identified the NLSs of 
EWS and FLI1. We allocated the NLS to amino acid residues 632-656 near the
C-terminal region of EWS that is different from the previous study, and
identified two NLSs of FLI1, NLS1 (63-90) in the N-terminal domain and NLS2
(319-360) in the 3'-ETS domain. In addition, the present study showed that all of
the EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins completely reside in the nucleus without affecting
the frequency of nuclear localization among variants, suggesting that NLS2 of
FLI1 was used for nuclear translocation of various EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins.

PMID: 16865286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2006 Aug;209(4):369-77.

Ewing's sarcoma in the spinal nerve root: a case report and review of the
literature.

Isefuku S(1), Seki M, Tajino T, Hakozaki M, Asano S, Hojo H, Hatori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Iwaki Kyouritsu General Hospital, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is a highly malignant tumor composed of uniform small round 
cells. Recently, a single biologic entity, Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors
(ESFT) has been accepted. The entity includes ES, extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma
(EES) and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). ESFT cells have
immunoreactivity for CD99, an antigen determined by the MIC2 gene. Most ESFT has 
the (11;22) (q24;q12) translocation. The translocation results in the fusion of
the EWS gene with the transcription factor gene FLI1 which has been considered a 
hallmark of ESFT. We present an extremely unusual case with ESFT in a spinal
nerve root mimicking a neurogenic dumbbell tumor. A male aged 20 years noticed
pain in his right buttock. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a mass in
the right L5/S intervertebral foramen and the lesions in the sacrum. Surgery was 
performed with a presumptive diagnosis of a nerve sheath tumor. At surgery, the
tumor was located in the right L5 nerve root sleeve. The sacral lesions were
observed closely. At one month after surgery, radiologically multiple lesions
were detected in the pelvic bones. Microscopically the lesions from the root and 
ilium were composed of small round cells immunoreactive for CD99. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction detected transcripts resulting from the
fusion of the EWS gene with FLI1 genes in the iliac lesion. Immunoreactivity for 
CD99 and detection of the EWS-FLI1 hybrid transcripts are important for the
correct diagnosis of ESFT arising in an unusual location.

PMID: 16864960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Struct Biol. 2006 Sep;155(3):493-504. Epub 2006 Jun 2.

Localization of genetic elements of intact and derivative chromosome 11 and 22
territories in nuclei of Ewing sarcoma cells.

Taslerová R(1), Kozubek S, Bártová E, Gajdusková P, Kodet R, Kozubek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Optical Microscopy, Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, 
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, and Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Faculty Hospital
Motol, Praha 5, Czech Republic.

Recurring chromosomal abnormalities are associated with specific tumour types.
The EWSR1 and FLI1 genes are involved in balanced translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), which is present in more than 85% of Ewing sarcomas. In our
previous study, we have found that the fusion genes pertaining to both derivative
chromosomes 11 and 22 in Ewing sarcoma cell nuclei are shifted to the midway
nuclear position between the native EWSR1 and FLI1 genes. In this contribution we
focused our attention at nuclear positioning of other genetic elements of
chromosomes 11 and 22 in order to find if the whole derivative chromosomes or
only their translocated parts change their nuclear positions in comparison with
the native chromosomes. Using repeated fluorescence in situ hybridization and
high-resolution cytometry, 2D radial positions of EWSR1, BCR, FLI1, BCL1 genes
and fluorescence weight centres of chromosome territories were compared for
intact and derivative chromosomes 11 and 22 in nuclei of three Ewing sarcoma
samples. Significant radial shift was obtained for the derivative EWSR1, FLI1 and
BCL1 genes and for the derivative chromosome 11 compared with the intact ones and
not very significant for chromosome 22 and the BCR gene. Our results also suggest
that the mean nuclear positions of fusion genes are determined by the final
structure of the derivative chromosomes and do not depend on the location of the 
translocation event.

PMID: 16837212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Jun;35(6):328-32.

[Application of fluorescence in-situ hybridization and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction in molecular diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma
and primitive neuroectodermal tumor].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Y(1), Wang H, Wei YY, Zhang Y, Ma XL, Yang XP, Zheng J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100083, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect tumor specific chromosome translocations and associated
fusion transcripts in paraffin-embedded tissue by interphase fluorescence in-situ
hybridization (FISH) and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR), respectively, and to evaluate their diagnostic values for Ewing's
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET).
METHODS: Nuclei of the tumor cells and total RNA were extracted from 10 cases of 
ES/PNET. Interphase FISH was utilized to analyze the EWS gene translocation with 
a dual color, break apart probe (Vysis company). RT-PCR was used to detect t (11;
22) (q24; q12) and t (21; 22) (q22; q12) fusion transcripts.
RESULTS: Among 10 cases of ES/PNET, the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript was detected
in 8 by RT-PCR. EWS-ERG fusion transcript was not detected in any of the cases.
EWS gene translocation was found in 9 of 10 cases by FISH.
CONCLUSIONS: Interphase FISH and RT-PCR can be reliably applied to
paraffin-embedded tissues for molecular diagnosis of ES/PNET. Between the two
approaches, interphase FISH provides a more sensitive and stable result.

PMID: 16834905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25259-69. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Fli1 and Ets1 have distinct roles in connective tissue growth factor/CCN2 gene
regulation and induction of the profibrotic gene program.

Nakerakanti SS(1), Kapanadze B, Yamasaki M, Markiewicz M, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

CCN2 (connective tissue growth factor), an important regulator of angiogenesis,
chondrogenesis, and wound healing, is overexpressed in a majority of fibrotic
diseases and in various tumors. This study investigated regulation of CCN2 gene
expression by Ets family of transcription factors, focusing on two members, Fli1 
and Ets1, with deregulated expression during fibrosis and tumorigenesis. We show 
that Ets1 and Fli1 have opposite effects on CCN2 gene expression. Ets1 functions 
as an activator of CCN2 transcription, whereas Fli1 acts as a repressor. A
functional Ets binding site was mapped at -114 within the CCN2 promoter. This
site not only mediates stimulation by Ets factors, including Ets1, Ets2, and
GABPalpha/beta, but is also required for the transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta response. The contrasting functions of Ets1 and Fli1 in regulation of 
the CCN2 gene were confirmed by suppressing their endogenous levels using
adenoviral vectors expressing specific small interfering RNAs. Additional
experiments using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays have revealed that in
fibroblasts both Ets1 and Fli1 occupy the CCN2 promoter. TGF-beta stimulation
resulted in displacement of Fli1 from the CCN2 promoter and a transient
inhibition of Fli1 synthesis. Moreover, reduction of Fli1 expression resulted in 
up-regulation of COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes and down-regulation of the MMP1 gene.
Thus, inhibition of Fli1 recapitulated some of the key effects of TGF-beta,
suggesting that Fli1 suppression is involved in activation of the profibrotic
gene program in fibroblasts. On the other hand, activation of the CCN2 gene
downstream of Ets1 is consistent with its role in angiogenesis and extracellular 
matrix remodeling. This study strongly supports a critical role of Fli1 and Ets1 
in the pathological extracellular matrix regulation during fibrosis and cancer.

PMID: 16829517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Clin Pathol. 2006 Jul;59(7):775-8.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumour of the urinary bladder: a
clinico-pathological study emphasising immunohistochemical, ultrastructural and
molecular analyses.

Lopez-Beltran A(1), Pérez-Seoane C, Montironi R, Hernández-Iglesias T, Mackintosh
C, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Cordoba, Spain.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs) of the bladder are extremely
rare and aggressive neoplasms, and only six examples have been reported in the
literature. The case of a 21-year-old woman, who remains disease free 3 years
after tumour resection, is reported here. Morphological features were found to
correspond to a small round blue cell tumour without rosette formation and with
extensive areas of necrosis. Strong expression of CD99, vimentin and CD117
(c-kit), and focal reactivity to cytokeratin and S-100 protein was observed in
tumour cells. Ultrastructurally, sparse neurosecretory granules were observed.
Diagnosis of PNET was supported by molecular genetic analysis, showing the
EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript type 2 by RT-PCR and EWS gene rearrangement by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation. A normal genetically balanced genotype was
shown by comparative genomic hybridisation, which, together with the expression
of c-kit, a known therapeutic target for imatinib, may have prognostic and
therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC1860413
PMID: 16803953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Jul;54(7):2271-9.

Association between enhanced type I collagen expression and epigenetic repression
of the FLI1 gene in scleroderma fibroblasts.

Wang Y(1), Fan PS, Kahaleh B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of Ohio, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, 3120
Glendale Avenue, Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis; SSc) is an autoimmune disease
characterized by vasculopathy and widespread organ fibrosis. Altered fibroblast
function, both in vivo and in vitro, is well documented and illustrated by
augmented synthesis and deposition of extracellular matrix proteins. We undertook
this study to investigate the possibility that epigenetic mechanisms mediate the 
emergence and persistence of the altered SSc fibroblast phenotype.
METHODS: The effects of DNA methyltransferase and histone deacetylase inhibitors 
on collagen expression and the level of epigenetic mediators in fibroblasts were 
examined. The effects of transient transfection of SSc fibroblasts with FLI1 gene
and normal cells with FLI1 antisense construct on collagen expression were
determined. The methylation status of the FLI1 promoter was tested in cultured
cells and in SSc and normal skin biopsy specimens.
RESULTS: Increased levels of epigenetic mediators in SSc fibroblasts were noted. 
The addition of epigenetic inhibitors to cell cultures normalized collagen
expression in SSc fibroblasts. The augmented collagen synthesis by SSc
fibroblasts was linked to epigenetic repression of the collagen suppressor gene
FLI1. Heavy methylation of the CpG islands in the FLI1 promoter region was
demonstrated in SSc fibroblasts and skin biopsy specimens.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that epigenetic mechanisms may
mediate the fibrotic manifestations of SSc. The signal transduction leading to
the SSc fibrotic phenotype appears to converge on DNA methylation and histone
deacetylation at the FLI1 gene.

PMID: 16802366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hum Pathol. 2006 Jul;37(7):845-53. Epub 2006 May 19.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma of the craniospinal
vault: case reports and review.

Mobley BC(1), Roulston D, Shah GV, Bijwaard KE, McKeever PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA
94035, USA.

The peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing's sarcoma family tumor
(pPNET/ESFT) group includes small round cell tumors of the bone, soft tissue, and
nerve with morphological attributes of the germinal neuroepithelium. Peripheral
PNETs/ESFTs also occur within the craniospinal vault, a region including the
central nervous system, the meninges, and the cranial and spinal nerve roots.
Gene rearrangements between the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 and members of the
ETS gene family are common in and specific to pPNETs/ESFTs. Another defining
characteristic of pPNETs/ESFTs is their membranous expression of the MIC2 gene
product. We describe 2 cases of pPNETs within the craniospinal vault. An
intradural tumor arising from the nerve roots of the cauda equina was discovered 
in a 32-year-old man presenting with radiculopathic back pain and lower-extremity
weakness. An intracranial pPNET that mimicked a meningioma was found in a
21-year-old man presenting with headache and visual disturbances. MIC2 gene
product expression and EWS/ETS gene rearrangement were detected in both case
patients. The literature with regard to pPNETs/ESFTs arising within the
craniospinal vault is reviewed.

PMID: 16784984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oligonucleotides. 2006 Summer;16(2):158-68.

Antisense oligonucleotide nanocapsules efficiently inhibit EWS-Fli1 expression in
a Ewing's sarcoma model.

Toub N(1), Bertrand JR, Malvy C, Fattal E, Couvreur P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physicochimie, Pharmacotechnie et Biopharmacie, UMR CNRS 8612, 
Faculté de Pharmacie, 92286 Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.

The cytogenetic abnormality of Ewing's sarcoma is related to the presence of a
balanced t(11;22) translocation expressing the EWS-Fli1 chimeric fusion protein. 
Oligonucleotides (ODNs) are specific compounds that inhibit gene expression at
the transcriptional level. They possess a poor bioavailability and are degraded
by nucleases very rapidly. Therefore, there is a strong need for the development 
of ODN drug delivery systems. In the present study, polyisobutylcyanoacrylate
nanocapsules entrapping ODNs in their aqueous core were prepared, with high
encapsulation yield (99%). Previous studies have demonstrated that such complexes
were able to inhibit tumor growth in mice. Nevertheless, no information was
available about their mode of action at the cellular level. The aim of this study
was to investigate the efficacy of these ODN nanocapsules on cultured tumor
cells. We found that nanocapsules were capable of protecting ODN against
degradation. Using confocal microscopy, we observed that cell uptake and nuclear 
accumulation of ODNs were importantly enhanced when ODNs were associated with
these nanocapsules. Consequently, a specific cellular growth inhibition and
suppression of EWSFli1 fusion gene expression was noticed. In conclusion, it was 
demonstrated that nanocapsules as nonviral vectors show great potential for the
delivery of ODNs to cells.

PMID: 16764539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Blood. 2006 Oct 1;108(7):2198-206. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Maturation stage-specific regulation of megakaryopoiesis by pointed-domain Ets
proteins.

Pang L(1), Xue HH, Szalai G, Wang X, Wang Y, Watson DK, Leonard WJ, Blobel GA,
Poncz M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, ARC 316H, 3165 Civic Center Blvd,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Numerous megakaryocyte-specific genes contain signature Ets-binding sites in
their regulatory regions. Fli-1 (friend leukemia integration 1), an Ets
transcription factor, is required for the normal maturation of megakaryocytes and
controls the expression of multiple megakaryocyte-specific genes. However, in
Fli-1-/- mice, early megakaryopoiesis persists, and the expression of the early
megakaryocyte-specific genes, alphaIIb and cMpl, is maintained, consistent with
functional compensation by a related Ets factor(s). Here we identify the Ets
protein GABPalpha (GA-binding protein alpha) as a regulator of early
megakaryocyte-specific genes. Notably, GABPalpha preferentially occupies Ets
elements of early megakaryocyte-specific genes in vitro and in vivo, whereas
Fli-1 binds both early and late megakaryocyte-specific genes. Moreover, the ratio
of GABPalpha/Fli-1 expression declines throughout megakaryocyte maturation.
Consistent with this expression pattern, primary fetal liver-derived
megakaryocytes from Fli-1-deficient murine embryos exhibit reduced expression of 
genes associated with late stages of maturation (glycoprotein [GP] Ibalpha, GPIX,
and platelet factor 4 [PF4]), whereas GABPalpha-deficient megakaryocytes were
mostly impaired in the expression of early megakaryocyte-specific genes (alphaIIb
and cMpl). Finally, mechanistic experiments revealed that GABPalpha, like Fli-1, 
can impart transcriptional synergy between the hematopoietic transcription factor
GATA-1 and its cofactor FOG-1 (friend of GATA-1). In concert, these data reveal
disparate, but overlapping, functions of Ets transcription factors at distinct
stages of megakaryocyte maturation.

PMCID: PMC1895561
PMID: 16757682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 1;66(11):5574-81.

Oncoprotein EWS-FLI1 activity is enhanced by RNA helicase A.

Toretsky JA(1), Erkizan V, Levenson A, Abaan OD, Parvin JD, Cripe TP, Rice AM,
Lee SB, Uren A.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, District of Columbia, USA. jat42@georgetown.edu

RNA helicase A (RHA), a member of the DEXH box helicase family of proteins, is an
integral component of protein complexes that regulate transcription and splicing.
The EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein is expressed as a result of the chromosomal
translocation t(11;22) that occurs in patients with the Ewing's sarcoma family of
tumors (ESFT). Using phage display library screening, we identified an EWS-FLI1
binding peptide containing homology to RHA. ESFT cell lines and patient tumors
highly expressed RHA. GST pull-down and ELISA assays showed that EWS-FLI1
specifically bound RHA fragment amino acids 630 to 1020, which contains the
peptide region discovered by phage display. Endogenous RHA was identified in a
protein complex with EWS-FLI1 in ESFT cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed both EWS-FLI1 and RHA bound to EWS-FLI1 target gene promoters.
RHA stimulated the transcriptional activity of EWS-FLI1 regulated promoters,
including Id2, in ESFT cells. In addition, RHA expression in mouse embryonic
fibroblast cells stably transfected with EWS-FLI1 enhanced the
anchorage-independent phenotype above that with EWS-FLI1 alone. These results
suggest that RHA interacts with EWS-FLI1 as a transcriptional cofactor to enhance
its function.

PMID: 16740692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncologist. 2006 May;11(5):503-19.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors: current management.

Bernstein M(1), Kovar H, Paulussen M, Randall RL, Schuck A, Teot LA, Juergens H.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Hematology/Oncology, Ste-Justine Hospital, University of Montreal, 
3175 Cote Ste. Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.
mark.lawrence.bernstein@umontreal.ca

Ewing's sarcoma is the second most frequent primary bone cancer, with
approximately 225 new cases diagnosed each year in patients less than 20 years of
age in North America. It is one of the pediatric small round blue cell tumors,
characterized by strong membrane expression of CD99 in a chain-mail pattern and
negativity for lymphoid (CD45), rhabdomyosarcoma (myogenin, desmin, actin) and
neuroblastoma (neurofilament protein) markers. Pathognomonic translocations
involving the ews gene on chromosome 22 and an ets-type gene, most commonly the
fli1 gene on chromosome 11, are implicated in the great majority of cases.
Clinical presentation is usually dominated by local bone pain and a mass. Imaging
reveals a technetium pyrophosphate avid lesion that, on plain radiograph, is
destructive, diaphyseal and classically causes layered periosteal calcification. 
Magnetic resonance best defines the extent of the lesion. Biopsy should be
undertaken by an experienced orthopedic oncologist. Approximately three quarters 
of patients have initially localized disease. About two thirds survive
disease-free. Management, preferably at a specialist center with a
multi-disciplinary team, includes both local control-either surgery, radiation or
a combination-and systemic chemotherapy. Chemotherapy includes cyclic
combinations, incorporating vincristine, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide,
etoposide, ifosfamide and occasionally actinomycin D. Topotecan in combination
with cyclophosphamide has shown preliminary activity. Patients with initially
metastatic disease fare less well, with about one quarter surviving. Studies
incorporating intensive therapy followed by stem cell infusion show no clear
benefit. New approaches include anti-angiogenic therapy, particularly since
vascular endothelial growth factor is an apparent downstream target of the
ews-fli1 oncogene.

PMID: 16720851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jul 1;15(13):2125-37. Epub 2006 May 22.

Fusion between CIC and DUX4 up-regulates PEA3 family genes in Ewing-like sarcomas
with t(4;19)(q35;q13) translocation.

Kawamura-Saito M(1), Yamazaki Y, Kaneko K, Kawaguchi N, Kanda H, Mukai H, Gotoh
T, Motoi T, Fukayama M, Aburatani H, Takizawa T, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) are highly malignant tumors arising from bone and
soft tissues that exhibit EWS-FLI1 or variant EWS-ETS gene fusions in more than
85% of the cases. Here we show that CIC, a human homolog of Drosophila capicua
which encodes a high mobility group box transcription factor, is fused to a
double homeodomain gene DUX4 as a result of a recurrent chromosomal translocation
t(4;19)(q35;q13). This translocation was seen in two cases of soft tissue sarcoma
diagnosed as Ewing-like sarcoma. CIC-DUX4 exhibits a transforming potential for
NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, and as a consequence of fusion with a C-terminal fragment of
DUX4, CIC acquires an enhanced transcriptional activity, suggesting that
expression of its downstream targets might be deregulated. Gene expression
analysis identified the ETS family genes, ERM/ETV5 and ETV1, as potential targets
for the gene product of CIC-DUX4. Indeed, CIC-DUX4 directly binds the ERM
promoter by recognizing a novel target sequence and significantly up-regulates
its expression. This study clarifies the function of CIC and its role in
tumorigenesis, as well as the importance of the PEA3 subclass of ETS family
proteins in the development of EFTs arising through mechanisms different from
those involving EWS-ETS chimeras. Moreover, the study identifies the role of DUX4
that is closely linked to facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy in
transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 16717057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Pharm Res. 2006 May;23(5):892-900. Epub 2006 May 2.

Efficacy of siRNA nanocapsules targeted against the EWS-Fli1 oncogene in Ewing
sarcoma.

Toub N(1), Bertrand JR, Tamaddon A, Elhamess H, Hillaireau H, Maksimenko A,
Maccario J, Malvy C, Fattal E, Couvreur P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physicochimie, Pharmacotechnie et Biopharmacie, Faculté de
Pharmacie, UMR CNRS 8612, 92286, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

The EWS-Fli1 fusion gene encodes for a chimeric oncogenic transcription factor
considered to be the cause of the Ewing sarcoma. The efficiency of small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) targeted toward the EWS-Fli1 transcript (at the
junction point type 1) was studied, free or encapsulated into recently developed 
polyisobutylcyanoacrylate aqueous core nanocapsules. Because this mRNA sequence
is only present in cancer cells, it therefore constituted a relevant target.
Studies of the intracellular penetration by confocal microscopy in NIH/3T3
EWS-Fli1 cells showed that nanocapsules improved the intracellular penetration of
siRNA with mainly a cytoplasmic localization. These biodegradable siRNA-loaded
nanocapsules were then tested in vivo on a mice xenografted EWS-Fli1-expressing
tumor; they were found to trigger a dose-dependant inhibition of tumor growth
after intratumoral injection. A specific inhibition of EWS-Fli1 was observed,
too. These findings now open new prospects for the treatment of experimental
cancers with junction oncogenes.

PMID: 16715379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Expression profiling of EWS/FLI identifies NKX2.2 as a critical target gene in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Smith R(1), Owen LA, Trem DJ, Wong JS, Whangbo JS, Golub TR, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Children, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Jan;11(1):97.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Our understanding of Ewing's sarcoma development mediated by the EWS/FLI fusion
protein has been limited by a lack of knowledge regarding the tumor cell of
origin. To circumvent this, we analyzed the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma itself. By combining retroviral-mediated RNA interference with
reexpression studies, we show that ongoing EWS/FLI expression is required for the
tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. We used this system to define the full 
complement of EWS/FLI-regulated genes in Ewing's sarcoma. Functional analysis
revealed that NKX2.2 is an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is necessary for oncogenic
transformation in this tumor. Thus, we developed a highly validated
transcriptional profile for the EWS/FLI fusion protein and identified a critical 
target gene in Ewing's sarcoma development.

PMID: 16697960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Ewing's sarcoma: general insights from a rare model.

Davis S(1), Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the presence of fusion oncoproteins involving
EWSR1 and an ETS gene, most commonly FLI1. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Smith et
al. have combined RNA interference with expression profiling to study the pattern
of gene expression downstream of the most common of these fusions, EWS/FLI. Using
this strategy, Smith et al. have identified a homeobox gene, NKX2.2, which is
both highly expressed in Ewing's sarcoma and essential for the transforming
activity of EWS/FLI.

PMID: 16697953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz). 2006 May-Jun;54(3):149-63. Epub 2006 May 2.

ETS transcription factors and regulation of immunity.

Gallant S(1), Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatolog, Medical University of South
Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas St. Suite 912, PO Box 250637, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. gallant@musc.edu

The ETS family is a diverse group of transcription factors that control the
expressions of genes that participate in an array of cellular activities, ranging
from mitosis to apoptosis. As a consequence of regulating these processes, most
ETS factors are oncogenic. However, there is growing evidence that ETS factors
are also essential to regulation of the immune system. Of the 29 recognized ETS
factors, nine are known to regulate genes involved in immunity, including Ets1,
Ets2, GABP, Fli1, Elf1, MEF, ESE1, PU.1, and SpiB. These ETS factors typically
activate the transcription of genes associated with pathogen and tumor defense,
but several also demonstrate ability to repress transcription. Ets1 and PU.1
appear to have the greatest impact on immunity, primarily through their control
of immune cell development. Alterations of Fli1 and Elf1 expression are
associated with autoimmunity, emphasizing the role of ETS factors as not only
positive, but also negative regulators of immunity. This review summarizes the
roles of ETS factors in development of the immune system, defense against
pathogens and malignancies, and self-tolerance.

PMID: 16652219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neurosurgery. 2006 May;58(5):E992; discussion E992.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the cavernous sinus: case report.

Attabib NA(1), West M, Rhodes RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Section of Neurosurgery, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNET
family) are small, round, blue cell tumors that have a decided predilection for
young patients and commonly arise in bone and soft tissue. We are reporting a
rare case of cavernous sinus pPNET in a 48-year-old woman.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION: A 48-year-old woman presented with headache, ipsilateral
maxillary, and ophthalmic and oculomotor nerve palsies. Neuroimaging revealed a
cavernous sinus lesion.
INTERVENTION: The patient underwent debulking of the tumor, and the diagnosis of 
a pPNET was made based on histological, immunohistochemical, and molecular
genetics (EWS-FLI1 fusion gene) findings. Bone scans, bone marrow aspiration, and
biopsy and chest computed tomographic scans showed no evidence of systemic
involvement. The patient had adjuvant treatment with radiotherapy and
chemotherapy. After 14 months, the patient had no neurological deficits, and
neuroimaging showed stable disease, although some chemotherapy complications
occurred.
CONCLUSION: This is a case of cavernous sinus pPNET in a 48-year-old woman, in
whom the diagnosis is supported by the presence of EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. This
seems to be the first reported case of a cavernous sinus pPNET confirmed by
molecular genetic analysis.

PMID: 16639307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2006 Apr 15;166(2):173-9.

Molecular cytogenetic characterization of four previously established and two
newly established Ewing sarcoma cell lines.

Szuhai K(1), Ijszenga M, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Hogendoorn PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, PO Box
9600, 2300RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. k.szuhai@lumc.nl

Most Ewing family tumors are identified by the characteristic translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), resulting in a fusion protein EWS/FLI1 that acts as an
aberrant transcription factor. In a minority of cases, the EWS gene is fused to
another member of the ETS gene (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV). Though the oncogenic
transforming capability of the EWS/FLI1 protein is highly suggestive, the exact
pathway behind remains to be elucidated. The availability of cell lines may help 
in the understanding of underlying cellular processes. In this study, we have
established two new Ewing sarcoma cell lines and characterized them with
molecular cytogenetic tools. This technology was also applied on four other
previously published Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Our findings in relation to
previous data on similar tumors are discussed.

PMID: 16631476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Future Oncol. 2005 Aug;1(4):521-8.

Ewing's sarcoma oncoprotein EWS-FLI1: the perfect target without a therapeutic
agent.

Uren A(1), Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown University School of Medicine, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 3970 Reservoir Road North West, New Research Building, Room W316,
Washington DC, WA 20057, USA. au26@georgetown.edu

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) affect patients between the ages of 3 and
40 years, with most cases occurring in the second decade of life. ESFTs are
characterized by a translocation that occurs in 95% of tumors. This translocation
joins the Ewing's sarcoma gene (EWS) located on chromosome 22 to an ets family
gene; either friend leukemia insertion (FLI)1 located on chromosome 11, t(11;22),
or ets-related gene (ERG) located on chromosome 21, t(21;22). The EWS-FLI1 fusion
transcript encodes a 68 kDa protein with two primary domains. The EWS domain is a
potent transcriptional activator, while the FLI1 domain contains a highly
conserved ets DNA binding domain. ESFT presents a clinical challenge, especially 
in patients with metastatic disease in which dose-intensifying chemotherapy with 
bone-marrow transplantation does not improve survival. EWS-FLI1 is only present
in ESFT cells and does not exist in any normal cell of the body. Experiments
using ESFT cell lines or animal xenograft models have proven that EWS-FLI1 is
required for tumor survival. Therefore, ESFT contains a unique protein generated 
by a tumor-specific translocation that has great potential as a molecular target 
for therapy. However, therapeutic applications directed towards eliminating or
inactivating EWS-FLI1 have not reached the clinic. EWS-FLI1 has been a very
difficult molecule to directly analyze in vitro due to poor solubility. Recent
advances in generating recombinant EWS-FLI1 and novel data on the cellular
functions of EWS-FLI1 should enhance progress towards understanding and
application.

PMID: 16556028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 12;281(19):13733-42. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Characterization of a megakaryocyte-specific enhancer of the key hemopoietic
transcription factor GATA1.

Guyot B(1), Murai K, Fujiwara Y, Valverde-Garduno V, Hammett M, Wells S, Dear N, 
Orkin SH, Porcher C, Vyas P.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford
OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.

Specification and differentiation of the megakaryocyte and erythroid lineages
from a common bipotential progenitor provides a well studied model to dissect
binary cell fate decisions. To understand how the distinct megakaryocyte- and
erythroid-specific gene programs arise, we have examined the transcriptional
regulation of the megakaryocyte erythroid transcription factor GATA1.
Hemopoietic-specific mouse (m)GATA1 expression requires the mGata1 enhancer
mHS-3.5. Within mHS-3.5, the 3' 179 bp of mHS-3.5 are required for megakaryocyte 
but not red cell expression. Here, we show mHS-3.5 binds key hemopoietic
transcription factors in vivo and is required to maintain histone acetylation at 
the mGata1 locus in primary megakaryocytes. Analysis of GATA1-LacZ reporter gene 
expression in transgenic mice shows that a 25-bp element within the 3'-179 bp in 
mHS-3.5 is critical for megakaryocyte expression. In vitro three DNA binding
activities A, B, and C bind to the core of the 25-bp element, and these binding
sites are conserved through evolution. Activity A is the zinc finger
transcription factor ZBP89 that also binds to other cis elements in the mGata1
locus. Activity B is of particular interest as it is present in primary
megakaryocytes but not red cells. Furthermore, mutation analysis in transgenic
mice reveals activity B is required for megakaryocyte-specific enhancer function.
Bioinformatic analysis shows sequence corresponding to the binding site for
activity B is a previously unrecognized motif, present in the cis elements of the
Fli1 gene, another important megakaryocyte-specific transcription factor. In
summary, we have identified a motif and a DNA binding activity likely to be
important in directing a megakaryocyte gene expression program that is distinct
from that in red cells.

PMID: 16551635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2615-25.

Transcriptional link between blood and bone: the stem cell leukemia gene and its 
+19 stem cell enhancer are active in bone cells.

Pimanda JE(1), Silberstein L, Dominici M, Dekel B, Bowen M, Oldham S, Kallianpur 
A, Brandt SJ, Tannahill D, Göttgens B, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Blood and vascular cells are generated during early embryogenesis from a common
precursor, the hemangioblast. The stem cell leukemia gene (SCL/tal 1) encodes a
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is essential for the normal
development of blood progenitors and blood vessels. We have previously
characterized a panel of SCL enhancers including the +19 element, which directs
expression to hematopoietic stem cells and endothelium. Here we demonstrate that 
SCL is expressed in bone primordia during embryonic development and in adult
osteoblasts. Despite consistent expression in cells of the osteogenic lineage,
SCL protein is not required for bone specification of embryonic stem cells. In
transgenic mice, the SCL +19 core enhancer directed reporter gene expression to
vascular smooth muscle and bone in addition to blood and endothelium. A 644-bp
fragment containing the SCL +19 core enhancer was active in both blood and bone
cell lines and was bound in vivo by a common array of Ets and GATA transcription 
factors. Taken together with the recent observation that a common progenitor can 
give rise to blood and bone cells, our results suggest that the SCL +19 enhancer 
targets a mesodermal progenitor capable of generating hematopoietic, vascular,
and osteoblastic progeny.

PMCID: PMC1430329
PMID: 16537906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(7):2467-78.

Cooperative DNA binding with AP-1 proteins is required for transformation by
EWS-Ets fusion proteins.

Kim S(1), Denny CT, Wisdom R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology and UC Davis Cancer Center, University of
California at Davis, USA.

A key molecular event in the genesis of Ewing's sarcoma is the consistent
presence of chromosomal translocations that result in the formation of proteins
in which the amino terminus of EWS is fused to the carboxyl terminus, including
the DNA binding domain, of one of five different Ets family proteins. These
fusion proteins function as deregulated transcription factors, resulting in
aberrant control of gene expression. Recent data indicate that some EWS-Ets
target promoters, including the uridine phosphorylase (UPP) promoter, harbor
tandem binding sites for Ets and AP-1 proteins. Here we show that those Ets
family proteins that participate in Ewing's sarcoma, including Fli1, ERG, and
ETV1, cooperatively bind these tandem elements with Fos-Jun while other Ets
family members do not. Analysis of this cooperativity in vitro shows that (i)
many different spatial arrangements of the Ets and AP-1 sites support cooperative
binding, (ii) the bZIP motifs of Fos and Jun are sufficient to support this
cooperativity, and (iii) both the Ets domain and carboxy-terminal sequences of
Fli1 are important for cooperative DNA binding. EWS-Fli1 activates the expression
of UPP mRNA, is directly bound to the UPP promoter, and transforms 3T3
fibroblasts; in contrast, a C-terminally truncated mutant form of EWS-Fli1 that
cannot cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is defective in all of these
properties. The results show that the ability of EWS-Ets proteins to
cooperatively bind DNA with Fos-Jun is critical to the biologic activities of
these proteins. The results have implications for understanding the pathogenesis 
of Ewing's sarcoma. In addition, they may be relevant to the mechanisms of
Ras-dependent activation of genes that harbor tandem Ets and AP-1 binding sites.

PMCID: PMC1430316
PMID: 16537893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Urologe A. 2006 Jun;45(6):735-8.

[Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney].

[Article in German]

Ellinger J(1), Bastian P, Hauser S, Biermann K, Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Urologie, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms Universität,
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53105, Bonn. joergellinger@web.de

Primitive neuroectodermal Tumor (PNET) is a rare malignant tumor of young adult. 
Patients often present with the classical trias of renal cancer (pain,
haematuria, palpable tumor). Specific radiological signs are missing, and
therefore a PNET is often diagnosed postoperatively. It is characterized by the
expression of MIC2, neural markers (Vimentin, S-100, Synaptophysin) and
EWS/FLI1-translocation. The tumor is often diagnosed in advanced stage, and
prognosis is poor despite of multimodal treatment including radical nephrectomy, 
polychemotherapy (vincristine, adriamycin, cyclophosphamid, etoposide,
ifosfamide) and radiation in case of metastases or incomplete resection of
primary tumor. We represent two cases of metastatic renal PNET in a 28- and
39-year-old patient. Due to the multimodal treatment a partial and a complete
remission was achieved, respectively.

PMID: 16534648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mod Pathol. 2006 May;19(5):659-68.

Cluster analysis of immunohistochemical profiles in synovial sarcoma, malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and Ewing sarcoma.

Olsen SH(1), Thomas DG, Lucas DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109-0054, USA.

As a result of overlapping morphologic and immunohistochemical features, it can
be difficult to distinguish synovial sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor, and Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in core biopsies. To
analyze and compare immunohistochemical profiles, we stained tissue microarrays
of 23 synovial sarcomas, 23 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and 27
Ewing sarcomas with 22 antibodies potentially useful in the differential
diagnosis, and analyzed the data with cluster analysis. Stain intensity was
scored as none, weak, or strong. For CD99, tumors with membranous accentuation
were independently categorized. Cluster analysis sorted five groups, with like
tumors clustering together. Synovial sarcoma clustered into two groups: one
cytokeratin and EMA positive (n = 11), the other mostly cytokeratin negative, EMA
positive, bcl-2 positive and mostly CD56 positive (n = 9). Malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor clustered into two groups: one S100 positive, with nestin and 
NGFR positivity in most (n = 10), the other mostly S100 negative, and variably
but mostly weakly positive for nestin and NGFR (n = 11). Ewing sarcomas clustered
into a single group driven by membranous CD99 staining. Thirteen cases failed to 
cluster (outliers), while three Ewing sarcomas clustered into groups of other
tumor types. Paired antibodies for each tumor type determined by visual
assessment of cluster analysis data and statistical calculations of specificity, 
sensitivity, and predictive values showed that EMA/CK7 for synovial sarcoma,
nestin/S100 for malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, and membranous
CD99/Fli-1 for Ewing sarcoma yielded high specificity and positive predictive
values. Cluster analysis also highlighted aberrant staining reactions and
diagnostic pitfalls in these tumors. Hierarchical cluster analysis is an
effective method for analyzing high-volume immunohistochemical data.

PMID: 16528378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2006 Apr-May;23(3):263-7.

Spinal epidural extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma in an adolescent boy: a case report.

Athanassiadou F(1), Tragiannidis A, Kourti M, Papageorgiou T, Kotoula V,
Kontopoulos V, Christoforidis J.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Pediatric Department, Hematology-Oncology Unit, AHEPA Hospital, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. atragian@hotmail.com

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (EES) represents a rare soft tissue malignant
neoplasm histologically similar to skeletal Ewing sarcoma. It occurs mainly in
adolescents and young adults and commonly affects the paravertebral regions. The 
differential diagnosis includes other small, blue round cells tumors. The authors
report a case of an EES involving the spinal epidural and paravertebral spaces in
an adolescent boy. EES diagnosis was confirmed by features of histologic analysis
and immunohistochemistry and by the presence of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal
translocation by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMID: 16517542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Histopathology. 2006 Mar;48(4):363-76.

Ewing's sarcoma of bone: the detection of specific transcripts in a large,
consecutive series of formalin-fixed, decalcified, paraffin-embedded tissue
samples using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

Mangham DC(1), Williams A, McMullan DJ, McClure J, Sumathi VP, Grimer RJ, Davies 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Musculoskeletal Pathology, Royal Orthopaedic Hospital, The
Medical School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
chas.mangham@rjah.nhs.uk

AIMS: (i) To report on the routine use of the reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) technique on decalcified or non-decalcified,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue (FFPET) for translocation detection,
with particular emphasis on improved RNA extraction methodology and the use of
PCR primers designed to generate small amplicons. (ii) To report on the relative 
incidences of translocation types and transcript variants in a large, single
institution series of Ewing's sarcoma of bone.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using RT-PCR to detect specific transcript variants, we
analysed FFPET from 54 consecutive cases of Ewing's sarcoma of bone. We used
'gold standard' detection methods on corresponding fresh and fresh frozen tissue 
to validate the technique. We have demonstrated the effective use of RT-PCR on
decalcified and non-decalcified FFPET samples for sarcoma-specific translocation 
detection (96% sensitivity, 100% specificity). Tissue decalcification did not
affect the detection rate. The relative incidence of Ewing's sarcoma-specific
translocation types and transcript variants was entirely consistent with
previously published data.
CONCLUSIONS: With equal effectiveness, RT-PCR can be applied to both acid
decalcified and non-decalcified FFPET for (Ewing's sarcoma) translocation
detection and the technique can be introduced into routine practice in
histopathology departments.

PMID: 16487358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Blood. 2006 Jun 15;107(12):4737-45. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Endoglin expression in the endothelium is regulated by Fli-1, Erg, and Elf-1
acting on the promoter and a -8-kb enhancer.

Pimanda JE(1), Chan WY, Donaldson IJ, Bowen M, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Angiogenesis is critical to the growth and regeneration of tissue but is also a
key component of tumor growth and chronic inflammatory disorders. Endoglin plays 
a key role in angiogenesis by modulating cellular responses to transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling and is upregulated in proliferating
endothelial cells. To gain insights into the transcriptional hierarchies that
govern endoglin expression, we used a combination of comparative genomic,
biochemical, and transgenic approaches. Both the promoter and a region 8 kb
upstream of exon 1 were active in transfection assays in endothelial cells. In
transgenic mice, the promoter directed low-level expression to a subset of
endothelial cells. By contrast, inclusion of the -8 enhancer resulted in robust
endothelial activity with additional staining in developing ear mesenchyme.
Subsequent molecular analysis demonstrated that both the -8 enhancer and the
promoter depend on conserved Ets sites, which were bound in endothelial cells in 
vivo by Fli-1, Erg, and Elf-1. This study therefore establishes the
transcriptional framework within which endoglin functions during angiogenesis.

PMID: 16484587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Arthritis Res Ther. 2006;8(2):R36. Epub 2006 Jan 16.

The induction of CCN2 by TGFbeta1 involves Ets-1.

Van Beek JP(1), Kennedy L, Rockel JS, Bernier SM, Leask A.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group in Skeletal Development and Remodeling, Schulich School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Dental Sciences Building, The University of Western Ontario,
London, ON N6A 5C1, Canada.

CCN2 is encoded by an immediate-early gene induced in mesenchymal cells during
the formation of blood vessels, bone and connective tissue. It plays key roles in
cell adhesion and migration, as well as matrix remodeling. CCN2 is overexpressed 
in fibrosis, arthritis and cancer; thus, an understanding of how to control CCN2 
expression is likely to have importance in developing therapies to combat these
pathologies. Previously, we found that the promoter sequence GAGGAATG is
important for Ccn2 gene regulation in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. In this report, we
show that this sequence mediates activation of the CCN2 promoter by the ETS
family of transcription factors. Endogenous Ets-1 binds this element of the CCN2 
promoter, and dominant negative Ets-1 and specific Ets-1 small interfering RNA
block induction of CCN2 expression by TGFbeta. In the absence of added TGFbeta1, 
Ets-1, but not the related fli-1, synergizes with Smad 3 to activate the CCN2
promoter. Whereas the ability of transfected Ets-1 to activate the CCN2 promoter 
is dependent on protein kinase C (PKC), Ets-1 in the presence of co-transfected
Smad3 does not require PKC, suggesting that the presence of Smad3 bypasses the
requirement of Ets-1 for PKC to activate target promoter activity. Our results
are consistent with the notion that Smad3 and Ets-1 cooperate in the induction of
the CCN2 promoter by TGFbeta1. Antagonizing Ets-1 might be of benefit in
attenuating CCN2 expression in fibrosis, arthritis and cancer, and may be useful 
in modulating the outcome of these disorders.

PMCID: PMC1526589
PMID: 16469114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Pathol. 2006 Apr;208(5):624-32.

STAT3 is activated in a subset of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumours.

Lai R(1), Navid F, Rodriguez-Galindo C, Liu T, Fuller CE, Ganti R, Dien J, Dalton
J, Billups C, Khoury JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

STAT3 is an oncogene that regulates critical cellular processes and whose
constitutive activation has been demonstrated to correlate with biological and
clinical features in many types of human malignancy. In this study, STAT3
activation was assessed in the Ewing sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT), which is
characterized by fusion of the EWS gene with one of several Ets transcription
factors, most commonly EWS-FLI1. STAT3 activation was assessed by
immunohistochemistry using a monoclonal antibody specific for
tyrosine(705)-phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3(tyr705)) and a tissue microarray
containing 49 paraffin-embedded ESFT tumours with known EWS translocations.
Twenty-five (51%) tumours were pSTAT3(tyr705)-positive, as defined by more than
10% tumour cell immunostaining. STAT3 activation correlated with tumour site at
presentation, with pSTAT3(tyr705)-negative ESFT involving axial sites
predominantly (p = 0.008). Notably, among 31 patients who presented with
localized disease, high-level STAT3 activation correlated with better overall
survival (p = 0.02). STAT3 activation was not directly related to EWS-FLI1
expression, since EWS-FLI1 transfection did not result in STAT3 activation.
Furthermore, detailed molecular analysis indicated that STAT3 activation may be
seen with EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG and appears to be independent of EWS-FLI1 fusion
type. In conclusion, STAT3 activation is present in approximately half of ESFT
and correlates with clinical features. The role of STAT3 activation in ESFT
pathogenesis seems to be independent of the type of EWS/Ets translocation.

PMID: 16463269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Surg Today. 2006;36(2):193-7.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the colon: report of a case.

Kuwabara K(1), Ishida H, Shirakawa K, Yokoyama M, Nakada H, Hayashi Y, Hashimoto 
D, Miura I, Itoyama S, Heike Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Tract and General Surgery, Saitama Medical School,
1981 Kamoda, Tsujido-cho, Kawagoe, Saitama, 350-8550, Japan.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs) are usually found in the
soft tissue of the extremities, paravertebral region, and chest wall. We report a
rare case of a pPNET arising in the colon. A 59-year-old man underwent left
hemicolectomy for an infiltrative ulcerating tumor, 11 cm long, in the descending
colon. Histological examination of the resected specimen revealed small, round
cell proliferation with rosette-like structures, and confirmed regional lymph
node involvement and peritoneal dissemination near the primary tumor.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin and MIC2
(CD 99). ESW-FLI1 chimeric mRNA was detected in the tumor by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The patient underwent resection of
recurrence in the retroperitoneum 3 months later, but metastasis rapidly
developed and he died of the disease 7 months after his first operation.

PMID: 16440172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):803-11.

The possible role of EWS-Fli1 in evasion of senescence in Ewing family tumors.

Matsunobu T(1), Tanaka K, Nakamura T, Nakatani F, Sakimura R, Hanada M, Li X,
Okada T, Oda Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, 812-8582 Fukuoka, Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(11;22) yields the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene and is
associated with oncogenesis of Ewing family tumors (EFT). In this study, using
the RNA interference method, we show that EWS-Fli1-targeting small interfering
RNAs (siRNA) depleted EWS-Fli1 protein and caused growth inhibition in EFT cells 
with the accumulation of p27 protein and the down-regulation of Skp2 protein in
dose-dependent, time-dependent, and sequence-specific manners. Depletion of
EWS-Fli1 subacutely elicited a senescence-like phenotype, but not apoptosis, in
EFT cells. Furthermore, not only the knockdown of p27, but also the forced
expression of Skp2, reduced the expression levels of p27 protein and partially
rescued senescence-like phenotype caused by EWS-Fli1-targeting siRNAs. The
accumulation of p27 protein in EWS-Fli1-depleted cells inhibited cdk2 kinase
activity and was related to the stability of p27 protein, which resulted from a
decrease in Skp2 protein. Immunohistochemical analysis of p27 and Skp2 proteins
in EFT samples revealed that there was an inverse relationship between the
expression profiles of p27 and Skp2 proteins. These findings indicate an
important role of EWS-Fli1 in the prevention of senescence, leading to the
unlimited growth and oncogenesis of EFT cells through a decrease in the stability
of p27 protein due to increased action of Skp2-mediated 26S proteasome
degradation.

PMID: 16424012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Hematol Oncol. 2006 Mar;24(1):14-21.

Regulation of apoptosis and proliferation in Ewing's sarcoma--opportunities for
targeted therapy.

Kontny U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Germany.
kontny@kikli.uni-freiburg.de

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors are malignant tumors of bone and soft tissue
which occur predominantely in children and adolescents. Whereas cure rates for
patients with localized tumors are around 70%, survival rates for patients with
metastases or relapse are poor in spite of intensive chemo- and radiation
therapy, demonstrating a clear need for new, more effective therapies. Insights
into the biology of the tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family with identification 
of the EWS/ETS gene rearrangement as the key event in malignant transformation
and its influence on the regulation of various pathways involved in
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis has led to the identification of
potential targets for the development of new molecular therapeutics. This review 
will focus on the regulation of major pathways of proliferation and apoptosis in 
tumors of the Ewing's sarcoma family and point out how modulation of these
pathways might be of potential use for future therapy.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16400699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Nov;1058:52-61.

In vivo potentialities of EWS-Fli-1 targeted antisense
oligonucleotides-nanospheres complexes.

Maksimenko A(1), Polard V, Villemeur M, Elhamess H, Couvreur P, Bertrand JR,
Aboubakar M, Gottikh M, Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)Bioalliance Pharma SA, Paris 75015, France.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene, resulting from a t(11;22) translocation, plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma. Previously, we have shown that
antisense oligonucleotides designed against EWS-Fli-1 inhibited tumor growth in
nude mice provided they were delivered intratumorally by nanocapsules or by
CTAB-coated nanospheres. In this study, we have used two types of nanospheres
(designated as type 1 and type 2 nanospheres) stabilized with chitosan for both
intratumoral and systemic administration of oligonucleotides. Inhibition of the
tumor growth in vivo was found to be dependent on the carrier type as well as on 
antisense oligonucleotide modification. Indeed, whereas both types of nanospheres
were efficient in reducing tumor growth after intratumoral injection, we have
obtained only with type 2 nanospheres an antitumoral effect after intravenous
injection in a preliminary experiment. Additionally, the anticancer efficacy of a
localized modification of the EWS-Fli-1 phosphodiester/phosphorothioate chimeric 
antisense oligonucleotide was demonstrated. In cell culture the oligonucleotides 
inhibit cell growth by their antisense activity. Further investigations are
needed in vivo to learn the mechanism of action of the complexes.

PMID: 16394125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11459-68.

Development of Ewing's sarcoma from primary bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
progenitor cells.

Riggi N(1), Cironi L, Provero P, Suvà ML, Kaloulis K, Garcia-Echeverria C,
Hoffmann F, Trumpp A, Stamenkovic I.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Division, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9786; author reply 9786.

Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) and the second most
common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy of children and young adults. It is 
associated in 85% of cases with the t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation
that generates fusion of the 5' segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of
the ETS family gene FLI-1. The EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein behaves as an aberrant
transcriptional activator and is believed to contribute to EFT development.
However, EWS-FLI-1 induces growth arrest and apoptosis in normal fibroblasts, and
primary cells that are permissive for its putative oncogenic properties have not 
been discovered, hampering basic understanding of EFT biology. Here, we show that
EWS-FLI-1 alone can transform primary bone marrow-derived mesenchymal progenitor 
cells and generate tumors that display hallmarks of Ewing's sarcoma, including a 
small round cell phenotype, expression of EFT-associated markers, insulin like
growth factor-I dependence, and induction or repression of numerous EWS-FLI-1
target genes. These observations provide the first identification of candidate
primary cells from which EFTs originate and suggest that EWS-FLI-1 expression may
constitute the initiating event in EFT pathogenesis.

PMID: 16357154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. BMC Bioinformatics. 2005 Dec 1;6 Suppl 4:S14.

Mining published lists of cancer related microarray experiments: identification
of a gene expression signature having a critical role in cell-cycle control.

Finocchiaro G(1), Mancuso F, Muller H.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 Milan, Italy.
Giacomo.finocchiaro@ifom-ieo-campus.it

BACKGROUND: Routine application of gene expression microarray technology is
rapidly producing large amounts of data that necessitate new approaches of
analysis. The analysis of a specific microarray experiment profits enormously
from cross-comparing to other experiments. This process is generally performed by
numerical meta-analysis of published data where the researcher chooses the
datasets to be analyzed based on assumptions about the biological relations of
published datasets to his own data, thus severely limiting the possibility of
finding surprising connections. Here we propose using a repository of published
gene lists for the identification of interesting datasets to be subjected to more
detailed numerical analysis.
RESULTS: We have compiled lists of genes that have been reported as
differentially regulated in cancer related microarray studies. We searched these 
gene lists for statistically significant overlaps with lists of genes regulated
by the tumor suppressors p16 and pRB. We identified a highly significant overlap 
of p16 and pRB target genes with genes regulated by the EWS/FLI fusion protein.
Detailed numerical analysis of these data identified two sets of genes with
clearly distinct roles in the G1/S and the G2/M phases of the cell cycle, as
measured by enrichment of Gene Ontology categories.
CONCLUSION: We show that mining of published gene lists in the absence of
numerical detail about gene expression levels constitutes a fast, easy to
perform, widely applicable, and unbiased route towards the identification of
biologically related gene expression microarray datasets.

PMCID: PMC1866394
PMID: 16351740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 15;175(12):7996-8002.

The cytotoxicity receptor CRACC (CS-1) recruits EAT-2 and activates the PI3K and 
phospholipase Cgamma signaling pathways in human NK cells.

Tassi I(1), Colonna M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The CD2-like receptor-activating cytotoxic cell (CRACC) is a cell surface
receptor of the CD2 family that triggers NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity through an
undefined signaling pathway. CRACC contains cytoplasmic tyrosine-based motifs,
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motifs, which resemble those found in the NK
cell receptor 2B4. In 2B4, these motifs recruit the adaptor signaling lymphocytic
activation molecule-associated protein (SAP), which initiates a signaling cascade
mediating cytotoxicity. However, CRACC does not recruit SAP. In this study, we
demonstrate that, upon activation, CRACC associates with a homolog of SAP,
Ewing's sarcoma's/FLI1-activated transcript 2 (EAT-2), in human NK cells. We show
that association of EAT-2 induces the phosphorylation of CRACC and that this
process is partially reduced by a pharmacological inhibitor of Src kinases. We
identify PLCgamma1, PLCgamma2, and PI3K as the major signaling mediators
downstream of CRACC/EAT-2 implicated in NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Moreover, 
EAT-2 also associates with 2B4 predominantly in resting NK cells, whereas SAP
preferentially binds 2B4 upon activation. These results outline a new signaling
pathway that triggers CRACC-mediated cytotoxicity and modulates 2B4-mediated
activation.

PMID: 16339536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Histopathology. 2005 Dec;47(6):575-81.

Evaluation of perineurial differentiation in epithelioid sarcoma.

Smith ME(1), Awasthi R, O'Shaughnessy S, Fisher C.

Author information: 
(1)Histopathology, Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, London, UK.
mark.smith@phnt.swest.nhs.uk

AIMS: To investigate the differentiation pattern of epithelioid sarcoma in terms 
of perineurial and endothelial differentiation, and its relationship to that of
meningioma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nine cases of epithelioid sarcoma and five cases of
meningioma were studied in an immunohistochemical analysis of 'perineurial'
antigens [GLUT-1, claudin-1, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and VE-cadherin]
and of 'endothelial' antigens not present on normal perineurium (CD34, CD31,
Fli-1). Both epithelioid sarcoma and meningioma showed frequent expression of the
perineurial markers GLUT-1, claudin-1 and EMA. VE-cadherin was identified in one 
of five meningiomas, and in the only case of epithelioid sarcoma in which
suitably fixed material was available. CD34 was expressed by all epithelioid
sarcomas studied but by none of the meningiomas. Fli-1 was present in a
substantial majority of epithelioid sarcomas and by all the meningiomas. CD31 was
not detected in any epithelioid sarcoma or meningioma.
CONCLUSIONS: The results were evaluated in the context of previous
immunohistochemical, ultrastructural and genetic studies and suggest that
epithelioid sarcoma may be a form of malignant perineurioma with a range of
differentiation (epithelial features) akin to that seen in meningioma, reflecting
the close relationship between perineurium and meningothelium.

PMID: 16324194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6664-72. Epub 2005 Nov 28.

A critical role for calponin 2 in vascular development.

Tang J(1), Hu G, Hanai J, Yadlapalli G, Lin Y, Zhang B, Galloway J, Bahary N,
Sinha S, Thisse B, Thisse C, Jin JP, Zon LI, Sukhatme VP.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division and Center for Study of the Tumor Microenvironment, Department 
of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215,
USA.

Calponin 2 (h2 calponin, CNN2) is an actin-binding protein implicated in
cytoskeletal organization. We have found that the expression of calponin 2 is
relatively restricted to vasculature from 16 to 30 h post-fertilization during
zebrafish (Danio rerio) development. Forty-eight hours after injecting antisense 
morpholino oligos against calponin 2 into embryos at the 1-4-cell stage,
zebrafish demonstrated various cardiovascular defects, including sluggish axial
and head circulation, absence of circulation in intersegmental vessels and in the
dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessel, enlarged cerebral ventricles, and
pericardial edema, in addition to an excess bending, spiraling tail and twisting 
of the caudal fin. Knockdown of calponin 2 in the Tg(fli1:EGFP)(y1) zebrafish
line (in which a fli1 promoter drives vascular-specific enhanced green
fluorescent protein expression) indicated that diminished calponin 2 expression
blocked the proper migration of endothelial cells during formation of
intersegmental vessels. In vitro studies showed that basic fibroblast growth
factor-induced human umbilical vein endothelial cell migration was down-regulated
by knockdown of calponin 2 expression using an antisense adenovirus, and
overexpression of calponin 2 enhanced migration and hastened wound healing. These
events were correlated with activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase;
moreover, inhibition of this pathway blocked the promigratory effect of calponin 
2. Collectively, these data suggest that calponin 2 plays an important role in
the migration of endothelial cells both in vivo and in vitro and that its
expression is critical for proper vascular development.

PMID: 16317011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Lab Clin Med. 2005 Dec;146(6):326-32.

Differential regulation of the rat heme oxygenase-1 expression by Ets
oncoproteins in glomerular mesangial cells.

Dhulipala PD(1), Datta PK, Reddy ES, Lianos EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ 08903-0019, USA.

The Ets-1 oncoprotein and the heme-catabolizing enzyme heme oxygenase (HO)-1 have
been implicated in the pathogenesis of renal disease. We investigated the role of
the putative Ets-binding sites (EBSs) in the transactivation of the proximal
promoter of rat heme oxygenase 1 (hmox1) gene by the Ets oncoproteins Fli-1,
Erg-2, and Ets-1 in mesangial cells. We examined several rat
hmox1-chloramphenicol acetytransferase (CAT) constructs and EBS mutant constructs
in an effort to assess the effect of ETS oncoproteins on transactivation of the
rat hmox1 proximal promoter in renal glomerular mesangial cells. CAT assays
demonstrated that the proximal promoter region (-1387 to -40) contains positive
and negative regulatory regions and that the EBS-2, 3, and 4 play a role in basal
promoter activity. Overexpression of Fli-1 and Erg-2 proteins showed a
significant increase in promoter activity, whereas Ets-1 showed no effect on
promoter activity. The Fli-1-induced transcriptional activation was not altered
by mutation of EBSs, either independently or in combination. However, mutation of
EBS-4 independently or a combined mutation of sites 3 and 4 led to a 50%
reduction in Erg-2-induced transcriptional activation. Furthermore, mutation of
EBS-2 and 4 completely abolished Erg-2-mediated promoter activation. Our results 
support a role for Ets transcription factors in the regulation of rat hmox-1 gene
expression in mesangial cells.

PMID: 16310515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Neurooncol. 2006 Mar;77(1):65-72. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumours (PNETs) located in the spinal canal; the
relevance of classification as central or peripheral PNET : case report of a
primary spinal PNET occurrence with a critical literature review.

Kampman WA(1), Kros JM, De Jong TH, Lequin MH.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Hospital of the Vrije Universiteit Brussel (AZVUB), Brussels,
Belgium. kampmanwendy@hotmail.com

Intraspinal location of central PNET (cPNET) is very rare. We present a case,
critically review all publications of primary intraspinal cPNET occurrence and
discuss tendencies in clinical presentation. In several previous attempts to
summarise, authors often confused cPNET with peripheral PNET (pPNET). cPNET and
pPNET are different entities with different immunohistochemical profiles and
genetic backgrounds. Clinically, they are both aggressive tumours, but exhibit
different characteristics in their local manifestation and metastatic spread.
Survival rates are quite similar provided that treatment is applied according to 
the established protocols. Protocols in cPNET treatment differ from those for
pPNET as regards the order of the treatment sub-modalities, specific
chemotherapeutic regimen and intensity, radiation dose and its extent and
consequently, the side effects. Therefore, failure to distinguish cPNET from
pPNET leads to clinical guidance and treatment proposals based on false
assumptions, which might effect outcomes. Often, distinguishing between cPNET and
pPNET is easy, because they occur in different location. In the case of
intraspinal tumour location, however, the differentiation is crucial because both
primary cPNET and pPNET can occur intraspinally, even though this is rare.
Nowadays, demonstrating the expression of MIC2 glycoprotein by immunocytochemical
staining (CD99) showing the specific EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene presence in pPNET,
offers an easy way of making a differential diagnosis between cPNET and pPNET.

PMID: 16292490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Mar;45(3):257-64.

Amplified, lost, and fused genes in 11q23-25 amplicon in acute myeloid leukemia, 
an array-CGH study.

Tyybäkinoja A(1), Saarinen-Pihkala U, Elonen E, Knuutila S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and HUSLAB, University of Helsinki
and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Gene amplifications occur rarely in hematologic neoplasms. We characterized two
cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with marker chromosomes and 11q23-25
amplicons. Case 1 was a 14-year-old male with an additional ring of chromosome 11
material as the sole karyotypic abnormality, as determined by G-banding and
multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization. Standard comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) showed amplification in 11q23-qter. However, the MLL gene, in
11q23, was not amplified by FISH. Case 2 was a 38-year-old male with the
G-banding karyotype 51,XY,+8,+19,+3mar and with 11q22-qter amplification by
standard CGH. This patient also had the MLL-LARG fusion gene. We used
microarray-based CGH (array-CGH) to characterize the amplicons. In case 1, the
amplified region in 11q24.3-25 (5.5 Mb) was continuous, and MLL was not
amplified, as expected. In case 2, the amplicon was divided into two distinct
parts, in 11q23.3 (1.2 Mb) and in 11q23.3-25 (13.3 Mb). It contained a loss (
approximately 1 Mb) in 11q23.3, and the amplicon breakpoint was in the middle of 
MLL. Although the amplicon size varied, the patients had a common amplified
region in 11q24-25 that comprised 14 genes. Expression microarray of case 1
revealed that three of these genes, FLI1, NFRKB, and SNX19, were also
overexpressed. The results indicate that the 11q24-q25 region may harbor new
candidate oncogenes. In addition, the complex amplicon of case 2 suggests some
intriguing chromosomal mechanisms.

PMID: 16283618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jan;19(1):1-8.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in routinely
processed tissue: a comparison of two FISH strategies and RT-PCR in malignant
round cell tumors.

Bridge RS(1), Rajaram V, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD, Perry A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Lauren V Ackerman Laboratory of
Surgical Pathology, Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Washington University Medical Center,
St Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) is a diagnostically
challenging malignant round cell tumor with signature translocations involving
the EWS gene. These translocations are detectable with both reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. However, RT-PCR 
is less sensitive in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded than frozen tissue.
Similarly, commercial FISH probes have recently become available, but have yet to
be rigorously tested in the clinical setting. Therefore, we have compared RT-PCR 
with FISH using 'home brew' fusion probes for Ewing sarcoma (EWS)-FLI1 and a
commercial EWS break apart probe set in 67 archival round cell tumors, including 
27 EWS/PNETs. Sensitivities and specificities for both FISH assays were 91 and
100%, respectively, whereas RT-PCR had a sensitivity of 54% and a specificity of 
85%. The break apart strategy was easier to interpret than probe fusion approach.
We conclude that FISH is a more sensitive and reliable ancillary technique than
RT-PCR for the diagnosis of EWS/PNET in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue, 
although the latter provides additional information regarding fusion transcript
subtype and prognosis. The commercial break apart probe set is both readily
available and easy to interpret, making it particularly attractive. Nonetheless, 
complex round cell tumors often benefit from molecular testing with multiple
methods.

PMID: 16258512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Mod Pathol. 2005 Dec;18(12):1585-90.

Dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization for EWS gene
rearrangement distinguishes clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue from malignant
melanoma.

Patel RM(1), Downs-Kelly E, Weiss SW, Folpe AL, Tubbs RR, Tuthill RJ, Goldblum
JR, Skacel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30355, USA. rmpate5@emory.edu

Clear cell sarcoma of soft tissue (malignant melanoma of soft parts) is a soft
tissue sarcoma with melanocytic differentiation that typically occurs in the
tendons and aponeuroses of young adults. As demonstrated by cytogenetics and
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, between 70% and over 90% of
clear cell sarcomas have a t(12;22) translocation, fusing the EWS and ATF1 genes 
on chromosomes 22q12 and 12q13, respectively. Identification of this
translocation distinguishes clear cell sarcoma from histologic mimics, most
importantly conventional malignant melanoma. We report our experience with a
commercially available, dual-color, break-apart fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) probe, which allows detection of EWS (22q12) gene
rearrangement in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. Histologically and
immunophenotypically well-characterized cases of clear cell sarcoma (n = 10) and 
malignant melanoma (n = 32) were evaluated with a 22q12 dual-color, break-apart
probe (Vysis, Downer's Grove, IL, USA), which spans the known common breakpoints 
in the EWS gene on chromosome 22 (introns 7-10). Signals from tumor cell nuclei
were counted under a fluorescence microscope and the presence of red-green
break-apart signals was recorded. Of the clear cell sarcoma cases, seven of 10
showed evidence of an EWS gene rearrangement with a mean of 81.6% positive cells 
per sample (range: 60-95%). All cases of malignant melanoma (n = 32) showed
virtually absent break-apart signals in the EWS gene (less than 4% cells per
case). FISH detects EWS gene rearrangement in a substantial proportion of clear
cell sarcomas, with excellent specificity. Importantly, EWS FISH is negative in
malignant melanoma, a clinically dissimilar tumor, which may closely mimic clear 
cell sarcoma histologically and immunohistochemically. As the studied probe can
be utilized in routinely processed tissue, FISH provides an excellent alternative
to reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction in cases where fresh tissue is
unavailable.

PMID: 16258500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Mar;206(3):718-27.

Platelet derived growth factor induced tenascin-C transcription is
phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt-dependent and mediated by Ets family transcription 
factors.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Asano Y, Yamane K, Trojanowska M, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

Previous studies have identified several cytokines as inducers of tenascin-C
(TN-C) expression in various tissue culture systems. However, the signaling
pathways of the regulation of TN-C expression are almost unknown. In this study, 
we clarified the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the regulation of the TN-C
gene by platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) in cultured human dermal
fibroblasts. PDGF induced the expression of TN-C protein as well as mRNA in a
dose-dependent manner. Actinomycin D, an RNA synthesis inhibitor, significantly
blocked the PDGF-mediated upregulation of TN-C mRNA expression, whereas
cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, did not. The PDGF-mediated
induction of TN-C expression was inhibited by the treatment of fibroblasts with a
selective phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor, wortmannin, or LY294002.
These results suggest that PDGF induced the expression of TN-C at a
transcriptional level via phosphoinositide3-kinase/Akt signaling pathways. We
performed serial 5' deletions and a transient transfection analysis to define the
region in the TN-C promoter mediating the responsiveness to PDGF. Overexpression 
of Sp1, Ets1, or Ets2 activated the TN-C promoter and superinduced TN-C promoter 
activity stimulated by PDGF, whereas overexpression of Fli1 inhibited the effects
of PDGF on TN-C expression. Mutation of the Sp1/3 binding sites or Ets binding
sites in the TN-C promoter region responsible to PDGF abrogated the
PDGF-inducible promoter activity. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Sp1,
Ets1, and Ets2 form a transcriptionally active complex. On the other hand, the
interaction of Fli1 with Sp1 decreased after PDGF treatment. These results
suggest that the upregulation of TN-C expression by PDGF involves Ets family
transcription factors, co-operating with Sp1.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16245312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2005 Nov;6(6):461-71.

The potential for molecular therapeutic targets in Ewing's sarcoma.

McAllister NR(1), Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Room 4242, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT 
84112, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is an uncompromising tumor of children and young adults. Before
the introduction of chemotherapy for Ewing's sarcoma, nearly all patients
succumbed to their disease, even with highly aggressive approaches to local
control. The realization that most patients have micrometastatic disease at
presentation, and the identification of active chemotherapeutic agents for this
tumor, have resulted in significant improvements in patient survival. Modern
therapy for Ewing's sarcoma combines high-dose chemotherapy for systemic control 
of disease, with advanced surgical and/or radiation therapeutic approaches for
local control. Current therapy remains imperfect. Despite optimal management, the
cure rate for localized disease is only approximately 70%, whereas the cure rate 
for metastatic disease at presentation is less than 30%. Patients who experience 
long-term disease-free survival are at risk for significant side effects of
therapy, including infertility, limb dysfunction, and an increased risk for
second malignancies. More effective and less toxic therapies are needed. This
report presents an overview of dysregulated molecular pathways in Ewing's sarcoma
and highlights the possibility that they may serve as therapeutic targets for the
disease. Although a great deal of additional investigation is required before
most of these approaches can be assessed in the clinic, we think that these
potential new targets offer a great deal of hope for patients with Ewing's
sarcoma.

PMID: 16242051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Oct;27(10):537-42.

Gene expression profile of ewing sarcoma cell lines differing in their EWS-FLI1
fusion type.

Bandrés E(1), Malumbres R, Escalada A, Cubedo E, González I, Honorato B, Zarate
R, García-Foncillas J, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacogenomics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
ebandres@unav.es

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in up to 95% of Ewing tumor
patients and results in the formation of an EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene that encodes a 
chimeric transcription factor. Many alternative forms of EWS-FLI-1 exist because 
of variations in the location of the EWS and FLI-1 genomic breakpoints. Previous 
reports have shown that the type 1 fusion is associated with a significantly
better prognosis than the other fusion types. It has been suggested that the
observed clinical discrepancies result from different transactivation potentials 
of the various EWS-FLI-1 fusion proteins. In an attempt to identify genes whose
expression levels are differentially modulated by structurally different
EWS-FLI-1 transcription factors, we have used microarray technology to
interrogate 19,000 sequence genes to compare gene expression profile of type 1 or
non-type 1 Ewing sarcoma cell lines. Data analysis showed few qualitative
differences on gene expression; expression of only 41 genes (0.215% of possible
sequences analyzed) differed significantly between Ewing tumor cell lines
carrying EWS-FLI-1 fusion type 1 with respect to those with non-type 1 fusion.

PMID: 16217257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Eur J Cancer. 2005 Nov;41(16):2513-27. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Chromosome translocations in sarcomas and the emergence of oncogenic
transcription factors.

Xia SJ(1), Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 505C Stellar Chance Laboratories, 422 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6082, USA.

A subset of sarcomas is characterised by recurrent chromosome translocations that
generate novel fusion oncoproteins. One or both of the genes involved in these
translocations often encode transcription factors, and the resulting fusion
proteins have aberrant transcriptional function compared to their wild-type
counterparts. These fusion transcription factors disrupt multiple biological
pathways by altering expression of target genes, and thereby result in a variety 
of altered cellular properties that contribute to the tumourigenic process.
However, experimental data indicate that the fusion gene alone is not sufficient 
for transformation in primary cells (EWS-FLI1) or tumourigenesis in the mouse
(PAX3-FKHR, FUS-CHOP), suggesting that additional collaborating genetic
alterations are required. In addition to improving our understanding of the
etiology of these tumours, this accumulating knowledge of the oncogenic
properties of these fusion proteins, their downstream targets, and cooperating
genetic alterations will permit the development of a variety of novel approaches 
to improve the therapy of these cancers.

PMID: 16213703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Int J Cancer. 2006 Mar 15;118(6):1381-9.

The orphan nuclear receptor DAX1 is up-regulated by the EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein and 
is highly expressed in Ewing tumors.

Mendiola M(1), Carrillo J, García E, Lalli E, Hernández T, de Alava E, Tirode F, 
Delattre O, García-Miguel P, López-Barea F, Pestaña A, Alonso J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular del Cáncer, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas A. Sols CSIC-UAM, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

The Ewing family of tumors harbors chromosomal translocations that join the
N-terminal region of the EWS gene with the C-terminal region of several
transcription factors of the ETS family, mainly FLI1, resulting in chimeric
transcription factors that play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of Ewing
tumors. To identify downstream targets of the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein, we
established 293 cells expressing constitutively either the chimeric EWS/FLI1 or
wild type FLI1 proteins and used cDNA arrays to identify genes differentially
regulated by EWS/FLI1. DAX1 (NR0B1), an unusual orphan nuclear receptor involved 
in gonadal development, sex determination and steroidogenesis, showed a
consistent up-regulation by EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein, but not by wild type FLI1.
Specific induction of DAX1 by EWS/FLI1 was confirmed in two independent cell
systems with inducible expression of EWS/FLI1. We also analyzed the expression of
DAX1 in Ewing tumors and derived cell lines, as well as in other nonrelated small
round cell tumors. DAX1 was expressed in all Ewing tumor specimens analyzed, and 
in seven out of eight Ewing tumor cell lines, but not in any neuroblastoma or
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, silencing of EWS/FLI1 by RNA
interference in a Ewing tumor cell line markedly reduced the levels of DAX1 mRNA 
and protein, confirming that DAX1 up-regulation is dependent upon EWS/FLI1
expression. The high levels of DAX1 found in Ewing tumors and its potent
transcriptional repressor activity suggest that the oncogenic effect of EWS/FLI1 
may be mediated, at least in part, by the up-regulation of DAX1 expression.

PMID: 16206264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8984-92.

Sequence-specific knockdown of EWS-FLI1 by targeted, nonviral delivery of small
interfering RNA inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of metastatic Ewing's
sarcoma.

Hu-Lieskovan S(1), Heidel JD, Bartlett DW, Davis ME, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

The development of effective, systemic therapies for metastatic cancer is highly 
desired. We show here that the systemic delivery of sequence-specific small
interfering RNA (siRNA) against the EWS-FLI1 gene product by a targeted, nonviral
delivery system dramatically inhibits tumor growth in a murine model of
metastatic Ewing's sarcoma. The nonviral delivery system uses a
cyclodextrin-containing polycation to bind and protect siRNA and transferrin as a
targeting ligand for delivery to transferrin receptor-expressing tumor cells.
Removal of the targeting ligand or the use of a control siRNA sequence eliminates
the antitumor effects. Additionally, no abnormalities in interleukin-12 and
IFN-alpha, liver and kidney function tests, complete blood counts, or pathology
of major organs are observed from long-term, low-pressure, low-volume tail-vein
administrations. These data provide strong evidence for the safety and efficacy
of this targeted, nonviral siRNA delivery system.

PMID: 16204072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8698-705.

Expression of the EWS/FLI-1 oncogene in murine primary bone-derived cells Results
in EWS/FLI-1-dependent, ewing sarcoma-like tumors.

Castillero-Trejo Y(1), Eliazer S, Xiang L, Richardson JA, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, Department of Pathology,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

Ewing sarcoma is the second most common malignant pediatric bone tumor. Over 80% 
of Ewing sarcoma contain the oncogene EWS/FLI-1, which encodes the EWS/FLI-1
oncoprotein, a hybrid transcription factor comprised of NH2-terminal sequences
from the RNA-binding protein EWS and the DNA-binding and COOH-terminal regions of
the Ets transcription factor FLI-1. Although numerous genes are dysregulated by
EWS/FLI-1, advances in Ewing sarcoma cancer biology have been hindered by the
lack of an animal model because of EWS/FLI-1-mediated cytotoxicity. In this
study, we have developed conditions for the isolation and propagation of murine
primary bone-derived cells (mPBDC) that stably express EWS/FLI-1. Early-passage
EWS/FLI-1 mPBDCs were immortalized in culture but inefficient at tumor induction,
whereas later-passage cells formed sarcomatous tumors in immunocompetent
syngeneic mice. Murine EWS/FLI-1 tumors contained morphologically primitive cells
that lacked definitive lineage markers. Molecular characterization of murine
EWS/FLI-1 tumors revealed that some but not all had acquired a novel, clonal
in-frame p53 mutation associated with a constitutive loss of p21 expression.
Despite indications that secondary events facilitated EWS/FLI-1 mPBDC
tumorigenesis, cells remained highly dependent on EWS/FLI-1 for efficient
transformation in clonogenic assays. This Ewing sarcoma animal model will be a
useful tool for dissecting the molecular pathogenesis of Ewing sarcoma and
provides rationale for the broader use of organ-specific progenitor cell
populations for the study of human sarcoma.

PMID: 16204038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Brain Pathol. 2005 Jul;15(3):265-7.

A 15-year-old female with progressive myelopathy.

Siami-Namini K, Shuey-Drake R, Wilson D, Francel P, Perry A, Fung KM.

March 2005. A 15-year-old female presented with urinary retention, inability to
walk and low back pain. MRI disclosed an elongated epidural mass in the thoracic 
spine with cord compression and invasion into the surrounding bone and soft
tissue. Cytologic preparation at intraoperative consultation disclosed a rather
monotonous small tumor cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and vacuolated cytoplasm.
These vacuoles were best visualized with DiffQuick stain. Pathologic studies
revealed an Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/pPNET) 
with typical features including periodic acid Schiff positive diastase sensitive 
cytoplasmic substance; strong membranous pattern of immunoreactivity for CD99,
and a reciprocal translocation of t(11;22)(q24;q12) that was demonstrated by
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). The vacuolated cytoplasm was produced
by glycogen as demonstrated by electron microscopy. Although primary vertebral
EWS/pPNETs are uncommon, they should be considered in the differential diagnoses 
of extradural/epidural mass of the spine in young patients.

PMID: 16196395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Chin Med J (Engl). 2005 Aug 20;118(16):1323-9.

Molecular detection of EWS-Ets fusion transcripts and their clinicopathologic
significance in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Wang H(1), Zheng J, Wang YP, Yang Y, You JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100083, China.

BACKGROUND: Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/pPNET)
is often difficult to distinguish from other small round cell tumors. The EWS-Ets
gene fusions that result from chromosomal translocations in this tumor provide
potential molecular diagnostic markers. To apply these molecular markers to
commonly available archival materials, we evaluated the feasibility of detecting 
EWS-Ets including EWS-Fli1 and EWS-ERG fusion transcripts in paraffin-embedded
tissues and its diagnostic value for detecting ES/pPNET.
METHODS: Thirteen paraffin-embedded samples of ES/pPNETs were retrieved from
archives. Thirteen cases of other tumors with small round cell features
(including rhabdomyosarcoma, neuroblastoma, lymphoma, small cell carcinoma, and
desmoplastic small round cell tumor) were used as negative controls. Beta-actin
and beta2-microglobulin were used as internal controls. A nested reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based assay was performed to
detect the EWS-Fli1 and EWS-ERG fusion transcripts.
RESULTS: Beta-actin and beta2-microglobulin were detected in 10/13 and 13/13
ES/pPNETs, respectively. EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts were detected in 11 of 13
(85%) ES/pPNETs. Three chimeric transcripts, all EWS-Fli1, were detected in
ES/pPNET samples. Among 11 EWS-Fli1-positive cases, 7 cases had a type I fusion
transcript involving fusion of EWS exon 7 with Fli1 exon 6, 2 cases had a type II
fusion transcript involving EWS exon 7 with Fli1 exon 5, and 2 cases expressed
fusion transcripts involving EWS exon 7 and Fli1 exon 8. Type I EWS-Fli1 fusion
predominated over other types. Fusion types could not be distinguished in the
remaining 2 cases. Thirteen negative controls did not show detectable chimeric
messages. There was a significant relationship between EWS-Fli1 fusion
transcripts and CD99 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular detection of EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded material by nested RT-PCR is feasible and is useful for the
diagnosis and differential diagnosis of ES/pPNETs.

PMID: 16157025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):38035-46. Epub 2005 Sep 7.

FLI-1 functionally interacts with PIASxalpha, a member of the PIAS E3 SUMO ligase
family.

van den Akker E(1), Ano S, Shih HM, Wang LC, Pironin M, Palvimo JJ, Kotaja N,
Kirsh O, Dejean A, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, CNRS UMR 146, Orsay, France.

FLI-1 is a transcription factor of the ETS family that is involved in several
developmental processes and that becomes oncogenic when overexpressed or mutated.
As the functional regulators of FLI-1 are largely unknown, we performed a yeast
two-hybrid screen with FLI-1 and identified the SUMO E3 ligase PIASxalpha/ARIP3
as a novel in vitro and in vivo binding partner of FLI-1. This interaction
involved the ETS domain of FLI-1 and required the integrity of the SAP domain of 
PIASxalpha/ARIP3. SUMO-1 and Ubc9, the ubiquitin carrier protein component in the
sumoylation pathway, were also identified as interactors of FLI-1. Both
PIASxalpha/ARIP3 and the closely related PIASxbeta isoform specifically enhanced 
sumoylation of FLI-1 at Lys(67), located in its N-terminal activation domain.
PIASxalpha/ARIP3 relocalized the normally nuclear but diffusely distributed FLI-1
protein to PIASxalpha nuclear bodies and repressed FLI-1 transcriptional
activation as assessed using different ETS-binding site-dependent promoters and
different cell systems. PIASxalpha repressive activity was independent of
sumoylation and did not result from inhibition of FLI-1 DNA-binding activity.
Analysis of the properties of a series of ARIP3 mutants showed that the
repressive properties of PIASxalpha/ARIP3 require its physical interaction with
FLI-1, identifying PIASxalpha as a novel corepressor of FLI-1.

PMID: 16148010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Korean Med Sci. 2005 Aug;20(4):687-90.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma of the hard palate.

Kang MS(1), Yoon HK, Choi JB, Eum JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pusan Paik Hospital, College of Medicine, Inje
University, Busan, Korea. pathkang@inje.ac.kr

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma (EES) is a rare soft tissue tumor morphologically
indistinguishable from the more common Ewing's sarcoma of bone. We report a case 
of EES arising in the hard palate of 34-yr-old male patient. Microscopically, the
monotonous small round cells without neuronal differentiation showed membranous
positive immunoreactivity for MIC2/CD99 and vimentin. Ultrastructurally, the
tumor cells showed a few intracytoplasmic organelles without evidence of
neurosecretory granules or neurofilaments. The EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene was
identified using the nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMCID: PMC2782172
PMID: 16100468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Adv Anat Pathol. 2005 Jul;12(4):212-20.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

Khoury JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA. Joseph.Khoury@stjude.org

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) comprises morphologically heterogeneous
tumors that are characterized by nonrandom chromosomal translocations involving
the EWS gene and one of several members of the ETS family of transcription
factors. The translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is the most common and leads to the 
formation of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein, which contributes to ESFT pathogenesis 
by modulating the expression of target genes. Tumors may be composed of small
uniform cells with minimal morphologic evidence of differentiation, or they may
be composed of larger, less uniform cells with varying degrees of neuroectodermal
differentiation. CD99 expression is identified in nearly all ESFT and constitutes
a useful positive marker when used as part of a panel of immunostains that can
help rule out other differential diagnostic considerations. Molecular diagnostic 
tests commonly used to detect the presence of ESFT-specific translocations
include RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Current therapy for
patients with ESFT includes chemotherapy and surgery with or without radiation
therapy. At present, the most significant prognostic factor for patients with
ESFT is whether the disease is localized or metastatic.

PMID: 16096383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2005 Aug;9(4):825-30.

Oncogene-targeted antisense oligonucleotides for the treatment of Ewing sarcoma.

Maksimenko A(1), Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)Bioalliance Pharma SA, 59 boulevard de M Valin, Paris 75015, France.

The genetic hallmark of the Ewing sarcoma family of tumours (ESFT) is the
presence of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation, present in up to 85% of cases of
ESFT, which creates the EWS/FLI1 fusion gene and results in the expression of a
chimeric protein regulating many other genes. The inhibition of this protein by
antisense strategies has shown its predominant role in the transformed phenotype 
of Ewing cells. In addition, the junction point at the mRNA level offers a target
for short therapeutic nucleic acids that is present only in the cancer cells and 
not in the normal tissues of a patient. Several teams have, therefore,
investigated the activity of antisense oligonucleotides and siRNAs targeted
against the junction point in mRNA; thus, inhibiting EWS/FLI1 synthesis.
Generally speaking, the molecules induce a cell growth inhibition in culture.
Apoptosis has also been reported. One laboratory has reported the in vivo tumour 
inhibitory effect of phosphorothioate antisense oligonucleotide directed against 
the EWS part of EWS/FlI1 when injected intratumourally. Independently, a tumour
inhibitory effect of oligonucleotides targeting the junction point has been
demonstrated provided they are delivered by polymeric nanoparticles through the
intratumoural route. Alongside this target, other genes participating to the
maintenance of the transformed phenotype of Ewing cells have been downregulated
by antisense strategies.

PMID: 16083345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biosci. 2005 Jun;30(3):371-6.

Type 1 (11;22)(q24:q12) translocation is common in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral
neuroectodermal tumour in south Indian patients.

Parija T(1), Shirley S, Uma S, Rajalekshmy KR, Ayyappan S, Rajkumar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute (WIA), Adyar, Chennai 600
020, India.

The Ewing's sarcoma family can present diagnostic difficulties. In the past the
basis of diagnosis has been a exclusion. Identification of a specific
translocation especially t(11;22) (EWS-FLI 1 fusion gene), which is seen in
nearly 85 percent of Ewing's sarcoma cases can help in precise diagnosis. We have
carried out a study on twenty patient samples diagnosed to have Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumour (PNET)/small round cell malignant
tumour. The study involved RT-PCR analysis for the fusion transcript, followed by
sequencing to identify the specific type of fusion. Ninety percent (18/20) of the
samples tested were found to be t(11;22) translocations involving EWS-FLI 1
genes. Sixty-one percent (11/18) were found to be type 1 fusion and seven were
type 2 (39 percentage). This is the first study in India with quantitative
information about the types of EWS-FLI 1 translocations present in Ewing's family
of tumours in south Indian patients.

PMID: 16052075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Histochem Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;124(2):105-11. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) as a proliferative marker during
embryonic and adult zebrafish hematopoiesis.

Leung AY(1), Leung JC, Chan LY, Ma ES, Kwan TT, Lai KN, Meng A, Liang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu
Lam Road, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. ayhleung@hku.hk

We investigated the expression of proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in
zebrafish to delineate the proliferative hematopoietic component during adult and
embryonic hematopoiesis. Immunostaining for PCNA and enhanced green fluorescence 
protein (eGFP) was performed in wild-type and fli1-eGFP (endothelial marker) and 
gata1-eGFP (erythroid cell marker) transgenic fish. Expression of PCNA mRNA was
examined in wild-type and chordin morphant embryos. In adult zebrafish kidney,
the renal tubules are surrounded by endothelial cells and it is separated into
hematopoietic and excretory compartments. PCNA was expressed in hematopoietic
progenitor cells but not in mature neutrophils, eosinophils or erythroid cells.
Some PCNA+ cells are scattered in the hematopoietic compartment of the kidney
while others are closely associated with renal tubular cells. PCNA was also
expressed in spermatogonial stem cells and intestine crypts, consistent with its 
role in cell proliferation and DNA synthesis. In embryos, PCNA is expressed in
the brain, spinal cord and intermediate cell mass (ICM) at 24 h-post
fertilization. In chordin morphants, PCNA is significantly upregulated in the
expanded ICM. Therefore, PCNA can be used to mark cell proliferation in zebrafish
hematopoietic tissues and to identify a population of progenitor cells whose
significance would have to be further investigated.

PMID: 16028068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2005 Jun;22(4):297-308.

Identification of an immunogenic EWS-FLI1-derived HLA-DR-restricted T helper cell
epitope.

Meyer-Wentrup F(1), Richter G, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Munich
University of Technology, München, Germany.
friederike.meyer-wentrup@medizin.uni-halle.de

Immunotherapy with tumor-specific peptide-loaded dendritic cells represents a
promising therapeutic approach for patients with multifocal primary or early
relapsed Ewing family tumors (EFT). The authors therefore screened a peptide
library derived from the fusion region of the EFT-specific chimeric transcription
factor EWS-FLI1 for immunogenic peptides. T-cell priming with 10 peptides was
evaluated using IFN(gamma) video-assisted automated enzyme-linked immunospot
technique. The authors report the identification of the first EFT-specific
immunogenic T-cell epitope so far. Its identification will lead to a better
understanding of EFT immunology and may improve DC-based immunotherapy.

PMID: 16020117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Oncogene. 2005 Aug 18;24(35):5443-58.

Id2 protein is selectively upregulated by UVB in primary, but not in immortalized
human keratinocytes and inhibits differentiation.

Simbulan-Rosenthal CM(1), Trabosh V, Velarde A, Chou FP, Daher A, Tenzin F,
Tokino T, Rosenthal DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgetown University,
School of Medicine, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Solar ultraviolet B (UVB) acts as both an initiator and promoter in models of
multistage skin carcinogenesis. We found that, whereas UVB induces apoptosis in
human papillomavirus-16 E6/7-immortalized keratinocytes, it inhibits markers of
differentiation in human foreskin keratinocytes (HFK). Potential mechanisms for
this differential response were examined by DNA microarray, which revealed that
UVB alters the expression of three of the four human inhibitor of
differentiation/DNA binding (Id) proteins that comprise a class of
helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors involved in proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. These results were verified by
RT-PCR and immunoblot analysis of control and UVB-irradiated primary and
immortalized keratinocytes. Whereas Id1 was downregulated in both cell types, Id2
expression was upregulated in primary HFK, but not immortalized cells. In
contrast, Id3 expression was significantly increased only in immortalized cells. 
The differential expression pattern of Id2 in response to UVB was recapitulated
in reporter constructs containing the 5' regulatory regions of this gene. Id2
promoter activity increased in response to UVB in HFK, but not in immortalized
cells. To identify the regulatory elements in the Id2 promoter that mediate
transcriptional activation by UVB in HFK, promoter deletion/mutation analysis was
performed. Deletion analysis revealed that transactivation involves a 166 bp
region immediately upstream to the Id2 transcriptional start site and is
independent of c-Myc. The consensus E twenty-six (ETS) binding site at -120
appears to mediate UVB transcriptional activation of Id2 because point mutations 
at this site completely abrogated this response. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays verified that the Id2 promoter
interacts with known Id2 promoter (ETS) binding factors Erg1/2 and Fli1, but not 
with c-Myc; and this interaction is enhanced after UVB exposure. Similar to the
effects of UVB exposure, ectopic expression of Id2 protein in primary HFK
resulted in inhibition of differentiation, as shown by decreased levels of the
terminal differentiation marker keratin K1 and inhibition of involucrin
crosslinking. Reduction of Id2 expression by small interfering RNAs attenuated
the UVB-induced inhibition of differentiation in these cells. These results
suggest that UVB-induced inhibition of differentiation of primary HFK is at
least, in part, due to the upregulation of Id2, and that upregulation of Id2 by
UVB might predispose keratinocytes to carcinogenesis by preventing their normal
differentiation program.

PMID: 16007217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Aug;29(8):1025-33.

Morphologic and immunophenotypic diversity in Ewing family tumors: a study of 66 
genetically confirmed cases.

Folpe AL(1), Goldblum JR, Rubin BP, Shehata BM, Liu W, Dei Tos AP, Weiss SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. afolpe@emory.edu

More than 85% of Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET), or
"Ewing family of tumors" (EFTs), have the translocation, t (11;22) (q24;q12),
with others having variant translocations. Identification of these by cytogenetic
and/or molecular genetic techniques is specific for EFT and is increasingly
recognized as the "gold standard" for diagnosis. However, these techniques are
not universally available. We therefore studied a large group of genetically
confirmed EFTs to more completely understand the morphologic and immunophenotypic
spectrum of this rare sarcoma. Sixty-six cytogenetically, FISH or RT-PCR
proven-EFTs were retrieved. In 56 cases, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed
for pan-cytokeratins (PanCK), high molecular weight cytokeratins (HMWCK), desmin 
(DES), CD99, CD117, and FLI1 protein using heat-induced epitope retrieval and the
Dako Envision system. The cases arose chiefly in children and young adults
(median 18 years; range, 3-65 years) of both sexes (male, 32; female, 31;
unknown, 3) in a variety of bone (N = 39) and soft tissue (N = 27) sites.
Histologically, 46 cases (73%) showed only typical features of ES, 9 cases (16%) 
showed features of PNET, 3 cases (5%) showed "adamantinoma-like" features, 3
cases (5%) corresponded to "atypical Ewing sarcoma," 3 cases (5%) showed
principally intersecting fascicles of spindled cells, and 2 cases had abundant
hyalinized matrix. IHC results were as follows: PanCK (18 of 56, 32%), HMWCK (3
of 55, 5%), DES (1 of 56, 2%), CD99 (52 of 52, 100%), CD117 (13 of 54, 24%), and 
FLI1 (44 of 47, 94%). HMWCK was expressed only in "adamantinoma-like" EFTs, none 
of which expressed DES. In conclusion, most, but not all, EFTs can be accurately 
diagnosed using time-honored morphologic criteria and ancillary
immunohistochemistry. However, genetic confirmation remains essential for the
diagnosis of unusual morphologic variants of EFT, including "adamantinoma-like," 
spindled, sclerosing, and clear cell/anaplastic variants. Therefore, to exclude
or confirm the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma in round cell sarcomas having a
variety of patterns but not specifically conforming to a tumor of known lineage
(eg, rhabdomyosarcoma), cytogenetics, and/or molecular analysis is required.

PMID: 16006796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Blood. 2005 Oct 15;106(8):2680-7. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Fli1, Elf1, and Ets1 regulate the proximal promoter of the LMO2 gene in
endothelial cells.

Landry JR(1), Kinston S, Knezevic K, Donaldson IJ, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Rd, Cambridge, CB2 2XY, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk.

Transcriptional control has been identified as a key mechanism regulating the
formation and subsequent behavior of hematopoietic stem cells. We have used a
comparative genomics approach to identify transcriptional regulatory elements of 
the LMO2 gene, a transcriptional cofactor originally identified through its
involvement in T-cell leukemia and subsequently shown to be critical for normal
hematopoietic and endothelial development. Of the 2 previously characterized LMO2
promoters, the second (proximal) promoter was highly conserved in vertebrates
ranging from mammals to fish. Real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) expression analysis identified this promoter as the predominant
source of transcription in hematopoietic tissue. Transient and stable
transfections indicated that the proximal promoter was active in hematopoietic
progenitor and endothelial cell lines and this activity was shown to depend on 3 
conserved Ets sites that were bound in vivo by E74-like factor 1 (Elf1), Friend
leukemia integration 1 (Fli1), and erythroblastosis virus oncogene homolog E
twenty-six-1 (Ets1). Finally, transgenic analysis demonstrated that the LMO2
proximal promoter is sufficient for expression in endothelial cells in vivo. No
hematopoietic expression was observed, indicating that additional enhancers are
required to mediate transcription from the proximal promoter in hematopoietic
cells. Together, these results suggest that the conserved proximal promoter is
central to LMO2 transcription in hematopoietic and endothelial cells, where it is
regulated by Ets factors.

PMID: 15994290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Leuk Res. 2005 Aug;29(8):933-42.

Resistance against Friend leukemia virus-induced leukemogenesis in DNA-dependent 
protein kinase (DNA-PK)-deficient scid mice associated with defective viral
integration at the Spi-1 and Fli-1 site.

Hasegawa M(1), Yamaguchi S, Aizawa S, Ikeda H, Tatsumi K, Noda Y, Hirokawa K,
Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Pathology, Aging and Developmental Sciences, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Graduate School, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 
13-8519, Japan.

Retroviral DNA integration is mediated by the viral protein integrase. However,
elements of the host DNA repair machinery such as the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI-3K)-related protein kinase family system would play a role in the
integration of viral DNA into the host DNA. Here, we show that a host
PI-3K-related protein kinase, DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK), plays a role
in the specific integration of retroviral DNA and induction of retroviral
diseases in vivo. DNA-PK-deficient scid mice inoculated with Friend leukemia
virus (FLV) exhibited a random integration into their genomic DNA and expressed
the viral envelope protein gp70. However, the specific integration of FLV at
Spi-1 or Fli-1 sites did not occur in association with the significant resistance
of scid mice to FLV-induced leukemogenesis. In contrast, the knockout of another 
member of the PI-3K-related protein kinase family, encoded by the ataxia
telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene, resulted in mice as sensitive to FLV-induced
leukemogenesis as the wild type mice. FLV was specifically integrated into the
DNA at Spi-1 and Fli-1 sites with significant expression of these transcription
factors. These findings indicated that DNA-PK would be essential for controlling 
the in vivo integration of FLV at specific sites as well as the susceptibility to
FLV-induced leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15978944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jun 21;33(11):3540-9. Print 2005.

Matrix metalloproteinase-1 up-regulation by hepatocyte growth factor in human
dermal fibroblasts via ERK signaling pathway involves Ets1 and Fli1.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Yamane K, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

In this study, we clarified the molecular mechanism(s) underlying the regulation 
of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 gene by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) in
cultured human dermal fibroblasts. HGF induced MMP-1 protein as well as mRNA at a
transcriptional level via extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signaling
pathway. The region in the MMP-1 promoter mediating the inducible responsiveness 
to HGF, defined by the transient transfection analysis of the serial 5' deletion 
constructs, contained an Ets binding site. Mutation of this Ets binding site
abrogated the HGF-inducible promoter activity. Ets1 up-regulated the expression
of MMP-1 promoter activity, whereas Fli1 had antagonistic effects on them. After 
HGF treatment, the protein level and the binding activity of Ets1 was increased
and those of Fli1 was decreased, which were canceled by PD98059. These results
suggest that HGF up-regulates MMP-1 expression via ERK signaling pathway through 
the balance of Ets1 and Fli1, which may be a novel mechanism of regulating MMP-1 
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1156961
PMID: 15972796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 1;65(11):4633-44.

EWS-FLI1 fusion protein up-regulates critical genes in neural crest development
and is responsible for the observed phenotype of Ewing's family of tumors.

Hu-Lieskovan S(1), Zhang J, Wu L, Shimada H, Schofield DE, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

Tumor-specific translocations are common in tumors of mesenchymal origin. Whether
the translocation determines the phenotype, or vice versa, is debatable. Ewing's 
family tumors (EFT) are consistently associated with an EWS-FLI1 translocation
and a primitive neural phenotype. Histogenesis and classification are therefore
uncertain. To test whether EWS-FLI1 fusion gene expression is responsible for the
primitive neuroectodermal phenotype of EFT, we established a
tetracycline-inducible EWS-FLI1 expression system in a rhabdomyosarcoma cell line
RD. Cell morphology changed after EWS-FLI1 expression, resembling cultured EFT
cells. Xenografts showed typical EFT features, distinct from tumors formed by
parental RD. Neuron-specific microtubule gene MAPT, parasympathetic marker
cholecystokinin, and epithelial marker keratin 18 were up-regulated. Conversely, 
myogenesis was diminished. Comparison of the up-regulated genes in RD-EF with the
Ewing's signature genes identified important EWS-FLI1 downstream genes, many
involved in neural crest differentiation. These results were validated by
real-time reverse transcription-PCR analysis and RNA interference technology
using small interfering RNA against EWS-FLI1 breakpoint. The present study shows 
that the neural phenotype of Ewing's tumors is attributable to the EWS-FLI1
expression and the resultant phenotype resembles developing neural crest. Such
tumors have a limited neural phenotype regardless of tissue of origin. These
findings challenge traditional views of histogenesis and tumor origin.

PMID: 15930281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Nov;45(6):850-6.

Intracranial Ewing sarcoma.

Mazur MA(1), Gururangan S, Bridge JA, Cummings TJ, Mukundan S, Fuchs H, Larrier
N, Halperin EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The occurrence of primary extraosseous Ewing sarcoma (EES) of the central nervous
system (CNS) has only rarely been reported in the literature. It is important to 
distinguish this entity from the more common central primitive neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET) of brain, since the management of these tumors is different from
that of EES. We present the clinical, radiologic, and pathologic features of two 
cases of EES occurring in the brain. The diagnosis was further confirmed by
detection of a rearrangement of the FLI1 and/or EWS gene loci in tumors from both
patients using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Although rare, the
possibility of EES should be considered particularly when tumors that arise near 
the meningeal surface of the brain and have the pathologic appearance of a PNET. 
Demonstration of t(11;22)(q24;q12) by molecular analysis essentially confirms the
diagnosis and enables the oncologist to choose appropriate therapy.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15929128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2005 Nov;45(6):846-9.

Concomitant Ewing sarcoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a 5-year-old girl.

Masjosthusmann K(1), Bielack SS, Köhler G, Florax A, Schiborr M, Bruch J,
Reinhardt D, Kuhn N, Paulussen M, Jürgens H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany.

Malignancies from the Ewing family of tumors and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) are not known to be associated with each other. A 5-year-old girl was
incidentally found to suffer from acute lymphoblastic leukemia during bone marrow
staging for Ewing sarcoma of the radius. The simultaneous presence of two
distinct neoplasms was confirmed by RT-PCR, with EWS/FLI1 type 1 rearrangement in
the bone tumor and TEL/AML1 rearrangement in the marrow. She was treated with
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgery and was in remission of both diseases 31 
months after diagnosis.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15926159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 29;280(30):27544-51. Epub 2005 May 26.

Inhibition of platelet-derived growth factor-induced cell growth signaling by a
short interfering RNA for EWS-Fli1 via down-regulation of phospholipase D2 in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

Nozawa S(1), Ohno T, Banno Y, Dohjima T, Wakahara K, Fan DG, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University School of Medicine, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

EWS-Fli1, a fusion gene resulting from a chromosomal translocation t(11;22,
q24;q12) and found in Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors, encodes
a transcriptional activator and promotes cellular transformation. However, the
precise biological functions of its products remain unknown. To investigate the
role of EWS-Fli1 in cell growth signaling, we transfected Ewing sarcoma TC-135
cells with short interfering RNAs for EWS-Fli1. EWS-Fli1 knockdown reduced cell
growth and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB-induced activation of the
growth signaling enzymes. Interestingly, phospholipase D2 (but not the PDGF-BB
receptor) showed marked down-regulation in the EWS-Fli1-knocked down TC-135 cells
compared with the control cells. In Ewing sarcoma TC-135 cells, the
PDGF-BB-induced phosphorylation of growth signaling involving extracellular
signal-regulated kinase, Akt, p70S6K, and the expression of cyclin D3 were
markedly inhibited by transfection with short interfering RNA phospholipase
(PL)-D2. The PDGF-BB-induced activation of growth signaling was also suppressed
by 1-butanol, which prevents the production of phosphatidic acid by phospholipase
D (but not by t-butyl alcohol), thereby implicating PLD2 in PDGF-BB-mediated
signaling in TC-135 cells. These results suggest that EWS-Fli1 may play a role in
the regulation of tumor proliferation-signaling enzymes via PLD2 expression in
Ewing sarcoma cells.

PMID: 15919668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Histopathology. 2005 Jun;46(6):622-34.

Clinicopathological and immunohistochemical analysis of 20 cases of Merkel cell
carcinoma in search of prognostic markers.

Llombart B(1), Monteagudo C, López-Guerrero JA, Carda C, Jorda E, Sanmartín O,
Almenar S, Molina I, Martín JM, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, Valencia, Spain.
beatriz.llombart@uv.es

AIMS: To evaluate the clinicopathological and immunohistochemical characteristics
of Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) in an attempt to find new, potentially
significant, prognostic markers.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Clinical data and follow-up, histopathological features
(pattern, cell size, thickness, mitoses, vascular invasion, lymphocytic
infiltration) and immunohistochemical detection [CK20, thyroid transcription
factor (TTF-1), chromogranin A, synaptophysin, p53, Ki67, Fli-1, CD99, c-Kit]
were evaluated in 20 cases of MCC. Fli-1 and CD99 were detected in 90% and 55% of
cases, respectively. Tumour size>30 mm, stage II, 'absent' lymphocytic
infiltration, and the presence of>50% of Ki67+ tumour cells, were found to be
prognostic indicators of disease-free interval (DFI), but only 'absent'
lymphocytic infiltration constituted an independent prognostic factor of DFI
after multivariate analysis. For overall survival, the same variables, together
with local recurrence and lymph node involvement, had prognostic significance,
with only local recurrence as an independent prognostic factor after multivariate
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Absence of lymphocytic infiltration and Ki67 immunoreactivity in
more than 50% of tumour cells should be evaluated in conjunction with other
well-known prognostic markers in MCC. Furthermore, recognizing that Fli-1 and
CD99 expression is commonly found in MCC by immunohistochemistry may avoid
misinterpretation in the differential diagnosis of MCC with other small round
cell tumours.

PMID: 15910593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Int J Cancer. 2005 Sep 20;116(5):784-92.

Antitumor effects of histone deacetylase inhibitor on Ewing's family tumors.

Sakimura R(1), Tanaka K, Nakatani F, Matsunobu T, Li X, Hanada M, Okada T,
Nakamura T, Matsumoto Y, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka City, Japan.

A chimeric protein, EWS-Fli1, identified in most Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) has
been shown to be associated with the tumorigenicity of EFTs. We have previously
reported that p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression was inhibited by EWS-Fli1 in EFTs.
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are known to up-regulate p21(Waf1/Cip1)
expression in various cells and show promise as a cancer therapy. Here, we
demonstrate the possible involvement of EWS-Fli1 in the activities of both
histone acetylation and deacetylation, as well as the potential use of HDACIs as 
an antitumor agent for EFTs. A novel HDACI, FK228, strongly induced
p21(Waf1/Cip1) expression, leading to the hypophosphorylation of retinoblastoma
protein (Rb) in EFT cells. Results indicated that EWS-Fli1 deregulated histone
acetylation through both the repression of histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and
the enhancement of histone deacetylase (HDAC) activities in EFT cells. FK228
treatment blocked both of the abnormal functions of EWS-Fli1. Expressions of
EWS-Fli1 protein and mRNA were also inhibited by HDACIs. We suggest that HDACIs
might inhibit the expression of EWS-Fli1 via the suppression of the EWS promoter 
activity. FK228 demonstrated potent growth inhibitory effects on EFT cells at
nanomolar concentrations, as well as an apparent distinction in the apoptotic
effects between EFT and normal cells. Moreover, intraperitoneal administration of
FK228 significantly inhibited tumor growth and induced apoptosis in EFTs in vivo.
These results suggest that HDACI might be a promising reagent for use in
molecular-based chemotherapy against EFTs.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15849726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Semin Cancer Biol. 2005 Jun;15(3):189-96.

Context matters: the hen or egg problem in Ewing's sarcoma.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors (ESFT) are characterized by rearrangements of 
EWS with ets family genes. While detection of these gene fusions greatly
facilitated diagnosis, it has not provided any clues about the tissue of origin. 
Immunological and gene expression profiling studies favour a neuroectodermal
histogenesis. These investigations did not appreciate the impact of EWS-ets
proteins on the tumor phenotype. Introduction of EWS-ets into different cellular 
models resulted in diverse outcomes ranging from the induction of cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis to transformation and tumorigenicity, and from blocked
differentiation to trans-differentiation. Thus, the molecular signature of
EWS-ets proteins depends on the cell type. The hen or egg problem in ESFT,
therefore, is whether ESFT reflect the phenotype of the tumor stem cell that is
blocked in differentiation by the activity of the EWS-ets gene fusion or if the
oncogene imposes an incomplete differentiation program on a pluripotent precursor
cell. This article addresses the problem by considering the tissue distribution
of FLI1 and ERG expression and by reviewing evidence for combinatorial control of
EWS-ets activity.

PMID: 15826833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Int J Cancer. 2005 Sep 1;116(3):385-94.

Transactivation of cyclin E gene by EWS-Fli1 and antitumor effects of cyclin
dependent kinase inhibitor on Ewing's family tumor cells.

Li X(1), Tanaka K, Nakatani F, Matsunobu T, Sakimura R, Hanada M, Okada T,
Nakamura T, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan.

Chromosomal translocation t(11; 22)(q24; q12) is detected in approximately 90% of
Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) including Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. This results in the formation of the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene,
which produces EWS-Fli1 fusion protein. This chimerical gene product acts as an
aberrant transcriptional activator, which may be responsible for the
tumorigenesis of EFTs. We have previously reported that cyclin E expression was
upregulated in EFT cells and in EWS-Fli1 transformed fibroblastic cells. However,
the mechanism of the overexpression of cyclin E by EWS-Fli1 is still unknown. In 
our study, we investigated the mechanism of transactivation of the cyclin E gene 
in EFT cells. We found that EWS-Fli1 enhanced the activity of the cyclin E gene
promoter partially through E2F binding sites in the promoter. In addition, the
basic transcriptional factor, Sp1, might also be involved in the transactivation 
of the cyclin E gene by EWS-Fli1. To study the biological significance of cyclin 
E overexpression in EFT cells, we used flavopiridol, a pan-cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor and found that flavopiridol efficiently suppressed the
growth of EFT cells in vitro and in vivo by the inhibition of cyclinE/CDK2 kinase
activity and the induction of apoptosis. These results suggest that targeting of 
the cyclin/CDK complex may provide new insight into treatment of EFTs.

PMID: 15818598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Blood. 2005 Jul 15;106(2):514-20. Epub 2005 Apr 5.

Zygotic nucleosome assembly protein-like 1 has a specific, non-cell autonomous
role in hematopoiesis.

Abu-Daya A(1), Steer WM, Trollope AF, Friedeberg CE, Patient RK, Thorne AW,
Guille MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Institute of Biomedical and Biomolecular
Science, University of Portsmouth, Portsmouth PO1 2DT, United Kingdom.

Nucleosome assembly proteins (NAPs) bind core histones, facilitate chromatin
remodeling, and can act as transcriptional coactivators. We previously described 
the isolation of a Xenopus NAP1-like (xNAP1L) cDNA, which encodes a member of
this protein family. Its zygotic expression is restricted to neural cells, the
outer cells of the ventral blood island (VBIs), and the ectoderm overlying the
blood precursors. Here, we report that depletion of zygotic xNAP1L in embryos
produces no obvious morphologic phenotype, but ablates alpha-globin mRNA
expression in the VBIs. Transcript levels of the hematopoietic precursor genes
SCL and Xaml (Runx-1) are also reduced in the VBIs. SCL expression can be rescued
by injection of xNAP1L mRNA into the ectoderm, showing that the effect of xNAP1L 
can be non-cell autonomous. Fli1 and Hex, genes expressed in hemangioblasts but
subsequently endothelial markers, were unaffected, suggesting that xNAP1L is
required for the hematopoietic lineage specifically. Our data are consistent with
a requirement for xNAP1L upstream of SCL, and injection of SCL mRNA into
xNAP1L-depleted embryos rescues alpha-globin expression. Thus, xNAP1L, which
belongs to a family of proteins previously believed to have general roles, has a 
specific function in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 15811954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biochem. 2005 Mar;137(3):297-302.

The FLI-1 transcription factor is a short-lived phosphoprotein in T cells.

Zhang XK(1), Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Ralph H. Johnson VAMC, Department of Medicine,
Division of Rheumatology & Immunology, 96 Jonathan Lucas St., PO Box 250623,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. zhangjo@musc.edu

The FLI-1 transcription factor is a member of the ETS gene family, most closely
related to ERG. In this study, the FLI-1 protein products were characterized
using a specific monoclonal antibody previously developed against bacterially
expressed protein. In the human T-cell line Jurkat, both isoforms of FLI-1, p51
and p48, are phosphorylated, primarily on serine residues. FLI-1 phosphorylation 
is increased by a Ca(2+)-mediated process, and inhibitor studies indicate that
protein phosphatase 2A, at least in part, controls FLI-1 phosphorylation level.
FLI-1 phosphorylation is not stimulated by phorbal 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA),
a protein kinase C activator, and in this it differs from ERG protein
phosphorylation. The p51 isoform has a half-life of 105 min, and p48 has a
half-life of 80 min; in contrast, the ERG protein is much more stable with a
half-life of 21 h. Newly synthesized FLI-1 protein decreased during human T cell 
activation. Our data suggest that although the FLI-1 and ERG genes are highly
homologous, their distinct properties may contribute to their different roles in 
gene regulation.

PMID: 15809330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(8):3087-108.

Identification of nuclear import and export signals within Fli-1: roles of the
nuclear import signals in Fli-1-dependent activation of megakaryocyte-specific
promoters.

Hu W(1), Philips AS, Kwok JC, Eisbacher M, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, Department of Medicine, SXt.
George Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales
2217, Australia.

The Ets factor Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1) is an important regulator of
megakaryocytic (Mk) differentiation. Here, we demonstrate two novel nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) within Fli-1: one (NLS1) is located at the N
terminus, and another (NLS2) is within the Ets domain. Nuclear accumulation of
Fli-1 reflected the combined functional effects of the two discrete NLSs. Each
NLS can independently direct nuclear transport of a carrier protein, with
mutations within the NLSs affecting nuclear accumulation. NLS1 has a bipartite
motif, whereas the NLS2 region contains a nonclassical NLS. Both NLSs bind
importin alpha (IMPalpha) and IMPbeta, with NLS1 and NLS2 being predominantly
recognized by IMPalpha and IMPbeta, respectively. Fli-1 also contains one nuclear
export signal. Leptomycin B abolished its cytoplasmic accumulation, showing CRM1 
dependency. We demonstrate that Ets domain binding to specific target DNA
effectively blocks IMP binding, indicating that the targeted DNA binding plays a 
role in localizing Fli-1 to its destination and releasing IMPs for recycling back
to the cytoplasm. Finally, by analyzing full-length Fli-1 carrying NLS1, NLS2,
and combined NLS1-NLS2 mutations, we conclude that two functional NLSs exist in
Fli-1 and that each NLS is sufficient to target Fli-1 to the nucleus for
activation of Mk-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC1069587
PMID: 15798196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 14;24(16):2715-22.

PTPL1 is a direct transcriptional target of EWS-FLI1 and modulates Ewing's
Sarcoma tumorigenesis.

Abaan OD(1), Levenson A, Khan O, Furth PA, Uren A, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Ewing's Sarcoma family tumors (ESFT) are characterized by a translocation
t(11:22) forming an aberrant transcription factor EWS-FLI1. Protein tyrosine
phosphatase L1 (PTPL1) was identified as a gene upregulated by EWS-FLI1 in
transfected cells by microarray. Our results show that PTPL1 is a transcriptional
target of EWS-FLI1 both by chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter activation 
studies. We demonstrate that PTPL1 is highly expressed in ESFT cells and patient 
tumors compared with normal tissues, with a trend towards higher expression in
metastatic versus primary tumors. Reduction of PTPL1 protein in ESFT cells
correlated with a significant reduction in both monolayer and soft-agar cell
growth. In addition, these PTPL1-reduced cells were more sensitive to
etoposide-induced apoptosis than the controls. We therefore report a novel
transcriptional activation of a phosphatase involved in the oncogenesis of ESFT. 
Increasing interest in specific phosphatase inhibitors would allow PTPL1 to be
evaluated as a therapeutic target in ESFT.

PMID: 15782144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Bioessays. 2005 Apr;27(4):388-96.

Evolution of the gelsolin family of actin-binding proteins as novel
transcriptional coactivators.

Archer SK(1), Claudianos C, Campbell HD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Evolution Group and Centre for the Molecular Genetics
of Development, Research School of Biological Sciences, Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia.

The gelsolin gene family encodes a number of higher eukaryotic actin-binding
proteins that are thought to function in the cytoplasm by severing, capping,
nucleating or bundling actin filaments. Recent evidence, however, suggests that
several members of the gelsolin family may have adopted unexpected nuclear
functions including a role in regulating transcription. In particular, flightless
I, supervillin and gelsolin itself have roles as coactivators for nuclear
receptors, despite the fact that their divergence appears to predate the
evolutionary appearance of nuclear receptors. Flightless I has been shown to bind
both actin and the actin-related BAF53a protein, which are subunits of
SWI/SNF-like chromatin remodelling complexes. The primary sequences of some
actin-related proteins such as BAF53a exhibit conservation of residues that, in
actin itself, are known to interact with gelsolin-related proteins. In summary,
there is a growing body of evidence supporting a biological role in the nucleus
for actin, Arps and actin-binding proteins and, in particular, the gelsolin
family of actin-binding proteins.

Copyright 2005 Wiley periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15770676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Apr 1;304(2):443-56. Epub 2004 Dec 13.

The actin cytoskeleton-associated protein zyxin acts as a tumor suppressor in
Ewing tumor cells.

Amsellem V(1), Kryszke MH, Hervy M, Subra F, Athman R, Leh H, Brachet-Ducos C,
Auclair C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biotechnologie et Pharmacologie génétique appliquée, CNRS UMR
8113, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan, 61 avenue du Président Wilson, 94230
Cachan, France. vamsel@igr.fr

Changes in cell architecture, essentially linked to profound cytoskeleton
rearrangements, are common features accompanying cell transformation. Supporting 
the involvement of the microfilament network in tumor cell behavior, several
actin-binding proteins, including zyxin, a potential regulator of actin
polymerization, may play a role in oncogenesis. In this work, we investigate the 
status of zyxin in Ewing tumors, a family of pediatric malignancies of bone and
soft tissues, which are mainly associated with a t(11;22) chromosomal
translocation encoding the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. We observe that
EWS-FLI1-transformed murine fibroblasts, as well as human Ewing tumor-derived
SK-N-MC cells, exhibit a complete disruption of their actin cytoskeleton,
retaining very few stress fibers, focal adhesions and cell-to-cell contacts. We
show that within these cells, zyxin is expressed at very low levels and remains
diffusely distributed throughout the cytoplasm, instead of concentrating in
actin-rich dynamic structures. We demonstrate that zyxin gene transfer into
EWS-FLI1-transformed fibroblasts elicits reconstitution of zyxin-rich focal
adhesions and intercellular junctions, dramatic reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton, decreased cell motility, inhibition of anchorage-independent growth
and impairment of tumor formation in athymic mice. We observe similar phenotypic 
changes after zyxin gene transfer in SK-N-MC cells, suggesting that zyxin has
tumor suppressor activity in Ewing tumor cells.

PMID: 15748890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 1;33(4):1337-51. Print 2005.

Alpha2(I) collagen gene regulation by protein kinase C signaling in human dermal 
fibroblasts.

Jinnin M(1), Ihn H, Yamane K, Mimura Y, Asano Y, Tamaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo 7-3-1
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

We investigated the mechanisms by which protein kinase C (PKC) regulates the
expression of the alpha2(I) collagen gene in normal dermal fibroblasts. Reduction
of PKC-alpha activity by treatment with Gö697-6 or by overexpression of a
dominant negative (DN) mutant form decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression. 
This decrease required a sequence element in the collagen promoter that contains 
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites. Reduction of PKC-delta activity by rottlerin or
overexpression of DN PKC-delta also decreased alpha2(I) collagen gene expression.
This effect required a separate sequence element containing Sp1/Sp3-binding sites
and an Ets-binding site. In both cases, point mutations within the response
elements abrogated the response to PKC inhibition. Forced overexpression of Sp1
rescued the PKC inhibitor-mediated reduction in collagen protein expression. A
DNA affinity precipitation assay revealed that inhibition of PKC-delta by
rottlerin increased the binding activity of endogenous Fli1 and decreased that of
Ets1. On the other hand, TGF-beta1, which increased the expression of PKC-delta, 
had the opposite effect, increasing the binding activity of Ets1 and decreasing
that of Fli1. Our results suggest that PKC-delta is involved in the regulation of
the alpha2(I) collagen gene in the presence or absence of TGF-beta. Alteration of
the balance of Ets1 and Fli1 may be a novel mechanism regulating alpha2(I)
collagen expression.

PMCID: PMC552962
PMID: 15741186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Int J Surg Pathol. 2005 Jan;13(1):43-50.

Keratin-positive Ewing's sarcoma: an ultrastructural study of 12 cases.

Srivastava A(1), Rosenberg AE, Selig M, Rubin BP, Nielsen GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA 02114,
USA.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) is an aggressive
neoplasm of bone and soft tissue. Histologically, it is characterized by the
presence of small round blue cells, which usually express MIC-2 and FLI-1
immunohistochemically. The most specific feature for diagnosis, however, is
cytogenetic or molecular evidence of a consistent abnormality, the
t(11;22)(q24;q12), or variants thereof. The immunohistochemical expression of
keratins in a significant proportion of these cases has been highlighted in
several recent studies. The ultrastructural features of these keratin-positive
tumors have not, however, been characterized in detail. In this study we analyzed
the ultrastructural features of 12 well-documented EWS/PNETs that stained
strongly for pankeratin by immunohistochemistry. Ultrastructurally, the tumor
cells contained a few organelles, which included a small number of mitochondria, 
poorly developed Golgi complexes, free ribosomes, and inconspicuous
rough-endoplasmic reticulum. Rudimentary cell junctions were seen in 2 tumors
while prominent junctions were observed in the remaining 10. Five tumors
contained intracytoplasmic filaments, and definite tonofibrils were identified in
2. Well-developed basal lamina around tumor cells were also demonstrated in 2
tumors. Follow-up information was available for all cases. Seven patients died of
disease, 2 are alive with disease, and 3 have no current evidence of disease. The
cohort includes 5 patients with a type-1 translocation, which has been associated
with a better prognosis in some studies; 4 of these patients have died of their
disease, and 1 is alive with recurrent disease. This study shows that
keratin-positive EWS/PNETs have evidence of epithelial differentiation
ultrastructurally, and may possibly represent a more aggressive subset of the
EWS/PNET group of tumors.

PMID: 15735854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Oncogene. 2005 Apr 7;24(15):2512-24.

EWS-FLI1 target genes recovered from Ewing's sarcoma chromatin.

Siligan C(1), Ban J, Bachmaier R, Spahn L, Kreppel M, Schaefer KL, Poremba C,
Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St Anna Kinderspital,
Kinderspitalgasse 6, Vienna A1090, Austria.

In all, 85% of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (ESFT), a neoplasm of unknown
histogenesis, express EWS-FLI1 transcription factor gene fusions. To characterize
direct target genes avoiding artificial model systems, we cloned genomic DNA from
ESFT chromatin precipitating with EWS-FLI1. We now present a comprehensive list
of 99 putative transcription factor targets identified, for the first time, by a 
hypothesis-free approach based on physical interaction. Gene-derived chromatin
fragments co-precipitating with EWS-FLI1 were nonrandomly distributed over the
human genome and localized predominantly to the upstream region and the first two
introns of the genes. At least 20% of putative direct EWS-FLI1 targets were
neural genes. One-third of genes recovered showed a significant ESFT-specific
expression pattern and were found to be altered upon RNAi-mediated knockdown of
EWS-FLI1. Among them, MK-STYX, encoding a MAP kinase phosphatase-like protein,
was consistently expressed in ESFT. EWS-FLI1 was found to drive MK-STYX
expression by binding to a single ETS binding motif within the first gene intron.
MK-STYX serves as precedence for successful recovery of direct EWS-FLI1 targets
from the authentic ESFT cellular context, the most relevant system to study
oncogenic mechanisms for the discovery of new therapeutic targets in this
disease.

PMID: 15735734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2005 Mar;14(1):23-8.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues by RT-PCR and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Qian X(1), Jin L, Shearer BM, Ketterling RP, Jalal SM, Lloyd RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Recent studies have suggested that formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE)
tissues can be used for molecular analyses by fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) and RT-PCR. We analyzed 18 cases of ES/PNET for the t(11;22)(q24;q12) and 
t(21;22)(q22;q12) fusion transcripts by RT-PCR and analyzed for EWS translocation
by interphase FISH with a dual color fusion probe to compare these two approaches
directly. RT-PCR detected 13 (72%) EWS-FLI-1 fusions (type I=10, type II=3) and 2
(11%) EWS-ERG fusions. Three cases could not be evaluated because the
housekeeping gene phosphoglycerate kinase (internal mRNA control) was not
amplified. FISH was diagnostic in 15 of 18 cases (83%). There were three
discordant cases between RT-PCR and FISH (concordance of 83%). Using a
combination of RT-PCR and FISH, the results were complementary. One advantage of 
RT-PCR analysis was that subtypes of EWS translocation could be determined
specifically (type I, type II and ERG). These findings indicate that because of
the difficulties and limitations associated with the molecular analysis of FFPE
tissues, a combination of RT-PCR and FISH may be a better approach to enhance the
sensitivity and accuracy of detecting ES/PNET translocations in FFPE tissues with
suboptimally preserved nucleic acids.

PMID: 15714060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2005 Feb;17(1):14-9.

Pediatric malignancies provide unique cancer therapy targets.

Uren A(1), Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Improving overall survival and reducing morbidity are major
goals of childhood cancer research. This review explores an old idea that
increased survival in childhood cancer can be achieved by inhibiting specific
cancer targets. Specific therapeutic targeting would theoretically cause reduced 
morbidity as well as increased survival. Tumor-specific translocation-generated
fusion proteins appear to be ideal tumor-specific therapeutic targets. This
review will describe advances in aspects of target identification, potential for 
small molecule screening, and the evolution of clinical resistance to this new
generation of pharmaceuticals.
RECENT FINDINGS: Advances in molecular biology have identified new protein
targets along with increased understanding of the biologic role of these
proteins. Ewing sarcoma family of tumors research has benefited from new target
discovery and enhanced biologic understanding of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein.
Congenital (infantile) fibrosarcoma and cellular mesoblastic nephroma have been
grouped based on the presence of a common translocation fusion protein,
ETV6-NTRK3. Functional knowledge of ETV6-NTRK3 has advanced so that strategies
for screening small molecule inhibitors can proceed. Patients with chronic
myeloid leukemia have benefited from the discovery of the BCR-ABL kinase
inhibitor imatinib mesylate (Gleevec), thus showing how a molecular therapeutic
target can be inactivated for improved therapy. This review will describe
challenges raised by clinical resistance to imatinib mesylate as a paradigm for
how resistance might evolve in other disease models. This review also describes
how patients with synovial sarcoma might benefit from future therapy directed
towards the SYT-SSX family of fusion proteins.
SUMMARY: The increased utilization of small molecules to disrupt or inactivate
tumor-specific molecular targets is rapidly evolving. The use of these small
molecules to probe biology and treat disease is advancing towards a new
generation of anticancer therapies.

PMID: 15659957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Jan 20;23(3):548-58.

Ewing sarcomas with p53 mutation or p16/p14ARF homozygous deletion: a highly
lethal subset associated with poor chemoresponse.

Huang HY(1), Illei PB, Zhao Z, Mazumdar M, Huvos AG, Healey JH, Wexler LH,
Gorlick R, Meyers P, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York
Ave, New York, NY 10021, USA.

PURPOSE: EWS-FLI1 fusion type, p53 mutation, and homozygous deletion of
p16/p14ARF have each been shown to be prognostically significant in Ewing sarcoma
(ES). We provide the first combined prognostic analysis of these three molecular 
parameters in ES.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 60 patients with ES (stage: localized in 54,
metastatic in six). All cases were confirmed to contain the EWS-FLI1 (29 type 1, 
12 type 2, 14 other types) or EWS-ERG fusions (five cases). Homozygous deletion
of p16/p14ARF, and p53 mutations were determined by fluorescent in situ
hybridization and Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA) p53 GeneChip microarray
hybridization, respectively.
RESULTS: Eight cases (13.3%) contained point mutations of p53, and eight cases
(13.3%) showed p16/p14ARF deletion, including one case with both alterations.
Among 32 cases with data on histologic chemoresponse, all 10 with alterations in 
p53 or p16/p14ARF showed a poor chemoresponse (P = .03). Variables predicting
poorer overall survival included p53 mutation alone (P < .001), either p53 or
p16/p14ARF alteration (P < .001), and stage (P < .01). In multivariate analysis, 
alterations of p53 and/or p16/p14ARF as a single variable, was the most adverse
prognostic factor (P < .001), followed by stage (P = .04). In a multivariate
analysis with alterations of p53 and p16/p14ARF as separate variables, both were 
significant (P < .001 and P = .03, respectively). Six cases with p16/p14ARF
deletion were also studied for co-deletion of the contiguous methylthioadenosine 
phosphorylase gene, and this was detected in four cases.
CONCLUSION: Alterations in p53 or p16/p14ARF are found in a fourth of ES cases
and define a subset with highly aggressive behavior and poor chemoresponse.

PMID: 15659501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 1;14(5):595-601. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Genome-wide identification of cis-regulatory sequences controlling blood and
endothelial development.

Donaldson IJ(1), Chapman M, Kinston S, Landry JR, Knezevic K, Piltz S, Buckley N,
Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institue for Medical Research, Cambridge 
University, UK.

The development of blood has long served as a model for mammalian cell type
specification and differentiation, and yet the underlying transcriptional
networks remain ill defined. Characterization of such networks will require
genome-wide identification of cis-regulatory sequences and an understanding of
how regulatory information is encoded in the primary DNA sequence. Despite
progress in lower organisms, genome-wide computational identification of
mammalian cis-regulatory sequences has been hindered by increased genomic
complexity and cumbersome transgenic assays. Starting with a well-characterized
blood stem cell enhancer from the SCL gene, we have developed computational tools
for the identification of functionally related gene regulatory sequences. Two
candidate enhancers discovered in this way were located in intron 1 of the Fli-1 
and PRH/Hex genes, both transcription factors previously implicated in
controlling blood and endothelial development. Subsequent transgenic and
biochemical analysis demonstrated that the two computationally identified
enhancers are functionally related to the SCL stem cell enhancer. The approach
developed here may therefore be useful for identifying additional enhancers
involved in the control of early blood and endothelial development, and may be
adapted to decipher transcriptional regulatory codes controlling a broad range of
mammalian developmental programmes.

PMID: 15649946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Oncol Rep. 2005 Feb;13(2):279-82.

Periosteal Ewing's sarcoma treated by photodynamic therapy with acridine orange.

Yoshida K(1), Kusuzaki K, Matsubara T, Matsumine A, Kumamoto T, Komada Y, Naka N,
Uchida A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Mie University Faculty of Medicine,
Edobashi 2-174, Tsu city, Mie 514-8507, Japan.

We recently encountered a very rare case of periosteal Ewing's sarcoma (PES),
which was treated by surgery followed by photodynamic therapy using acridine
orange with radiodynamic therapy. No more than 15 cases of PES have been reported
previously in literature. In our case, MRI revealed the tumor to be localized on 
the cortical surface of the proximal humerus. Histopathological examination of
biopsy specimens revealed a small round cell sarcoma suggestive of Ewing's
sarcoma or PNET, and immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for MIC2.
Although fusion genes EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG were undetectable, PES was still
considered to be the most likely diagnosis. Therefore, we administered
preoperative chemotherapy, as a result of which the tumor shrank to 48% of its
original volume. With a view to preserve excellent shoulder and upper limb
function, we attempted intralesional tumor resection supported by photodynamic
therapy using acridine orange with radiodynamic therapy. After surgery followed
by postoperative chemotherapy, the patient has, until the time of writing, had no
local tumor recurrence and no evidence of metastatic disease, and can move his
shoulder fully and throw a ball well. Since it has been reported that PES has a
better prognosis and responsiveness to chemotherapy than intramedullary Ewing's
sarcoma, we believe that such reduction surgery with photodynamic therapy might
be the strategy of choice to obtain satisfactory limb function in cases of PES.

PMID: 15643511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. BMC Biotechnol. 2004 Dec 14;4:32.

Production of soluble mammalian proteins in Escherichia coli: identification of
protein features that correlate with successful expression.

Dyson MR(1), Shadbolt SP, Vincent KJ, Perera RL, McCafferty J.

Author information: 
(1)The Atlas of Gene Expression Project, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK. mrd@sanger.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: In the search for generic expression strategies for mammalian protein
families several bacterial expression vectors were examined for their ability to 
promote high yields of soluble protein. Proteins studied included cell surface
receptors (Ephrins and Eph receptors, CD44), kinases (EGFR-cytoplasmic domain,
CDK2 and 4), proteases (MMP1, CASP2), signal transduction proteins (GRB2, RAF1,
HRAS) and transcription factors (GATA2, Fli1, Trp53, Mdm2, JUN, FOS, MAD, MAX).
Over 400 experiments were performed where expression of 30 full-length proteins
and protein domains were evaluated with 6 different N-terminal and 8 C-terminal
fusion partners. Expression of an additional set of 95 mammalian proteins was
also performed to test the conclusions of this study.
RESULTS: Several protein features correlated with soluble protein expression
yield including molecular weight and the number of contiguous hydrophobic
residues and low complexity regions. There was no relationship between successful
expression and protein pI, grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY), or
sub-cellular location. Only small globular cytoplasmic proteins with an average
molecular weight of 23 kDa did not require a solubility enhancing tag for high
level soluble expression. Thioredoxin (Trx) and maltose binding protein (MBP)
were the best N-terminal protein fusions to promote soluble expression, but MBP
was most effective as a C-terminal fusion. 63 of 95 mammalian proteins expressed 
at soluble levels of greater than 1 mg/l as N-terminal H10-MBP fusions and those 
that failed possessed, on average, a higher molecular weight and greater number
of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity regions.
CONCLUSIONS: By analysis of the protein features identified here, this study will
help predict which mammalian proteins and domains can be successfully expressed
in E. coli as soluble product and also which are best targeted for a eukaryotic
expression system. In some cases proteins may be truncated to minimise molecular 
weight and the numbers of contiguous hydrophobic amino acids and low complexity
regions to aid soluble expression in E. coli.

PMCID: PMC544853
PMID: 15598350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 3;24(6):962-9.

Direct transcriptional regulation of MDM2 by Fli-1.

Truong AH(1), Cervi D, Lee J, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M5.

The Ets transcription factor, Fli-1, has been shown to play a pivotal role in the
induction and progression of Friend Murine Leukemia Virus (F-MuLV)-induced
erythroleukemia, with its overexpression leading to erythroblast survival,
proliferation, and inhibition of terminal differentiation. P53 inactivation is an
additional genetic alteration that occurs in late-stage leukemic progression
associated with in vivo and in vitro immortalization. Since p53 protein
expression levels are low, to undetectable, in primary erythroleukemic cells that
express elevated levels of Fli-1, we investigated the potential regulation of p53
by Fli-1. We assessed whether the overexpression of Fli-1 could partially
regulate p53 via modulation of its well-established regulator, MDM2. In this
paper, we demonstrate that the promoter of MDM2 contains a consensus binding site
for Fli-1 that is bound by this transcription factor in vitro and in vivo,
resulting in MDM2 transcriptional regulation. We further substantiate these
observations in vivo by demonstrating a positive correlation in the expression of
Fli-1 and MDM2, and a negative correlation with p53 in leukemic tissues obtained 
from mice with Friend Disease. These observations depict a significant function
of Fli-1 overexpression in the indirect control of p53, evidently capable of
leading to an increasingly aggressive erythroleukemic clone in vivo.

PMID: 15592502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Klin Padiatr. 2004 Nov-Dec;216(6):315-22.

Identification of various exon combinations of the ews/fli1 translocation: an
optimized RT-PCR method for paraffin embedded tissue -- a report by the CWS-study
group.

Stegmaier S(1), Leuschner I, Aakcha-Rudel E, Münch P, Kazanowska B, Bekassy A,
Treuner J, Koscielniak E.

Author information: 
(1)Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. s.stegmaier@olgahospital.de

BACKGROUND: Chromosomal translocations t(11;22) (q24;q12) are characteristic of
about 80-90 % of Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors [bone and soft tissue Ewing's
sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumors (PNET)]. They generate ews/fli1
rearrangements showing great diversity in breakpoint exon combination. In about 5
% of Ewing's tumors, ews is fused to the erg gene at 21q22. The various chimeric 
proteins encoded may function as aberrant oncogenic transcription factors. These 
specific translocations can be used for exact molecular diagnosis in these poorly
differentiated small round-cell tumors. Moreover, the prognostic relevance of
different translocational variants has been previously suggested. Furthermore,
the sensitive molecular detection of minimal metastatic and residual disease and 
its clinical significance can be evaluated. To address these questions more
definitively in the large number of patients registered in multicenter studies,
it is often necessary to access archival paraffin-embedded tumor tissue if no
fresh or frozen tumor material is available for analysis by RT (reverse
transcription)-PCR. Specific problems arise from formalin-fixed and
paraffin-embedded tissue due to the degradation of RNA and insufficient
extraction efficiency. Therefore, primer distance and product size are limited
for successful PCR amplification. This conflicts with the requirement for
identification of various possible exon combinations by PCR simultaneously using 
one single primer pair with larger distance.
PATIENTS: We examined paraffin embedded soft part tumor tissue samples from 47
Ewing's tumor patients. Patients were treated according to either CWS
(Cooperative Weichteilsarkomstudie, CWS-91 or CWS-96) or Euro-E.W.I.N.G. 99
therapy protocols.
METHOD: We established a novel RT-PCR method, using 3 different exon specific
sets of PCR primer pairs, selected according to the coding ews and fli1
nucleotide sequences (NCBI database), suitable for RT-PCR identification of
variant ews/fli1 fusion transcripts in RNA isolated from formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue. For use in combination with ews -primer, an erg
specific primer was selected to alternatively test for ews/erg fusion
transcripts. As positive control for the integrity of isolated mRNA, we used the 
ubiquitously expressed gapdh transcript for RT-PCR amplification in each sample.
RESULTS: In 31 cases (= 66 %) of 47 paraffin samples of Ewing's tumors analysed, 
gapdh control indicated adequate quality of RNA. In 16 cases no gapdh control
fragment was amplifiable, nevertheless in 2 of these 16 samples distinct ews
fusion products could be detected. In 23 cases we identified ews fusion
transcripts. Thereof in 65 % ews exon 7 being fused to fli1 exon 6 (fusion type
I), in 22 % to fli1 exon 5 (fusion type II). In 4 % each ews exon 10 being
juxtaposed to fli1 either exon 6 or exon 5, respectively. An ews/erg fusion was
detected in 4 % ( ews exon 7 fused to erg exon 6). In 10 samples, a gapdh
fragment was amplified, but no ews/fli1 or - erg fusion transcript could be
identified. The reference pathological review (I. L., Kiel, Germany) disproved
the primary histopathology in 5 cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Using our different sets of exon specific primer pairs, it was
possible to detect 4 different breakpoints of ews/fli1 fusion transcripts and the
ews/erg fusion by RT-PCR in RNA isolates from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
Ewing's tumor tissue. This method can be a very useful alternative in clinical
situations (to ensure diagnosis and perform minimal metastatic and residual
disease investigations) and in order to assess prognostic significance of
translocation subtypes when no fresh tumor tissue is available.

PMID: 15565546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4772-8. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

Interleukins 2 and 15 regulate Ets1 expression via ERK1/2 and MNK1 in human
natural killer cells.

Grund EM(1), Spyropoulos DD, Watson DK, Muise-Helmericks RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Interleukins (IL)-2 and IL-15 regulate natural killer (NK) cell proliferation,
survival, and cytolytic activity. Ets1 is a transcription factor expressed early 
in NK cell differentiation. Because IL-2Rbeta, IL-2Rgamma, IL-15, and Ets1
knock-out mice similarly lack NK cells, we explored a molecular connection
between IL-2R signaling and Ets1. Here we report the post-transcriptional
regulation of Ets1 by IL-2R signaling in human NK cells. IL-2 and IL-15
stimulation leads to increased Ets1 protein levels with no significant change in 
mRNA levels. Pulse and pulse-chase experiments show that IL-2 stimulation results
in both a marked increase in the nascent translation of Ets1 and an increased
protein half-life. Pharmacological inhibition of MEK specifically blocks IL-2-
and IL-15-induced translation, whereas p38, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and
mTOR inhibitors had no effect on Ets1 levels. Fli1, an Ets family member,
exhibited a different mechanism of regulation, illustrating the specificity of
IL-2R beta and gamma subunit signaling on the regulation of Ets1 expression.
Expression of a dominant negative form of MNK1, a regulator of the translation
initiation factor eIF4E, blocks the expression of Ets1 as do the dominant
negative forms of the common IL-2R beta and gamma chains. Expression of Ets1 is
regulated similarly in normal peripheral human NK cells. Taken together, our
findings provide a direct link between IL-2R subunit signaling and Ets1
expression and helps to explain the interdependence of the IL-2R subunits and
Ets1 for NK cell development and function.

PMID: 15563472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Pediatr Res. 2005 Jan;57(1):63-6. Epub 2004 Nov 19.

G-CSF induces stabilization of ETS protein Fli-1 during myeloid cell development.

Mora-Garcia P(1), Wei J, Sakamoto KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics. Division of Hematology-Oncology, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories, and Mattel Children's Hospital at UCLA, LA 90095, USA.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a growth factor that regulates
the production and function of neutrophils. G-CSF has been used to treat
neutropenia in neonates, pediatric cancer patients, and patients undergoing stem 
cell transplantation. The regulation of transcription factors mediating G-CSF
activity has not been well characterized. The goal of this study was to examine
the regulation of the ETS binding protein, Friend leukemia integration site 1
(Fli-1), in myeloid cells treated with G-CSF. Fli-1 has oncogenic properties in
humans and mice, and plays a role in vascular and hematopoietic cell development.
We previously reported that Fli-1 and the serum response factor bind at adjacent 
sites within the serum response element-1 of the early growth response gene-1
promoter in the murine myeloid leukemic cell line, NFS60. We also identified that
Fli-1 DNA binding increased in G-CSF-treated cells compared with untreated cells.
To determine whether the change in binding activity is due to increased Fli-1
transcription or protein stability, we examined endogenous Fli-1 expression in
G-CSF-treated or -untreated NFS60 cells. Our results demonstrated that levels of 
Fli-1 protein, but not RNA, were higher in extracts from cells treated with
G-CSF. The increase in Fli-1 protein was also dependent on protein synthesis.
Finally, we showed that the half-life of Fli-1 is prolonged in G-CSF-treated
cells compared with control-treated cells. These results suggest that G-CSF
induces stabilization of Fli-1 protein in myeloid cells, thus proposing a novel
mechanism by which hematopoietic growth factors regulate transcription factors.

PMID: 15557108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 15;64(22):8213-21.

DNA microarrays reveal relationship of Ewing family tumors to both endothelial
and fetal neural crest-derived cells and define novel targets.

Staege MS(1), Hutter C, Neumann I, Foja S, Hattenhorst UE, Hansen G, Afar D,
Burdach SE.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center, Division of Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology and BioCenter, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle,
Germany.

Ewing family tumors (EFTs) are small round blue cell tumors that show features of
neuroectodermal differentiation. However, the histogenetic origin of EFTs is
still a matter of debate. We used high-density DNA microarrays for the
identification of EFT-specific gene expression profiles in comparison with normal
tissues of diverse origin. We identified 37 genes that are up-regulated in EFTs
compared with normal tissues and validated expression of these genes in EFTs by
both conventional and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction. The expression pattern of EFT-associated genes in normal tissues
indicated a high similarity between EFTs and fetal and neuronal as well as
endothelial tissues and supports the concept that a primitive neural
crest-derived progenitor at the transition to mesenchymal and endothelial
differentiation is transformed in EFTs. EFT-associated genes could be used for
molecular discrimination between EFTs and other small round blue cell tumors and 
clearly identified a cell line (SK-N-MC) that was initially established as
neuroblastoma as being an EFT. Ectopic expression of the EFT-specific EWS-FLI1
fusion protein in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells was not sufficient to
induce the complete EFT-specific gene expression signature, suggesting that the
EFT-specific gene expression profile is not just a consequence of EWS-FLI1
expression but depends on the histogenetic background of the EFT stem cell.

PMID: 15548687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2004 Nov 15;173(10):6481-9.

Decreased expression of the Ets family transcription factor Fli-1 markedly
prolongs survival and significantly reduces renal disease in MRL/lpr mice.

Zhang XK(1), Gallant S, Molano I, Moussa OM, Ruiz P, Spyropoulos DD, Watson DK,
Gilkeson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical
Research Service, Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathan Lucas Street, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. zhangjo@musc.edu

Increased Fli-1 mRNA is present in PBLs from systemic lupus erythematosus
patients, and transgenic overexpression of Fli-1 in normal mice leads to a
lupus-like disease. We report in this study that MRL/lpr mice, an animal model of
systemic lupus erythematosus, have increased splenic expression of Fli-1 protein 
compared with BALB/c mice. Using mice with targeted gene disruption, we examined 
the effect of reduced Fli-1 expression on disease development in MRL/lpr mice.
Complete knockout of Fli-1 is lethal in utero. Fli-1 protein expression in
heterozygous MRL/lpr (Fli-1(+/-)) mice was reduced by 50% compared with wild-type
MRL/lpr (Fli-1(+/+)) mice. Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice had significantly decreased
serum levels of total IgG and anti-dsDNA Abs as disease progressed. Fli-1(+/-)
MRL/lpr mice had significantly increased splenic CD8(+) and naive T cells
compared with Fli-1(+/+) MRL/lpr mice. Both in vivo and in vitro production of
MCP-1 were significantly decreased in Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice. The Fli-1(+/-)
mice had markedly decreased proteinuria and significantly lower pathologic renal 
scores. At 48 wk of age, survival was significantly increased in the Fli-1(+/-)
MRL/lpr mice, as 100% of Fli-1(+/-) MRL/lpr mice were alive, in contrast to only 
27% of Fli-1(+/+) mice. These findings indicate that Fli-1 expression is
important in lupus-like disease development, and that modulation of Fli-1
expression profoundly decreases renal disease and improves survival in MRL/lpr
mice.

PMID: 15528390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Med Sci (Paris). 2004 Nov;20(11):962-4.

[Fli1 haploinsufficiency underlies Paris-Trousseau thrombopenia].

[Article in French]

Raslova H, Favier R, Albagli O, Vainchenker W.

PMID: 15525489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Sep 17;84(18):1518-21.

[Diagnostic significance and clinical application of specific chimeric genes in
soft tissue sarcomas by RT-PCR using paraffin-embedded tissues: a study of 103
specimens].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Li XX, Chang B, Pang LJ, Yang JH, Hu WH, Lu TC, Li HA, Wang J, Lu HF,
Sun MH, Shi DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic and Surgical Pathology, Shihezi University School of
Medicine, Shihezi 832002, China. patho-sh@mail.xj.cninfo.net

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of the chimeric genes resulting from the
specific chromosomal translocations in soft tissue sarcomas (STS) and its
diagnostic significance for STS.
METHODS: The variety of fusion transcripts were detected in 103 cases of STS,
including 30 cases of synovial sarcoma (SS), 15 cases of rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), 
25 cases of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(ES/pPNET), 12 cases of dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP), 14 cases of
aveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS), 3 cases of leiomyosarcoma (LMS), 2 cases of
malignant fibrous histocytoma (MFH), and 2 cases of fibrosarcoma (FS); and 20
cases of control tumors by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) using formalin fixed, paraffin embedded specimens.
RESULTS: Of the 34 cases of SS 28 (93.3%) expressed SSX-SYT chimeric transcripts 
(14 were positive for SYT-SSX1, 9 for SYT-SSX2). Four of the six cases of
alveolar RMS had a PAX3/PAX7-FKHR fusion transcript. None of the 9 cases of
embryonic and polymorphic RMS expressed PAX3/PAX7-FKHR. Of the 25 cases of
ES/pPNET, 19 were positive for EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript and 1 for EWS-ERG
fusion transcript. COL1A1-PDGFB fusion transcript was expressed in 8 of the 12
cases (66.7%) of DFSP. Of the fourteen cases of ASPS, ten expressed ASPL-TFE3
fusion transcript. None of the 3 cases of LMS, 2 cases of MFH, 2 cases of FS, and
20 control cases contained any of the fusion transcript.
CONCLUSION: Chimeric gene transcript resulting from specific chromosomal
translocations is a reliable index for the molecular diagnosis of STS and RT-PCR 
assay for detection of specific fusion gene provides a useful tool for
confirmation of the diagnosis of STS in diagnostically difficult cases and in
retrospective studies.

PMID: 15500711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7288-95.

The Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene changes the status of p53 in neuroblastoma tumor cell
lines.

Rorie CJ(1), Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Toxicology and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

One hallmark of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumors is the presence
of the Ews/Fli-1 chimeric oncogene. Interestingly, infection of neuroblastoma
tumor cell lines with Ews/Fli-1 switches the differentiation program of
neuroblastomas to Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral neuroectodermal tumors. Here we
examined the status of cytoplasmically sequestered wt-p53 in neuroblastomas after
stable expression of Ews/Fli-1. Immunofluorescence revealed that in the
neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines, p53 went from a punctate-pattern of
cytoplasmic sequestration to increased nuclear localization. Western blot
analysis revealed that PARC was down-regulated in one neuroblastoma cell line but
not expressed in the second. Therefore, decreased PARC expression could not fully
account for relieving p53 sequestration in the neuroblastoma tumor cells.
Neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines showed marked increases in p53
protein expression without transcriptional up-regulation. Interestingly, p53 was 
primarily phosphorylated, without activation of its downstream target p21(WAF1). 
Western blot analysis revealed that whereas MDM2 gene expression does not change,
p14(ARF), a negative protein regulator of MDM2, increases. These observations
suggest that the downstream p53 pathway may be inactivated as a result of
abnormal p53. We also found that p53 has an extended half-life in the
neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectants despite the retention of a wild-type sequence 
in neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectant cell lines. We then tested the p53 response 
pathway and observed that the neuroblastoma parent cells responded to genotoxic
stress, whereas the neuroblastoma-Ews/Fli-1 infectants did not. These results
suggest that Ews/Fli-1 can directly abrogate the p53 pathway to promote
tumorigenesis. These studies also provide additional insight into the
relationship among the p53 pathway proteins.

PMID: 15492248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biochemistry. 2004 Oct 26;43(42):13579-89.

Recombinant EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein activates transcription.

Uren A(1), Tcherkasskaya O, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center,
Research Building, Room W316, 3970 Reservoir Road, N.W., Box 571469, Washington, 
DC 20057-1469, USA. au26@georgetown.edu

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) contains a characteristic
translocation the chimeric transcript of which is translated to become the
EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. EWS-FLI1 regulates transcription and posttranscriptional
splicing. Elimination of EWS-FLI1 protein from ESFT cells induces apoptosis and
reduces xenograft tumor growth. Therefore the production of a biologically active
recombinant EWS-FLI1 could lead to discoveries that would enhance our mechanistic
understanding of ESFT. We have cloned, expressed, and purified a biologically
active recombinant EWS-FLI1 in Escherichia coli using affinity column
chromatography. A refolding procedure was required to render the recombinant
EWS-FLI1 soluble in relatively native conditions. The structural alterations
induced by the refolding procedure were monitored by SDS-gel electrophoresis,
circular dichroism, and steady-state fluorescence spectroscopy. Recombinant
EWS-FLI1 under native conditions approaches a largely unfolded conformation.
Recombinant EWS-FLI1 protein under native conditions specifically binds to DNA
and transcribes RNA. Our biologically active recombinant EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein
will be useful to identify functional molecular partners and inhibitors.

PMID: 15491164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 10;279(50):52183-90. Epub 2004 Oct 5.

Ets-dependent regulation of target gene expression during megakaryopoiesis.

Jackers P(1), Szalai G, Moussa O, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29403, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):25304.

Megakaryopoiesis is the process by which hematopoietic stem cells in the bone
marrow differentiate into mature megakaryocytes. The expression of megakaryocytic
genes during megakaryopoiesis is controlled by specific transcription factors.
Fli-1 and GATA-1 transcription factors are required for development of
megakaryocytes and promoter analysis has defined in vitro functional binding
sites for these factors in several megakaryocytic genes, including GPIIb, GPIX,
and C-MPL. Herein, we utilize chromatin immunoprecipitation to examine the
presence of Ets-1, Fli-1, and GATA-1 on these promoters in vivo. Fli-1 and Ets-1 
occupy the promoters of GPIIb, GPIX, and C-MPL genes in both Meg-01 and CMK11-5
cells. Whereas GPIIb is expressed in both Meg-01 and CMK11-5 cells, GPIX and
C-MPL are only expressed in the more differentiated CMK11-5 cells. Thus, in vivo 
occupancy by an Ets factor is not sufficient to promote transcription of some
megakaryocytic genes. GATA-1 and Fli-1 are both expressed in CMK11-5 cells and
co-occupy the GPIX and C-MPL promoters. Transcription of all three megakaryocytic
genes is correlated with the presence of acetylated histone H3 and phosphorylated
RNA polymerase II on their promoters. We also show that exogenous expression of
GATA-1 in Meg-01 cells leads to the expression of endogenous c-mpl and gpIX mRNA.
Whereas GPIIb, GPIX, and C-MPL are direct target genes for Fli-1, both Fli-1 and 
GATA-1 are required for formation of an active transcriptional complex on the
C-MPL and GPIX promoters in vivo. In contrast, GPIIb expression appears to be
independent of GATA-1 in Meg-01 cells.

PMID: 15466856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Blood. 2005 Jan 1;105(1):95-102. Epub 2004 Sep 14.

Dysregulation of granulocyte, erythrocyte, and NK cell lineages in Fli-1
gene-targeted mice.

Masuya M(1), Moussa O, Abe T, Deguchi T, Higuchi T, Ebihara Y, Spyropoulos DD,
Watson DK, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Charleston, SC 29401-5799, USA.

Targeted disruption of the Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1) proto-oncogene
results in severe dysmegakaryopoiesis and embryonic lethality. We used
morula-stage aggregation as a strategy to further clarify the hematopoietic
defects of the Fli-1 gene-targeted mice. Analyses of lineage expression of
Fli-1(+/-) and Fli-1(-/-) cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow of
chimeric mice consistently demonstrated reduced numbers of neutrophilic
granulocytes and monocytes and increased numbers of natural killer (NK) cells.
Transplantation studies using sorted Fli-1 mutant cells produced similar
findings. Clonal culture studies of bone marrow cells revealed increased numbers 
of granulocytic and early erythroid progenitors in the Fli-1(+/-) cells. The
sorted Fli-1(-/-) bone marrow cells revealed specific down-regulation of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha) and C/EBPepsilon, and the
receptors for granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and
granulocyte-macrophage CSF (GM-CSF), consistent with their critical roles in
granulopoiesis. Collectively, these observations suggest previously unknown
physiologic roles for Fli-1 in granulocytic, erythroid, and NK cell proliferation
and differentiation. Production of chimeras by morula-stage embryo aggregation is
an effective way to unravel cell-autonomous hematopoietic defects in
gene-targeted mice.

PMID: 15367440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;33(4):328-31.

[Detection of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive 
neuroectodermal tumors by one-step RT-PCR using paraffin-embedded tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Li F(1), Chang B, Li XX, Pang LJ, Lu HF, Wang J, Sun MH, Shi DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shihezi University School of Medicine, Xinjiang
832002, China. patho-sh@mail.xj.cninfo.net

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript
resulting from t(11;12)(q24;12) in paraffin-embedded tissues and its diagnostic
implication for Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
(ES/pPNET).
METHODS: One-step reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was
employed to detect a characteristic EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript in 25 cases of
ES/pPNET and 15 cases of other small round cell tumors (including 8 cases of
rhabdomyosarcoma, 4 cases of synovial sarcoma, 2 cases of neuroblastoma and 1
case of lymphoma) using formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues.
RESULTS: EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript was detected in 20 of the 25 ES/pPNET
cases (80%). The 15 non-ES/pPNET control cases were negative for EWS-FLI1/ERG
fusion transcript.
CONCLUSIONS: Detection of EWS-FLI1/ERG fusion transcript is a reliable index for 
molecular diagnosis of ES/pPNET. One-step RT-PCR is a practical method for such
analysis in routine paraffin-embedded tumor tissues.

PMID: 15363317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2004 Jun;12(2):160-5.

Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor: adult abdominal tumors 
with an Ewing sarcoma gene rearrangement demonstrated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in paraffin sections.

Gardner LJ(1), Ayala AG, Monforte HL, Dunphy CH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

The differential diagnosis of small round cell tumors is exhaustive and requires 
ancillary studies. Relatively recently, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
using probes for specific gene rearrangements has gained wide acceptance. This
technique is particularly useful in the differential diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) and desmoplastic small
round-cell tumor (DSRCT). In ES/PNET, the EWS gene is juxtaposed to the FLI-1
gene in 85% of cases and to the ERG gene in another 7% of cases; the EWS gene is 
juxtaposed to the WTI gene in DSRCT. Documentation of the EWS gene rearrangements
in EWS/PNET has previously been demonstrated in frozen tissue. We report 2
unusual cases of EWS/PNET diagnosed in abdominal tumors in adults. Although the
immunohistochemical results supported a diagnosis of ES/PNET, 1 case
morphologically resembled DSRCT. The diagnosis in these 2 cases was confirmed by 
the FISH demonstration of EWS/FLI-1 gene fusion in paraffin-embedded tissue.
Thus, the usefulness of FISH demonstration of an EWS gene rearrangement with
these specific probes in such unusual cases is supported and is demonstrated in
paraffin-embedded tissue.

PMID: 15354743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6026-34.

Selective usage of D-Type cyclins by Ewing's tumors and rhabdomyosarcomas.

Zhang J(1), Hu S, Schofield DE, Sorensen PH, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California 90027, USA.

The genetic mechanisms that control proliferation of childhood musculoskeletal
malignancies, notably Ewing's tumor (ET) and rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), remain
largely unknown. Most human cancers appear to overexpress at least one of the G1 
cyclins (cyclins D1, D2, D3, E1, and E2) to bypass normal regulation of cell
cycle G1 progression. We compared the gene expression profiles of 7 ET and 13 RMS
primary tumor samples and found overexpression of cyclin D1 in all 7 ET samples. 
In contrast, RMS samples expressed higher levels of cyclin D2, cyclin D3, and
cyclin E1. This was confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction and Western blot. The relative roles of RAS-extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase (PI3K)-AKT
pathways in the regulation of D-type cyclin expression in these tumors were then 
assessed. Inhibition of either pathway reduced expression of cyclins D1, D2, and 
D3 in RMS lines, whereas only PI3K inhibitors blocked cyclin D1, D2, and D3
expression in ET lines. Furthermore, PI3K-AKT appeared to regulate D-type cyclin 
transcription in RMS lines through FKHR and FKHRL1. Finally, the role of the
ET-associated EWS-FLI1 fusion gene in regulating D cyclin expression was studied.
Inhibition of EWS-FLI1 expression in the TC71 ET line decreased cyclin D1 levels 
but increased cyclin D3 levels. In contrast, induction of EWS-FLI1 expression in 
the RD RMS cell line increased cyclin D1 expression but decreased cyclin D3
expression. Our results demonstrate distinct regulation of D-type cyclins in ET
and RMS and indicate that EWS-FLI1 can modulate the expression of D-type cyclins 
independent of cellular backgrounds.

PMID: 15342383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2004 Oct;41(2):155-62.

Divergent patterns of telomere maintenance mechanisms among human sarcomas:
sharply contrasting prevalence of the alternative lengthening of telomeres
mechanism in Ewing's sarcomas and osteosarcomas.

Ulaner GA(1), Hoffman AR, Otero J, Huang HY, Zhao Z, Mazumdar M, Gorlick R,
Meyers P, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Service, VA Palo Alto Health Care System, and Department of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California 94304, USA.
gary.ulaner@stanfordalumni.org

Two types of telomere maintenance mechanisms (TMMs) have been described in human 
tumors: telomerase activation and alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT).
Although the vast majority of epithelial tumors rely on telomerase activation,
many mesenchymal tumors rely on ALT for telomere maintenance, but within this
tumor group, the TMMs used by translocation-associated sarcomas have not been
systematically studied. We studied telomere lengths and telomerase expression and
activity in 30 uncultured tumor samples and in 10 cell lines of Ewing's sarcoma, 
a prototypical translocation-associated sarcoma, and compared the data to an
identical analysis of 60 osteosarcomas, the most common type of sarcoma lacking a
specific translocation. Telomerase activity was demonstrated in 21 Ewing's
sarcoma tumor samples (70%) and in 9 of 10 Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. Evidence
of ALT, indicated by the presence of long and heterogeneous telomeres, was
observed only in the cell line without telomerase activity and in none of the 30 
Ewing's sarcoma tumor samples. The 9 Ewing's sarcoma patients whose tumors lacked
detectable telomerase activity did not differ significantly from the remaining
patients in age, stage, EWSR1-FLI1 fusion type, prevalence of TP53 point
mutations, or overall survival. The low prevalence of ALT in Ewing's sarcoma
contrasted sharply with our data on TMMs in 60 osteosarcomas, which showed ALT in
38 of 60 cases (P<0.0001). The present study, together with emerging published
data on other sarcoma types, suggests that a predominance of telomerase
activation in the absence of ALT may characterize sarcomas with specific
chromosomal translocations (such as Ewing's sarcoma), whereas a high prevalence
of ALT appears typical of sarcomas with nonspecific complex karyotypes (such as
osteosarcoma).

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15287028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7275-83.

EWS/FLI-1 silencing and gene profiling of Ewing cells reveal downstream oncogenic
pathways and a crucial role for repression of insulin-like growth factor binding 
protein 3.

Prieur A(1), Tirode F, Cohen P, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, INSERM U509, Section de
Recherche, Institut Curie, 75248 Paris, France.

Ewing tumors are characterized by abnormal transcription factors resulting from
the oncogenic fusion of EWS with members of the ETS family, most commonly FLI-1. 
RNA interference targeted to the junction between EWS and FLI-1 sequences was
used to inactivate the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene in Ewing cells and to explore the
resulting phenotype and alteration of the gene expression profile. Loss of
expression of EWS/FLI-1 resulted in the complete arrest of growth and was
associated with a dramatic increase in the number of apoptotic cells. Gene
profiling of Ewing cells in which the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene had been inactivated 
identified downstream targets which could be grouped in two major functional
clusters related to extracellular matrix structure or remodeling and regulation
of signal transduction pathways. Among these targets, the insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3 gene (IGFBP-3), a major regulator of insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1) proliferation and survival signaling, was strongly induced upon 
treating Ewing cells with EWS/FLI-1-specific small interfering RNAs. We show that
EWS/FLI-1 can bind the IGFBP-3 promoter in vitro and in vivo and can repress its 
activity. Moreover, IGFBP-3 silencing can partially rescue the apoptotic
phenotype caused by EWS/FLI-1 inactivation. Finally, IGFBP-3-induced Ewing cell
apoptosis relies on both IGF-1-dependent and -independent pathways. These
findings therefore identify the repression of IGFBP-3 as a key event in the
development of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC479730
PMID: 15282325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Clin Invest. 2004 Jul;114(1):77-84.

FLI1 monoallelic expression combined with its hemizygous loss underlies
Paris-Trousseau/Jacobsen thrombopenia.

Raslova H(1), Komura E, Le Couédic JP, Larbret F, Debili N, Feunteun J, Danos O, 
Albagli O, Vainchenker W, Favier R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 362, Villejuif,
France.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2004 Jul;114(1):17-9.

Paris-Trousseau syndrome (PTS; also known as Jacobsen syndrome) is characterized 
by several congenital anomalies including a dysmegakaryopoiesis with two
morphologically distinct populations of megakaryocytes (MKs). PTS patients harbor
deletions on the long arm of chromosome 11, including the FLI1 gene, which
encodes a transcription factor essential for megakaryopoiesis. We show here that 
lentivirus-mediated overexpression of FLI1 in patient CD34(+) cells restores the 
megakaryopoiesis in vitro, indicating that FLI1 hemizygous deletion contributes
to the PTS hematopoietic defects. FISH analysis on pre-mRNA and single-cell
RT-PCR revealed that FLI1 expression is mainly monoallelic in CD41(+)CD42(-)
progenitors, while it is predominantly biallelic in the other stages of
megakaryopoiesis. In PTS cells, the hemizygous deletion of FLI1 generates a
subpopulation of CD41(+)CD42(-) cells completely lacking FLI1 transcription. We
propose that the absence of FLI1 expression in these CD41(+)CD42(-) cells might
prevent their differentiation, which could explain the segregation of the PTS MKs
into two subpopulations: one normal and one composed of small immature MKs
undergoing a massive lysis, presumably originating from either FLI1(+) or FLI1(-)
CD41(+)CD42(-) cells, respectively. Thus, we point to the role of transient
monoallelic expression of a gene essential for differentiation in the genesis of 
human haploinsufficiency-associated disease and suggest that such a mechanism may
be involved in the pathogenesis of other congenital or acquired genetic diseases.

PMCID: PMC437972
PMID: 15232614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Clin Invest. 2004 Jul;114(1):17-9.

Lonely in Paris: when one gene copy isn't enough.

Shivdasani RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2004 Jul;114(1):77-84.

Circulating platelets are continually replenished by fragmentation of terminally 
differentiated megakaryocytes. Processes disrupted in inherited thrombocytopenias
frequently shed light on normal thrombopoietic mechanisms. An especially rare
condition called Paris-Trousseau syndrome (PTS) seems to occur by virtue of
hemizygous loss of the FLI1 transcription factor gene. Provocative new data
suggest that FLI1 shows monoallelic expression during a brief window in
megakaryocyte differentiation, which thus explains the dominant inheritance
pattern of PTS despite the presence of one normal FLI1 allele.

PMCID: PMC437976
PMID: 15232606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Hum Pathol. 2004 Jun;35(6):773-5.

Abdominal small round cell tumor with osteoid and EWS/FLI1.

Oshima Y(1), Kawaguchi S, Nagoya S, Wada T, Kokai Y, Ikeda T, Nogami S, Oya T,
Hirayama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In this report, we described a case of multiple intraperitoneal tumors.
Histologically, the tumors were composed of small round cells with malignant
phenotype, necrotic areas, and islands of osteoid matrix in the stroma. In
immunohistochemical and molecular analyses, the tumors expressed CD99 and
EWS-Fli1 fusion gene. Production of osteoid by small round tumor cells was
consistent with the histologic criteria of small-cell osteosarcoma, whereas
expression of EWS-Fli1 was a characteristic genetic feature of Ewing's sarcoma
family of tumor. Such tumors have been limited to a case in which histologically 
proven small-cell osteosarcoma of the scapula showed a chromosomal translocation,
t(11;22)(q24;q12).

PMID: 15188147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Orthop Res. 2004 Jul;22(4):910-7.

Targeting of EWS/FLI-1 by RNA interference attenuates the tumor phenotype of
Ewing's sarcoma cells in vitro.

Chansky HA(1), Barahmand-Pour F, Mei Q, Kahn-Farooqi W, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska A, 
Blackburn M, Chansky K, Conrad EU 3rd, Bruckner JD, Greenlee TK, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Sports Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Washington, 1660 S. Columbian Way, ORT112, Seattle, WA 98108, USA.
chansky@u.washington.edu

The defining cytogenetic abnormality of Ewing's sarcoma is the presence of a
balanced t(11;22) translocation expressing the EWS/FLI-1 chimeric fusion protein.
The effect of EWS/FLI-1 appears to be dominant negative since over-expression of 
EWS does not overcome the sarcoma phenotype. Previous studies have shown that
EWS/FLI-1 as well as related sarcoma fusion proteins are necessary and sufficient
to induce transformation both in vitro and in vivo. In this study we report that 
synthetic small interfering RNA (siRNA) specifically suppresses EWS/FLI-1 fusion 
gene expression in SK-ES Ewing's sarcoma cells. Knockdown of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
protein is correlated with decreased cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. 
We demonstrate that Ewing's sarcoma tumors as well as Ewing's sarcoma cell lines 
predominantly express the CXCR4 chemokine receptor. Using an in vitro invasion
assay, the SDF-1 ligand of CXCR4 was shown to be a potent stimulus of invasion by
SK-ES cells. Knockdown of EWS/FLI-1 by RNA interference abrogates the
invasiveness of SK-ES cells. These experiments suggest that targeted silencing of
the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene by siRNA represents a promising strategy to study the
loss of EWS/FLI-1 protein in Ewing's sarcoma cells of otherwise identical genetic
background.

PMID: 15183454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Am J Surg Pathol. 2004 May;28(5):559-68.

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma: a study of 33 cases emphasizing its pathologic, 
immunophenotypic, and biologic uniqueness from juvenile hemangioma.

Lyons LL(1), North PE, Mac-Moune Lai F, Stoler MH, Folpe AL, Weiss SW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
GA 30322, USA.

Kaposiform hemangioendothelioma (KH) is a rare tumor of childhood often
associated with Kasabach-Merritt phenomenon (KMP) and occasionally
lymphangiomatosis. Although generally considered distinct from other vascular
neoplasms, its rarity has precluded a thorough study of its immunophenotypic
profile and long-term behavior. Thirty-three cases of KH were reviewed and
immunostained for alpha-smooth muscle actin, various endothelial markers (CD31,
CD34, vWf, FLI1), a platelet marker (CD61), and the juvenile
hemangioma-associated markers GLUT-1 and Lewis Y antigen (LeY). In addition, the 
presence of HHV-8 was evaluated by RT-PCR. The patients (20 males and 13 females)
ranged in age from 2 weeks to 20 years (mean 3 years 9 months). Tumors developed 
on the extremities (17 cases), head/neck (8 cases), and other sites (8 cases) and
affected both superficial and deep soft tissue. Those in the skin presented as
slightly raised blue-red lesions. More than half of the patients presented with
KMP (14 of 25). Tumors consisted of irregular, infiltrating nodules of compressed
vessels, which modulated between areas resembling a capillary hemangioma and
Kaposi sarcoma (KS). Endothelial cells in nodules were CD31, CD34, and FLI1
positive but negative for GLUT1 and LeY. Scattered "epithelioid" or glomeruloid
islands featuring endothelium associated with clusters of plump alpha-smooth
muscle actin-positive pericytes, stippled hemosiderin, and CD61-positive fibrin
thrombi likely represent the morphologic sites of platelet consumption. Small and
large lymphatic channels occurred in 22 of 33 cases and were typically seen
peripheral or deep to the main tumor mass. HHV-8 transcripts were not identified 
(0 of 3 cases). Follow-up information was available in 22 patients (range 8
months to 15 years; mean 2 years) and indicated that 3 died of disease, 8 were
alive with disease, and 10 were alive without residual disease. Two patients
developed regional perinodal soft tissue involvement, but none developed distant 
metastases. KH is a lesion having both a vascular and lymphatic component. Its
common association with KMP probably relates in part to unique architectural
features that favor turbulent blood flow and platelet activation. KH can also be 
reliably separated from JH by GLUT-1 and LeY immunostaining, indicating
differences in the morphologic and functional attributes of the endothelium
between the two lesions. The absence of HHV-8 in KH underscores a different
pathogenesis from Kaposi sarcoma. Our study, the largest to date, emphasizes that
mortality is due to KMP and not metastatic disease, which appears limited to
regional perinodal soft tissue. Given this behavior, its continued classification
as a vascular tumor of intermediate malignancy is warranted.

PMID: 15105642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2004 May;42(5):404-9.

Tumor cells are present in stem cell harvests of Ewings sarcoma patients and
their persistence following transplantation is associated with relapse.

Yaniv I(1), Cohen IJ, Stein J, Zilberstein J, Liberzon E, Atlas O, Grunshpan A,
Sverdlov Y, Ash S, Zaizov R, Avigad S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology, Schneider Children's Medical
Center of Israel, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Tumor cells frequently contaminate autologous stem cell products in a
variety of malignancies, but their clinical significance remains controversial.
We retrospectively monitored tumor contamination in stem cell harvests from
patients with Ewing family of tumors (EFT) all harboring the specific
translocation EWS-FLI-1 that characterize these tumors.
PROCEDURE: Twenty- seven harvests from 11 patients were included in the study. In
addition, 6 and 19 bone marrow (BM) or peripheral blood (PBL) samples were
available before and after transplantation, respectively, for RT-PCR and nested
PCR analyzes.
RESULTS: All 11 patients had contaminating tumor cells in their harvests. All
samples prior to transplantation were RT-PCR positive. Two out of the 11 patients
who underwent transplantation died of complications. Out of the remaining nine
patients, two are alive and well 68 and 84 months from diagnosis, and are the
only patients with no detectable tumor cells in their samples after
transplantation. One of these patients harbored contaminating tumor cells in only
one of the two harvests collected. Seven patients relapsed after transplant, and 
in four patients BM/PBL samples were available prior to the clinical relapse. All
these samples harbored contaminating tumor cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest a possible correlation between the amount of
contaminating cells in the harvest and relapse after transplantation.
Quantitative RT-PCR studies of the chimeric transcripts are underway to explore
this issue.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15049010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2004 Mar;31(3):346-50.

[Ewing's sarcoma].

[Article in Japanese]

Goto T(1), Hozumi T, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Orthopaedic Surgery and Musculoskeletal Oncology, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Komagome Hospital, 3-18-22 Hon-Komagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8677, Japan.

Ewing's sarcomas account for 6.8% of all primary malignant bone tumors and are
probably a neurogenic, undifferentiated, high-grade malignancy, which usually
affects the bones of children 5-15 years of age. Pain and swelling are the most
common symptoms. Increase of CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
leucocytosis, and anemia are frequently seen. Radiologically, they show
permeative bone destruction on plain radiographs. When arising in the diaphysis
of long bones, laminated, "onion-skin" periosteal reaction is seen. The tumor
shows muscle density on CT, iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted MR images, and
high signal intensity on T2-weighted MR images. Intramedullary invasion and skip 
lesions can be detected on MR images. Histologically, the tumor is uniformly
composed of sheets of small round cells closely packed and without any matrix
product. Glycogen granules are demonstrated in the cytoplasm by periodic
acid-Schiff (PAS) and diastase reactions. Immunohistochemically, Ewing's sarcomas
are positive for vimentin and MIC-2 gene product (CD99). Reciprocal
translocation, i.e., t(11;22) (q24;q12), is seen in the tumor cells. EWS/FLI-1
fusion gene can be demonstrated, which can be a complementary method in
diagnosing this tumor. Because Ewing's sarcomas are chemosensitive and
radiosensitive, they are treated by a combination of chemotherapy, surgery, and
radiotherapy. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy consists of preoperative chemotherapy and 
postoperative chemotherapy. Preoperative chemotherapy aims at eradicating distant
micrometastasis, reducing the primary tumor volume, and evaluating the efficacy
of the chemotherapeutic agents. Surgery is performed as a local treatment by
excising the tumor using the wide procedure. If surgery is impractical, curative 
radiotherapy is performed instead of excision. When surgery is performed without 
complete wide procedure, adjuvant radiotherapy is carried out to eradicate the
residual tumor cells. Postoperative chemotherapy aims to eradicate the distant
micrometastasis. Recently, myeloablative, high-dose chemotherapy followed by
autologous bone marrow transplantation is being attempted for poor-prognosis
patients and good results have been reported.

PMID: 15045938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. N Engl J Med. 2004 Mar 25;350(13):1364-5.

A patient with two Ewing's sarcomas with distinct EWS fusion transcripts.

Bielack SS, Paulussen M, Köhler G.

PMID: 15044653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Oncogene. 2004 May 6;23(21):3830-40.

The effects of Brn-3a on neuronal differentiation and apoptosis are
differentially modulated by EWS and its oncogenic derivative EWS/Fli-1.

Gascoyne DM(1), Thomas GR, Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, UCL, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. d.gascoyne@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The Brn-3 family of POU (Pit-Oct-Unc) homeodomain transcription factors regulate 
differentiation of neuronal cell types. The transcriptional activator Brn-3a is
expressed in Ewing's sarcomas, which also express characteristic chimaeric
proteins as a consequence of fusion of the TET family gene EWS to one of several 
ETS genes. We have previously demonstrated a physical interaction between Brn-3a 
and EWS proteins, and show here that the C-terminal POU domain but not N-terminal
activation domain of Brn-3a can interact in vitro with the RNA-binding domain of 
EWS. Likely due to POU domain homology, the related factor Brn-3b can also
interact with EWS, but to a lesser extent than Brn-3a. Importantly, Brn-3a but
not Brn-3b interacts in vitro with chimaeric EWS/Fli-1, EWS/ATF-1 and EWS/ERG
proteins. Furthermore, overexpression of EWS/Fli-1 but not EWS or Fli-1 inhibits 
Brn-3a-associated growth arrest and neurite outgrowth in neuronal cells, and
specifically inhibits Brn-3a-dependent activation of p21 and SNAP-25
transcription. In contrast, upregulation of Bcl-2 expression and inhibition of
apoptosis by Brn-3a is antagonized more by EWS than by EWS/Fli-1. These data
demonstrate that oncogenic rearrangement of EWS to produce EWS/Fli-1 may enhance 
the antiapoptotic effect of Brn-3a and inhibit its ability to promote neuronal
differentiation.

PMID: 15021903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mod Pathol. 2004 May;17(5):547-52.

Utility of the immunohistochemical detection of FLI-1 expression in round cell
and vascular neoplasm using a monoclonal antibody.

Rossi S(1), Orvieto E, Furlanetto A, Laurino L, Ninfo V, Dei Tos AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Regional Hospital, Treviso, Italy.

FLI-1 nuclear transcription factor has been proposed as a useful tool in the
differential diagnosis of small round cell sarcomas. Recently, FLI-1 has been
reported as the first nuclear marker of endothelial differentiation. However, its
clinical use has been hampered by major interpretation problems, due to the
presence of background staining as well as staining variation between different
lots of the same antiserum. In this study, a novel monoclonal antibody raised
against the carboxyl terminal of the FLI-1 protein (clone GI146-222, BD
Pharmingen) was tested in a series of small round cell and vascular neoplasms.
Furthermore, in order to assess FLI-1 specificity, we analyzed its expression in 
a series of common epithelial and nonepithelial malignancies. In total, 15
Ewing's sarcomas, 10 rhabdomyosarcomas, 5 desmoplastic small round cell tumors,
10 synovial sarcomas, 10 high-grade pleomorphic sarcomas, 10 malignant melanomas,
5 Merkel's carcinomas, 10 colonic adenocarcinomas, 10 breast carcinomas, 10 lung 
adenocarcinomas, 20 angiosarcomas, 5 epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, 10
Kaposi's sarcomas and 10 benign hemangiomas, were stained. A strong FLI-1
immunoreactivity was detected in all Ewing's sarcomas and vascular neoplasms,
highlighting the high sensitivity of FLI-1 monoclonal antibody. However, 2/5
Merkel's carcinomas and 1/10 malignant melanomas showed a strong nuclear
immunostaining, suggesting that FLI-1 may not be so helpful in the differential
diagnosis of cutaneous Ewing's sarcoma. In addition, a weak immunoreactivity was 
found in 3/5 Merkel cell carcinomas, 3/10 synovial sarcomas, 5/10 malignant
melanomas, 6/10 lung adenocarcinomas and in 1/10 breast carcinomas. In contrast, 
all the rhabdomyosarcomas, desmoplastic small round cell tumors, high-grade
pleomorphic sarcomas and colonic adenocarcinomas tested were negative.
Importantly, in contrast with previous studies, no background staining was
observed. Our results indicate that FLI-1 monoclonal antibody can be reliably
applied to the differential diagnosis of small round cell neoplasms of soft
tissue, and confirm its important role as nuclear marker of endothelial
differentiation, mainly helpful in those cases in which technical artifacts are
seen by using the traditional membranous and cytoplasmic endothelial markers.

PMID: 15001993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cancer. 2004 Mar 1;100(5):1053-8.

The predictive potential of molecular detection in the nonmetastatic Ewing family
of tumors.

Avigad S(1), Cohen IJ, Zilberstein J, Liberzon E, Goshen Y, Ash S, Meller I,
Kollender Y, Issakov J, Zaizov R, Yaniv I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Felsenstein Medical Research Center,
Petah-Tikva, Israel. savigad@post.tau.ac.il

BACKGROUND: Tumors in the Ewing family (EFTs) are the second most common bone
tumors in children and adolescents. Despite aggressive chemotherapy, one-third of
patients with localized tumor still may develop recurrences. This implies that
not all tumor cells are eradicated and that the patients may have a level of
residual disease. EFTs are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations
that result in chimeric transcripts that can be detected with reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis.
METHODS: The authors report the prognostic potential of the positive chimeric
transcript (EWS/FLI1) in bone marrow (BM) and/or peripheral blood (PBL) in 26
patients with EFT during a long follow-up period (median, 61 months).
RESULTS: At diagnosis, 43% of patients had positive RT-PCR BM results, with no
correlation to tumor progression (P = 0.3). During follow-up, 58% of patients had
positive RT-PCR results in their last sample analyzed (BM and/or PBL). A highly
significant correlation between the presence of the chimeric transcript and
disease progression was detected (P = 0.0028). In a multivariate analysis, the
percentage of tumor necrosis (P = 0.007) and RT-PCR results during follow-up (P =
0.02) remained significant prognostic markers. In 10 of 11 patients who developed
disease progression, BM and/or PBL samples were positive for the chimeric
transcript before evidence of overt clinical recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Occult tumor cells in BM and/or PBL samples during long follow-up
are strong predictors of recurrent disease in patients with nonmetastatic EFTs.

Copyright 2004 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 14983502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 15;64(4):1266-77.

The Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene switches the differentiation program of neuroblastomas 
to Ewing sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors.

Rorie CJ(1), Thomas VD, Chen P, Pierce HH, O'Bryan JP, Weissman BE.

Author information: 
(1)Curriculum in Toxicology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

Neuroblastoma (NB) and the Ewing sarcoma (ES)/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) family are pediatric cancers derived from neural
crest cells. Although NBs display features of the sympathetic nervous system,
ES/PNETs express markers consistent with parasympathetic differentiation. To
examine the control of these differentiation markers, we generated NB x ES/PNET
somatic cell hybrids. NB-specific markers were suppressed in the hybrids, whereas
ES/PNET-specific markers were unaffected. These results suggested that the
Ews/Fli-1 fusion gene, resulting from a translocation unique to ES/PNETs, might
account for the loss of NB-specific markers. To test this hypothesis, we
generated two different NB cell lines that stably expressed the Ews/Fli-1 gene.
We observed that heterologous expression of the Ews/Fli-1 protein led to the
suppression of NB-specific markers and de novo expression of ES/PNET markers. To 
determine the extent of changes in differentiation, we used the Affymetrix
GeneChip Array system to observe global transcriptional changes of genes. This
analysis revealed that the gene expression pattern of the Ews/Fli-1-expressing NB
cells resembled that observed in pooled ES/PNET cell lines and differed
significantly from the NB parental cells. Therefore, we propose that Ews/Fli-1
contributes to the etiology of ES/PNET by subverting the differentiation program 
of its neural crest precursor cell to a less differentiated and more
proliferative state.

PMID: 14973077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1870-83.

The scl +18/19 stem cell enhancer is not required for hematopoiesis:
identification of a 5' bifunctional hematopoietic-endothelial enhancer bound by
Fli-1 and Elf-1.

Göttgens B(1), Broccardo C, Sanchez MJ, Deveaux S, Murphy G, Göthert JR,
Kotsopoulou E, Kinston S, Delaney L, Piltz S, Barton LM, Knezevic K, Erber WN,
Begley CG, Frampton J, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University
of Cambridge, United Kingdom. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Analysis of cis-regulatory elements is central to understanding the genomic
program for development. The scl/tal-1 transcription factor is essential for
lineage commitment to blood cell formation and previous studies identified an scl
enhancer (the +18/19 element) which was sufficient to target the vast majority of
hematopoietic stem cells, together with hematopoietic progenitors and
endothelium. Moreover, expression of scl under control of the +18/19 enhancer
rescued blood progenitor formation in scl(-/-) embryos. However, here we
demonstrate by using a knockout approach that, within the endogenous scl locus,
the +18/19 enhancer is not necessary for the initiation of scl transcription or
for the formation of hematopoietic cells. These results led to the identification
of a bifunctional 5' enhancer (-3.8 element), which targets expression to
hematopoietic progenitors and endothelium, contains conserved critical Ets sites,
and is bound by Ets family transcription factors, including Fli-1 and Elf-1.
These data demonstrate that two geographically distinct but functionally related 
enhancers regulate scl transcription in hematopoietic progenitors and endothelial
cells and suggest that enhancers with dual hematopoietic-endothelial activity may
represent a general strategy for regulating blood and endothelial development.

PMCID: PMC350551
PMID: 14966269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Feb 1;10(3):1003-12.

The prognostic and therapeutic relevance of p27kip1 in Ewing's family tumors.

Matsunobu T(1), Tanaka K, Matsumoto Y, Nakatani F, Sakimura R, Hanada M, Li X,
Oda Y, Naruse I, Hoshino H, Tsuneyoshi M, Miura H, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-5488, Japan.

PURPOSE: Ewing's family tumors (EFTs) display the characteristic fusion gene
EWS-Fli1. We have reported EWS-Fli1 may promote the cell cycle progression
accompanied by the suppression of the expression of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27(kip1) in EFT cells. Here, we describe the prognostic and
therapeutic relevance of p27 in EFTs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined tumor samples taken from 21 patients with
primary EFTs for the expression of p27 protein immunohistochemically and
evaluated its correlation with clinical outcome. We also investigated the
usefulness of p27 as a therapeutic strategy in vitro and in vivo using p27
expression adenovirus. Finally, we examined the process of EWS-Fli1-mediated
reduction of p27 expression.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis showed that a low expression level of p27
protein was related to poor event-free survival in an univariate analysis and
that the expression level of p27 correlated more significantly with patient
survival than several clinical factors in a multivariate survival analysis.
Overexpression of p27 with the adenoviral vector remarkably inhibited the cell
growth in all EFT cells tested and further induced apoptosis in the wild-type p53
EFT cells. In vivo studies demonstrated a reduction in tumor growth of EFT
xenograft in nude mice treated with the intratumoral injection of p27-expressing 
adenovirus. EWS-Fli1 did not significantly affect the p27 promoter activity and
p27 mRNA levels. However, the challenge of the proteasome inhibitor caused
accumulation of p27 protein in EFT cells. These data strongly suggest EWS-Fli1
might attenuate p27 protein level via activation of the proteasome-mediated
degradation pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first evidence of the prognostic relevance 
of p27 expression in EFTs. We propose p27 as a novel and powerful therapeutic
factor for the molecular target therapy of EFTs.

PMID: 14871979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;10(2):751-61.

Imatinib inhibits proliferation of Ewing tumor cells mediated by the stem cell
factor/KIT receptor pathway, and sensitizes cells to vincristine and
doxorubicin-induced apoptosis.

González I(1), Andreu EJ, Panizo A, Inogés S, Fontalba A, Fernández-Luna JL,
Gaboli M, Sierrasesúmaga L, Martín-Algarra S, Pardo J, Prósper F, de Alava E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Pathology, School of Medicine-Universidad de
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

PURPOSE AND EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The stem cell factor/KIT receptor loop may
represent a novel target for molecular-based therapies of Ewing tumor. We
analyzed the in vitro impact of KIT blockade by imatinib in Ewing tumor cell
lines.
RESULTS: KIT expression was detected in 4 of 4 Ewing tumor cell lines and in 49
of 110 patient samples (44.5%) by immunohistochemistry and/or Western blot
analysis. KIT expression was stronger in Ewing tumors showing EWS-FLI1 nontype 1 
fusions. Despite absence of c-kit mutations, constitutive and ligand-inducible
phosphorylation of KIT was found in all tumor cell lines, indicating an active
receptor. Treatment with KIT tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib (0.5-20 micro M) 
induced down-regulation of KIT phosphorylation and dose response inhibition of
cell proliferation (IC(50), 12-15 micro M). However, imatinib administered alone 
at doses close to IC(50) for growth inhibition (10 micro M) did not induce a
significant increase in apoptosis. We then analyzed if blockade of KIT loop
through imatinib (10 micro M) was able to increase the antitumor in vitro effect 
of doxorubicin (DXR) and vincristine (VCR), drugs usually used in Ewing tumor
treatment. Addition of imatinib decreased in 15-20 and 15-36% of the
proliferative rate of Ewing tumor cells exposed to DXR and VCR, respectively, and
increased in 15 and 30% of the apoptotic rate of Ewing tumor cells exposed to the
same drugs.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of Ewing tumor cell proliferation by imatinib is mediated
through blockade of KIT receptor signaling. Inhibition of KIT increases
sensitivity of these cells to DXR and VCR. This study supports a potential role
for imatinib in the treatment of Ewing tumor.

PMID: 14760098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003 Dec;1002:72-7.

Therapeutic potentialities of EWS-Fli-1 mRNA-targeted vectorized antisense
oligonucleotides.

Maksimenko A(1), Lambert G, Bertrand JR, Fattal E, Couvreur P, Malvy C.

Author information: 
(1)BioAlliance Pharma, 59, Boulevard du Général Martial Valin, 75015 Paris.

We have used structured antisense oligonucleotides (AON), which are protected
against extra and intracellular degradation by their internal structure. We have 
shown that if correctly designed this structure does not prevent them from
hybridizing to the mRNA target. This concept allows reducing the number of
thioate groups in the oligonucleotide and therefore the potential toxicity.
Junction oncogenes are found in cancers such as certain leukemias, Ewing sarcoma,
and thyroid papillary carcinomas. Ewing sarcoma is a cancer of children and young
adults with bone metastasis. It is caused by a chromosomic translocation t(11;22)
(q24;q12) creating a fusion gene between the genes EWS and Fli-1 giving rise to a
chimeric protein which is an unnatural transcription factor. Immortalized NIH/3T3
cells transfected by the EWS-Fli-1 cDNA under the control of the LTR retroviral
promoter--which do not undergo apoptosis and which became tumoral--were used for 
this study. As a model of Ewing sarcoma in nude mice, we have used permanently
expressing human EWS-Fli-1 cells grafted to nude mice. The nanospheres or
nanocapsules have been used to deliver two different AON: a phosphorothioate, and
a structured chimeric AON, both targeted toward the junction area of EWS-Fli-1.
Both types of AON-loaded nanoparticles inhibited the growth of the xenografted
tumor after intratumoral injections into nude mice, whereas similar nanoparticles
with control oligonucleotides had no effect. With AON in nanospheres, we have
shown after 24 hours that the mRNA of EWS-Fli-1 was specifically down-regulated, 
confirming the antisense activity of the targeted AON.

PMID: 14751824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Pediatr Pathol Mol Med. 2003 Sep-Oct;22(5):391-8.

Rectal primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Drut R(1), Drut M, Müller C, Marrón A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital de Niños Superiora Sor María Ludovica, 1900 
La Plata, Argentina. patologi@netverk.com.ar

We report the clinical, histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular findings
of a Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) localized to the
rectum in a 17-year-old boy. Notably the 4.5 x 4 x 4-cm sessile mass was
spontaneously eliminated through the anus, producing an episode of hemorrhagic
shock. Histologically the tumor presented as a proliferation of membrane
CD99-positive, small round cells. EWS/FLI1 chimeric mRNA was demonstrated by
nested reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis in the
tumor tissue. The patient is alive and well 2 years after initial symptoms. We
also review reported cases of ES/PNET of the digestive system.

PMID: 14692190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Oncogene. 2003 Dec 18;22(58):9282-7.

Rapamycin induces the fusion-type independent downregulation of the EWS/FLI-1
proteins and inhibits Ewing's sarcoma cell proliferation.

Mateo-Lozano S(1), Tirado OM, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Department of Radiation Medicine,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20057-1482, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is the prototype of a family of tumors (ESFT) of
neuroectodermal origin formed by small, round cells with limited neural
differentiation, which arise most frequently within bones in children or
adolescents. The proliferation of ESFT cells is highly dependent on the
establishment of, and signaling through several growth factor-mediated autocrine 
loops. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a central regulator of
translation and cell proliferation, involved in the cellular response to various 
nutritional, stress and mitogenic effectors. As mTOR has recently been associated
with certain human cancers, we investigated the possibility that mTOR played a
role in the regulation of ES cell proliferation. Results showed that ES cell
lines carrying EWS/FLI-1 alleles of different types expressed different levels of
total and phosphorylated mTOR protein. We demonstrate that rapamycin, an mTOR
inhibitor, efficiently blocked the proliferation of all cell lines by promoting
cell cycle arrest at the G1 phase. This was paralleled by the downregulation of
the levels of the EWS/FLI-1 proteins, regardless of their fusion type, and the
concomitant restoration of the expression of the TGF-beta type 2 receptor
(TGFbeta RII), which is known to be repressed by several EWS-ETS fusion proteins.
The expression of a rapamycin-resistant mTOR construct prevented both the
proliferation blockade and the EWS/FLI-1 downregulation. These data demonstrate
that mTOR signaling plays a central role in ES cell pathobiology and strongly
suggest that the use of rapamycin as a cytostatic agent may be an efficient tool 
for the treatment of ES patients.

PMID: 14681687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 1;63(23):8338-44.

EWS/ETS fusions activate telomerase in Ewing's tumors.

Takahashi A(1), Higashino F, Aoyagi M, Yoshida K, Itoh M, Kyo S, Ohno T, Taira T,
Ariga H, Nakajima K, Hatta M, Kobayashi M, Sano H, Kohgo T, Shindoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathobiological Science, Hokkaido University Graduate
School of Dental Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

EWS/ETS is a chimeric protein identified in most Ewing's sarcomas. Although
EWS/ETS has been shown to activate transcription as a transcription factor, the
detailed targets of EWS/ETS in transformed cells have not been clarified. Herein,
we demonstrate that telomerase is a new target of EWS/ETS fusions. Both
telomerase activity and the expression level of telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(TERT) mRNA were up-regulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by EWS/E1AF and
EWS/FLI1 as well as in two Ewing's sarcoma cell lines. Luciferase assay using the
TERT promoter revealed that EWS/E1AF and EWS/FLI1 function as positive regulators
of TERT transcription in an ETS binding site-independent manner. EWS/ETS appeared
to be included in the initiation complex of TERT transcription and to cooperate
with CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300. When EWS/FLI1 was knocked down in Ewing's
sarcomas cells by RNA interference, the expression level of TERT mRNA and the
telomerase activity were significantly decreased. These findings indicate that
EWS/ETS fusion proteins activate human telomerase activity in Ewing's tumors
through up-regulation of TERT gene expression, probably as a transcriptional
coactivator.

PMID: 14678994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Diagn Cytopathol. 2003 Dec;29(6):341-3.

Sequence confirmation of the EWS-WT1 fusion gene transcript in the peritoneal
effusion of a patient with desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Chiu LL(1), Koay ES, Chan NH, Salto-Tellez M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnosis Centre, Department of Laboratory Medicine, National
University Hospital, Singapore.

Desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) is a rare undifferentiated neoplasm. 
The prognosis is poor, even if therapy is instituted promptly, and thus it is
important to differentiate it from other histologically and cytologically
similar-looking malignancies of the young adult. We present a case of DSRCT in a 
17-yr-old male with disseminated peritoneal disease and peritoneal effusion. The 
cytology sample showed a malignant small round cell tumor, the classical
cytological features of DSRCT, and immunohistochemistry performed in the prepared
cell block exhibited an antibody expression profile in keeping with DSRCT.
Further material from the effusion was prepared for RNA extraction, following
which a reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and sequencing
of the t(11;22)(p13;q11 or q12) were carried out. The result showed the presence 
of the reciprocal translocation and thus confirmed the diagnosis of DSRCT. This
case shows how molecular techniques (including sequencing) can be applied to
cytology in clarifying and confirming certain difficult diagnosis of
undifferentiated neoplasms, DSRCT in this particular case.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14648792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Oncogene. 2004 Jan 29;23(4):920-7.

Spi-1/PU.1 but not Fli-1 inhibits erythroid-specific alternative splicing of 4.1R
pre-mRNA in murine erythroleukemia cells.

Théoleyre O(1), Deguillien M, Morinière M, Starck J, Moreau-Gachelin F, Morlé F, 
Baklouti F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, Université Lyon 
1, Villeurbanne, France.

The inclusion of exon 16 in mature protein 4.1R mRNA arises from a stage-specific
splicing event that occurs during late erythroid development. We have shown that 
mouse erythroleukemia (MEL) cells reproduce this erythroid-specific splicing
event upon induction of differentiation. We here found that this splicing event
is regulated specifically in erythroleukemic cells that have the potential to
differentiate and produce hemoglobin, regardless of the nature of the
differentiation inducer. Knowing that dysregulated expression of spi-1/pu.1 and
fli-1 oncogenes is involved in MEL cell differentiation arrest, we looked at
their effect on exon 16 erythroid splicing. We found that exon 16 inclusion
requires Spi-1/PU.1 shutdown in MEL cells, and that enforced expression of
Spi-1/PU.1 inhibits exon selection, regardless of the presence or absence of a
chemical inducer. By contrast, endogenous overexpression or enforced expression
of Fli-1 has no effect on exon selection. We further showed that Spi-1/PU.1 acts 
similarly on the endogenous and on a transfected exon 16, suggesting a
promoter-independent effect of Spi-1/PU.1 on splicing regulation. This study
provides the first evidence that Spi-1/PU.1 displays the unique property, not
shared with Fli-1, to inhibit erythroid-specific pre-mRNA splicing in
erythroleukemia cell context.

PMID: 14647452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Pharm Res. 2003 Oct;20(10):1565-7.

Oligonucleotides targeted against a junction oncogene are made efficient by
nanotechnologies.

Maksimenko A(1), Malvy C, Lambert G, Bertrand JR, Fattal E, Maccario J, Couvreur 
P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 1582, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39 rue Camille Desmoulins, 94805
Villejuif cedex, France.

PURPOSE: Antisense oligonucleotides (AON) against junction EWS-Fli-1 oncogene
(which is responsible for the Ewing Sarcoma) are particularly interesting for
targeting chromosomal translocations that are only found in tumor cells. However,
these AON have proved in the past to be ineffective in vivo because of their
susceptibility to degradation and their poor intracellular penetration. The aim
of this study was to improve the delivery of these molecules through the use of
nanotechnologies.
METHOD: Two different AONs, and their controls, both targeted against the
junction area of the fusion gene EWS-Fli-1 were used. Nanocapsules were employed 
to deliver a phosphorothioate AON and its control. The nanospheres were used to
deliver a chimeric phosphorothioate, phosphodiester AON, with 5 additional bases 
in 5' which allow this AON to be structured with a loop. These formulations were 
injected intratumorally to nude mice bearing the experimental EWS-Fli-1 tumor.
The tumour volume was estimated during the experiments by two perpendicular
measurements length (a) and width (b) of the tumour and was calculated as
ab(2)/2. Northern blot analysis was also performed after removing the tumors 24 h
after the treatment with a single dose of AON either free or associated with
nanotechnologies.
RESULTS: This study shows for the first time that AON against EWS-Fli-1 oncogene 
may inhibit with high specificity the growth of an EWS-Fli-1 dependent tumor
grafted to nude mice provided they are delivered by nanocapsules or nanospheres. 
In this experience, the antisense effect was confirmed by the specific down
regulation of EWS-Fli-1 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Thus, both nanocapsules and nanospheres may be considered as
promising systems for AON delivery in vivo.

PMID: 14620508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Surg Pathol. 2003 Oct;11(4):331-7.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma of the suodenum: a case report.

Kie JH(1), Lee MK, Kim CJ, Lee K, Kwon KW, Yang WI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Health Insurance Cooperation Ilsan Hospital,
Koyang, Korea.

We report a case of Ewing's sarcoma arising from the duodenum in a 20-year-old
woman who presented with a rapidly progressive ulcerative lesion. The surgical
specimen obtained via Whipple's operation revealed a small round-cell tumor
(SRCT) in the first and second portion of the duodenum. The tumor cells revealed 
strong immunore-activity for CD 99 and vimentin and focal paranuclear dot-like
immunoreactivity for cytokeratin. Electron microscopy showed primitive tumor
cells with few cytoplasmic organelles, but neither neurosecretory granules nor
specific cell junctions were present. On Western blot study, 68-kDa EWS/FLI1
fusion protein was detected. The occurrence of Ewing's sarcoma in the
gastrointestinal hollow viscus has recently been recognized, and this case
expands the known anatomic sites that can harbor Ewing's sarcoma by demonstrating
primary duodenal involvement.

PMID: 14615834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Exp Mol Pathol. 2003 Dec;75(3):238-47.

Role of Ets/Id proteins for telomerase regulation in human cancer cells.

Xiao X(1), Athanasiou M, Sidorov IA, Horikawa I, Cremona G, Blair D, Barret JC,
Dimitrov DS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental and Computational Biology, NCI-Frederick, NIH,
Miller Drive, Frederick, MD 21702-1201, USA. xiaox@ncifcrf.gov

Most human cancers express telomerase but its activity is highly variable and
regulated by complex mechanisms. Recently, we have proposed that Ets proteins may
be important for regulation of telomerase activity in leukemic cells. Here we
provide further evidence for the role of Ets family members and related Id
proteins in telomerase regulation and characterize the underlying molecular
mechanisms. By using PCR-based and gel shift assays we demonstrated specific
binding to a core hTERT promoter of Ets2, Fli1, Id2, c-Myc, Mad1, and Sp1 in
lysates from subclones of U937 cells. Further analysis of binding of purified
proteins and various mutants of the hTERT promoter suggested the existence of a
trimolecular Ets-Id2-DNA complex, and Ets inhibitory activity mediated by c-Myc
and the Ets binding site on the core hTERT promoter at -293 bp from the
transcription initiation site as well as a positive Ets regulatory effect mediate
through another Ets binding site at -36 bp. This analysis provided evidence for
the existence of negative and positive Ets regulatory site and suggested a
complex interplay between Ets/Id family members and c-Myc that may be an
important determinant of the diversity of telomerase activity in leukemia and
other cancers.

PMID: 14611815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Oncogene. 2003 Nov 6;22(50):8072-84.

Mutual repression of transcriptional activation between the ETS-related factor
ERG and estrogen receptor.

Vlaeminck-Guillem V(1), Vanacker JM, Verger A, Tomavo N, Stehelin D, Laudet V,
Duterque-Coquillaud M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

Transcription factors are known to interact with each other to modulate their
transcriptional activity. In this study, we found that the transcriptional
activity of human Erg (one of the Ets family-transcription factors) was repressed
by several nuclear receptors, including human estrogen receptor ERalpha,
nonsteroid receptors and orphan receptors. Conversely, Erg inhibited
ERalpha-dependent transcription. These reciprocal functional interactions
extended to other nuclear receptors such as thyroid hormone and retinoic acid
receptors, as well as to Fli1, an ERG-related ETS factor. Although similarly
inhibited by overexpression of the orphan nuclear receptors ERR1 and RORalpha,
ERG activity was unaffected by either REV-ERBalpha1 or COUP-TFII. The antagonism 
between ERG and ERalpha did not depend on DNA binding inhibition or direct
protein-protein interactions. Repression of ERalpha-dependent transcription
required the carboxyterminal and aminoterminal transactivation domains of Erg
whereas the carboxyterminal AF-2 domain of ERalpha was necessary for repression
of Erg activity. Reciprocal inhibition between Erg and ERalpha was not alleviated
by overexpressing CBP, SRC-1 or RIP 140, three nuclear coactivator proteins. A
negative cross-talk observed between Erg and ERalpha expands their potential
range of regulation and may be relevant in vivo, particularly in endothelial,
urogenital and cartilaginous tissues where both factors are expressed.

PMID: 14603248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2003 Nov 5;95(21):1574-6.

Ewing's sarcoma: a miracle drug waiting to happen?

Longtin R.

PMID: 14600088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Thromb Haemost. 2003 Nov;90(5):893-7.

Paris-Trousseau syndrome : clinical, hematological, molecular data of ten new
cases.

Favier R(1), Jondeau K, Boutard P, Grossfeld P, Reinert P, Jones C, Bertoni F,
Cramer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hématologie Biologique, Hôpital d'enfants A. Trousseau, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    Thromb Haemost. 2003 Nov;90(5):770-1.

Paris-Trousseau syndrome (PTS) is an inherited disorder characterized by mild
hemorragic tendency associated with 11q chromosome deletion. Here we report ten
new patients (5 boys, 5 girls) with complete clinical history, biological data,
ultra-structural and molecular investigations. Thrombocytopenia is chronic in all
the patients except two boys in whom it disappeared during the two first years of
life. On Romanovsky stained peripheral blood smears, abnormal platelets with
giant granules were detected in all the children and confirmed by electron
microscopy (EM). On bone marrow smears, dysmegakaryopoiesis with many
micromegakaryocytes was constantly observed. Abnormal alpha-granules were
virtually absent from bone marrow and cultured megakaryocytes, while EM detected 
numerous images of granule fusion within blood platelets. Molecular analyses
evidenced that the fli-1 gene is deleted in all the patients except one
confirming the crucial role of the transcription factor FLI-1 in
megakaryopoiesis. In summary, this study documents ten new cases of PTS with
characteristic alpha-granule abnormalities, and shows the putative pathogenic
role of fli-1 gene in the pathophysiology of this syndrome.

PMID: 14597985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Thromb Haemost. 2003 Nov;90(5):770-1.

Extending knowledge on inherited platelet disorders associated with
thrombocytopenia.

Hayward CP.

Comment on
    Thromb Haemost. 2003 Nov;90(5):893-7.

PMID: 14597968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2993-3002. Epub 2003 Oct 21.

Erythroblast transformation by FLI-1 depends upon its specific DNA binding and
transcriptional activation properties.

Ano S(1), Pereira R, Pironin M, Lesault I, Milley C, Lebigot I, Quang CT,
Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 146, Institut Curie, Centre Universitaire, Bâatiment 110, 91405
Orsay, France.

FLI-1 is a transcriptional regulator of the ETS family of proteins. Insertional
activation at the FLI-1 locus is an early event in F-murine leukemia
virus-induced erythroleukemia. Consistent with its essential role in erythroid
transformation, enforced expression of FLI-1 in primary erythroblasts strongly
impairs the response of these cells to erythropoietin (Epo), a cytokine essential
to erythropoiesis. We show here that point mutations in the ETS domain that
abolished FLI-1 binding to specific DNA elements (ETS-binding sites) suppressed
the ability of FLI-1 to transform erythroblasts. The exchange of the entire ETS
domain (DNA binding domain) of FLI-1 for that of PU.1 changed the DNA binding
specificity of FLI-1 for that of PU.1 and impaired FLI-1 transforming properties.
In contrast, ETS domain swapping mutants that maintained the DNA binding
specificity of FLI-1 did not affect the ability of FLI-1 to transform
erythroblasts. Deletion and swapping mutants that failed to inhibit the DNA
binding activity of FLI-1 but impaired its transcriptional activation properties 
were also transformation-defective. Taken together, these results show that both 
the ability of FLI-1 to inhibit Epo-induced differentiation of erythroblasts and 
to confer enhanced cell survival in the absence of Epo critically depend upon
FLI-1 ETS-binding site-dependent transcriptional activation properties.

PMID: 14570912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Exp Cell Res. 2003 Nov 1;290(2):414-9.

EWS/FLI function varies in different cellular backgrounds.

Zwerner JP(1), Guimbellot J, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-1150, USA.

EWS/FLI and other EWS/ets chimeric transcription factors play a central role in
the biology of the Ewing family tumors. As with many oncogenes, EWS/FLI biologic 
activity can be demonstrated in a limited range of cellular contexts. To
investigate the causes of this restriction, we demonstrate that two immortalized 
fibroblast lines resistant to EWS/FLI transformation, Rat1 and Yal7, express
stable levels of EWS/FLI protein. Despite their resistance to EWS/FLI, Rat1 and
Yal7 can be transformed by the potent EWS/FLI downstream mediator PDGF-C. In
contrast to NIH3T3, the EWS/FLI resistant lines show no upregulation of PDGF-C in
response to EWS/FLI, demonstrating differential EWS/FLI function in different
cellular backgrounds. This phenomenon of differential function can also be
demonstrated for several other NIH3T3 targets of EWS/FLI. Despite the correlation
between anchorage-independent growth and PDGF-C induction, PDGF-C does not fully 
reproduce all aspects of the EWS/FLI phenotype in NIH3T3 cells. These results
further point to the importance of PDGF-C in mediating EWS/FLI in vitro
transformation and suggest caution in assuming that a transcription factor will
produce identical effects in different cellular backgrounds.

PMID: 14567998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Semin Cancer Biol. 2003 Aug;13(4):275-81.

Potentials for RNAi in sarcoma research and therapy: Ewing's sarcoma as a model.

Kovar H(1), Ban J, Pospisilova S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Existing data identify EWS-FLI1 as indispensable for sustained Ewing's sarcoma
growth and as the ideal therapeutic target in this disease. The siRNA may hold
great promises as a fusion gene specific agent. RNAi mediated suppression of
EWS-FLI1 is likely to result in an altered tumor cell phenotype including changes
in chemosensitivity, and a restored differentiation potential. Thus, RNAi may
serve as an adjuvant to chemotherapy. As a therapeutic means however, RNAi is
hampered by limitations in the delivery of the agent and emergence of resistant
clones. In vitro suppression of EWS-FLI1 expression will allow to define the
phenotypic characteristics of dormant tumor cells that may give rise to late
relapses, enabling improved diagnosis and treatment even of minimal residual
disease.

PMID: 14563122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Oct 15;146(2):102-9.

Newly established Askin tumor cell line and overexpression of focal adhesion
kinase in Ewing sarcoma family of tumors cell lines.

Moritake H(1), Sugimoto T, Kuroda H, Hidaka F, Takahashi Y, Tsuneyoshi M, Yoshida
MA, Cui Q, Akiyoshi K, Izumi T, Nunoi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Miyazaki Medical College, Kiyotake, Miyazaki, Japan.
moritake@fc.miyazkai-med.ac.jp

Askin tumor is a malignant small round cell tumor that originates from the
thoracopulmonary region and is a member of Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT).
Only a few Askin tumor cell lines have been established. An Askin tumor cell
line, designated MP-ASKIN-SA, was established from the left thoracic tumor of a
13-year-old Japanese boy. ESFT is known to have a high rate of distant metastases
at diagnosis. The genes controlling the spread of ESFT cells, however, have not
been elucidated. G-banding chromosome analysis revealed that the MP-ASKIN-SA cell
line has complex chromosomal abnormalities including trisomy 8. The EWS/FLI1
chimeric transcript and c-myc overexpression were revealed by the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and Northern blot analysis. Furthermore, 
we investigated the expression of the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) gene in the
ESFT cell lines using Northern blot analysis. In addition to the MP-ASKIN-SA cell
line, six Ewing sarcoma cell lines, one peripheral nerve sheath tumor cell line, 
and two Askin tumor cell lines were analyzed. All ESFT cell lines, including
MP-ASKIN-SA, expressed five- to twenty-eight-fold-increased values of FAK, as
compared with fibroblasts obtained from the bone marrow of a healthy volunteer.
These results raise the possibility that the overexpression of c-myc and FAK are 
involved in the poor prognosis of ESFT.

PMID: 14553943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. FEBS Lett. 2003 Oct 9;553(1-2):104-8.

Upregulation of the matrix metalloproteinase-1 gene by the Ewing's sarcoma
associated EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 oncoproteins, c-Jun and p300.

Fuchs B(1), Inwards CY, Janknecht R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

The mechanisms of action of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) associated EWS-ETS oncoproteins
have largely remained unresolved. Here, we analyzed how two EWS-ETS proteins,
EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1, in vitro activate the matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1
promoter that is upregulated in a subset of EWSs. EWS-ER81 and EWS-Fli-1 interact
with and thereby activate the MMP-1 promoter, which is potentiated by the
cofactor p300 and the proto-oncoprotein c-Jun. Further, EWS-ER81 binds to c-Jun
in vitro and in vivo. The interaction between c-Jun, p300 and EWS-ER81 or
EWS-Fli-1 may also be relevant to the regulation of other yet-to-be-identified
genes that are responsible for EWS formation.

PMID: 14550555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Oncogene. 2003 Oct 9;22(44):6819-29.

Homotypic and heterotypic interactions of EWS, FLI1 and their oncogenic fusion
protein.

Spahn L(1), Siligan C, Bachmaier R, Schmid JA, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderspital, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

In Ewing's sarcoma family tumors, the ets transcription factor gene FLI1 is
rearranged with one EWS allele resulting in coexpression of germline EWS and
chimeric EWS-FLI1 proteins. Here, we investigated the potential of germline EWS, 
FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 to oligomerize. In two functional in vivo tests, fluorescence
resonance energy transfer (FRET) and the mammalian two-hybrid (MTH) assay,
self-association of EWS and EWS-FLI1, but not of FLI1 was detected. In addition, 
interaction of EWS-FLI1 with EWS and FLI1 was observed. GST pull-down assays and 
immunoprecipitation experiments largely confirmed these results. The EWS
N-terminal domain present in both EWS and EWS-FLI1 was found to contribute to
homotypic and heterotypic interactions of these proteins. However, in the context
of germline EWS, the presence of the whole or part of the C-terminal RNA-binding 
domain greatly supported the self-association potential of the protein.
Involvement of an RNA component in EWS oligomerization was confirmed by
sensitivity of the corresponding GST pull-down assay to RNaseA treatment. In
contrast, EWS-FLI1 was able to self-associate and also bind to FLI1 via its
C-terminal domain, which comprises the FLI1 DNA-binding motif. Accordingly, the
EWS-FLI1 interaction was not disrupted by RNaseA treatment. Despite its potential
to oligomerize, EWS-FLI1 bound to a tandem ets-binding site of the TGFbeta type
II receptor promoter as a monomer. Therefore, the functional consequences of
homo- and hetero-oligomerization of EWS and EWS-FLI1 proteins remain to be
elucidated.

PMID: 14534527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2003 Sep;30(9):1211-24.

[Recent progress of molecular diagnosis in pediatric malignancies].

[Article in Japanese]

Hayashi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pediatric Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

Recent progress of molecular and cytogenetic techniques has led to remarkable
advances in molecular diagnosis of pediatric malignancies, including malignant
bone and soft tissue sarcoma (MSTS). Fusion genes, such as EWS-FLI1 and
PAX3-FKHR, were cloned at the chromosome breakpoints of t(11;22) and t(2;13) in
Ewing's sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma, respectively. Minimal residual disease can 
be detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using these
translocations. These fusion genes contribute to differential diagnosis of
pediatric small round cell tumor, which was difficult to diagnose
morphologically. Some of these fusion genes, including SYT-SSX in synovial
sarcoma and EWS-FLI1 in Ewing sarcoma, have been reported to be associated with
prognosis. Recently, genome-wide searches using microarray and single nucleotide 
polymorphisms have been performed in pediatric malignancies. These advances have 
led to the increased importance of molecular diagnosis as well as morphological
diagnosis. We review here the recent progress of molecular diagnosis in pediatric
malignancies.

PMID: 14518398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Oct 1;31(19):5483-9.

Requirements for selective recruitment of Ets proteins and activation of
mb-1/Ig-alpha gene transcription by Pax-5 (BSAP).

Maier H(1), Ostraat R, Parenti S, Fitzsimmons D, Abraham LJ, Garvie CW, Hagman J.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research
Center and University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Pax-5, a member of the paired domain family of transcription factors, is a key
regulator of B lymphocyte-specific transcription and differentiation. A major
target of Pax-5-mediated activation is the mb-1 gene, which encodes the essential
transmembrane signaling protein Ig-alpha. Pax-5 recruits three members of the Ets
family of transcription factors: Ets-1, Fli-1 and GABPalpha (with GABPbeta1), to 
assemble ternary complexes on the mb-1 promoter in vitro. Using the
Pax-5:Ets-1:DNA crystal structure as a guide, we defined amino acid requirements 
for transcriptional activation of endogenous mb-1 genes using a novel cell-based 
assay. Mutations in the beta-hairpin/beta-turn of the DNA-binding domain of Pax-5
demonstrated its importance for DNA sequence recognition and activation of mb-1
transcription. Mutations of amino acids contacting Ets-1 in the crystal structure
reduced or blocked mb-1 promoter activation. One of these mutations, Q22A,
resulted in greatly reduced mb-1 gene transcript levels, concurrent with the loss
of its ability to recruit Fli-1 to bind the promoter in vitro. In contrast, the
mutation had no effect on recruitment of the related Ets protein GABPalpha (with 
GABPbeta1). These data further define requirements for Pax-5 function in vivo and
reveal the complexity of interactions required for cooperative partnerships
between transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC206479
PMID: 14500810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5281-90. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Angiogenic network formation in the developing vertebrate trunk.

Isogai S(1), Lawson ND, Torrealday S, Horiguchi M, Weinstein BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have used time-lapse multiphoton microscopy of living Tg(fli1:EGFP)y1
zebrafish embryos to examine how a patterned, functional network of angiogenic
blood vessels is generated in the early vertebrate trunk. Angiogenic vascular
sprouts emerge from the longitudinal trunk axial vessels (the dorsal aorta and
posterior cardinal vein) in two spatially and temporally distinct steps. Dorsal
aorta-derived sprouts form an initial primary network of vascular segments,
followed by emergence of vein-derived secondary vascular sprouts that interact
and interconnect dynamically with the primary network to initiate vascular flow. 
Using transgenic silent heart mutant embryos, we show that the gross anatomical
patterning of this network of vessels does not require blood circulation.
However, our results suggest that circulatory flow dynamics play an important
role in helping to determine the pattern of interconnections between the primary 
network and secondary sprouts, and thus the final arterial or venous identity of 
the vessels in the functional network. We discuss a model to explain our results 
combining genetic programming of overall vascular architecture with hemodynamic
determination of circulatory flow patterns.

PMID: 12954720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Blood. 2003 Dec 15;102(13):4555-62. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Up-regulation of SLAP in FLI-1-transformed erythroblasts interferes with EpoR
signaling.

Lebigot I(1), Gardellin P, Lefebvre L, Beug H, Ghysdael J, Quang CT.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Bat 110, Centre Universitaire, 91405 Orsay, France.

Rearrangement of the FLI-1 locus and ensuing overexpression of FLI-1 protein is
an early event in Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV)-induced erythroleukemia. 
When overexpressed in primary erythroblasts, FLI-1 converts erythropoietin
(Epo)-induced terminal differentiation into a proliferative response. We found
that SLAP, a gene encoding a recently described negative regulator of T-cell
antigen receptor function during thymocyte development, is up-regulated both at
the RNA and protein levels in FLI-1-transformed erythroblasts. Src-like adaptor
protein (SLAP) was found in a specific complex with erythropoietin receptor
(EpoR), a cytokine receptor essential to erythroid differentiation. Constitutive 
expression of SLAP severely impairs hemoglobinization and late survival during
Epo-induced terminal differentiation of erythroblasts. This impairment is
associated with the specific inhibition of several critical Epo-dependent
signaling events, including signal transducer and activator of transcription 5
(STAT5) activation and up-regulation of the expression of the antiapoptotic BCL-X
gene. Our data support a model by which FLI-1 inhibits normal erythroid
differentiation through the deregulation of genes encoding adaptors/effectors
that modify the signaling output of cytokine receptors normally required for
terminal differentiation.

PMID: 12946994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Blood. 2004 Jan 1;103(1):229-35. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Expression analyses identify MLL as a prominent target of 11q23 amplification and
support an etiologic role for MLL gain of function in myeloid malignancies.

Poppe B(1), Vandesompele J, Schoch C, Lindvall C, Mrozek K, Bloomfield CD,
Beverloo HB, Michaux L, Dastugue N, Herens C, Yigit N, De Paepe A, Hagemeijer A, 
Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ghent, Belgium.

MLL amplification was recently recognized as a recurrent aberration in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodys-plastic syndrome (MDS), associated with
adverse prognosis and karyotype complexity. Here we present detailed results of
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and expression analyses of MLL and 5
selected 11q candidate oncogenes (CBL, DDX6, ETS1, FLI1, and PLZF) in 31 patient 
samples and one cell line with 11q23 gain. FISH analyses revealed that the 11q23 
amplicon invariably encompassed MLL, DDX6, ETS1, and FLI1, whereas expression
analyses identified MLL and DDX6 as the most differentially expressed genes among
samples with and without 11q23 copy gain or amplification. In MLL-amplified
samples, a significant transcriptional up-regulation of MEIS1, PROML1, ADAM10,
NKG2D, and ITPA was noted. Further analyses, designed to elucidate a possible
role of the 11q overexpressed genes (MLL, DDX6, FLI1, and ETS1) in unselected MDS
and AML samples, revealed a significant upregulation of MLL in MDS. Our findings 
confirm the MLL gene as a prominent target of 11q23 amplification and provide
further evidence for an etiologic role for MLL gain of function in myeloid
malignancies. In addition, our results indicate that the transcriptional program 
associated with MLL rearrangements and MLL overexpression displays significant
similarities.

PMID: 12946992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2003;532:27-37.

Ewing tumor biology: perspectives for innovative treatment approaches.

Kovar H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is a group of malignancies affecting
bone and soft tissue in adolescents. It is characterized by a unique gene
rearrangement between the EWS gene and an ets transcription factor gene. EFT can 
be cured with conventional multi modal treatment, however, about 40% of patients 
still succumb to the disease. Relapses can be observed more than 5 years after
the end of primary treatment suggesting persistence of minimal residual disease
(MRD). Due to the still enigmatic nature of EFT histogenesis the phenotype of EFT
stem cells and of dormant tumor cells remains unknown. The most frequent fusion
product associated with EFT, EWS-FLI1, is the founding member of a whole class of
similarly structured chimeric proteins associated with a variety of human
sarcomas and also specific leukemias. The corresponding gene rearrangement
constitutes a rate limiting step in oncogenesis as implied by the high
association of EFT with EWS-ETS fusions, strong selective pressure for
maintenance of a correct reading frame in the tumors, and by experimental data
confirming the transforming and tumorigenic potential of EWS-FLI1. Understanding 
the biology of EWS-ETS gene fusions and its interplay with essential cellular
pathways regulating cell growth, apoptosis, differentiation, genomic integrity,
and treatment resistance may unravel specifically vulnerable sites for
therapeutic targeting. This review summarizes the current knowledge about the
EWS-FLI1 pathway in EFT and provides some ideas as to how this knowledge may be
translated into innovative treatment approaches.

PMID: 12908547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cancer Res. 2003 Aug 1;63(15):4568-76.

FUS/ERG gene fusions in Ewing's tumors.

Shing DC(1), McMullan DJ, Roberts P, Smith K, Chin SF, Nicholson J, Tillman RM,
Ramani P, Cullinane C, Coleman N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Hutchison/MRC Research Centre,
Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XZ, UK.

Ewing's tumors are rare pediatric neoplasms that are characterized by specific
chromosomal translocations and gene rearrangements. All of the fusion genes
reported to date in Ewing's tumors juxtapose the EWS gene at 22q12 to an
ETS-related gene, the most common of which are FLI1 at 11q24 and ERG at 21q22. We
present here four cases of Ewing's tumor, which showed no evidence of a EWS gene 
rearrangement, but instead contained translocations involving 16p11 and 21q22. A 
rearrangement involving the same chromosome bands, t(16;21)(p11;q22), is found in
rare cases of acute myeloid leukemia and fuses the FUS gene at 16p11 to the ERG
gene at 21q22. In two of our Ewing's tumor cases, we were able to show at the
sequence level that the translocation between chromosomes 16 and 21 similarly
results in a FUS/ERG fusion. In one case, exons 1-5 and most of exon 6 of FUS
were fused in-frame to exon 9 of ERG; in the other case, FUS exons 1-7 were fused
in-frame to ERG exons 8-9. The functional fusion transcript is expected to be
expressed from the der(21)t(16;21) derivative. In the two other t(16;21)-positive
Ewing's cases, we performed bacterial artificial chromosome fluorescence in situ 
hybridization analysis on metaphases and interphase nuclei to demonstrate
colocalization of bacterial artificial chromosomes containing FUS and ERG genes, 
also highly suggestive of fusion gene formation. These represent the first four
cases where FUS, rather than EWS, is rearranged with an ETS-family transcription 
factor in Ewing's tumors. Our data provide additional evidence that the
transactivation domains of the TET family of RNA-binding proteins (such as EWS
and FUS) are interchangeable, and suggests a novel mechanism of oncogenesis in
Ewing's tumors.

PMID: 12907633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Anticancer Res. 2003 May-Jun;23(3A):2143-53.

ERF, an ETS-related transcriptional repressor, can induce erythroid
differentiation.

Athanasiou M(1), Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. athanasi@ncifcrf.gov

Ets-family genes have been implicated in leukemia, as well as in normal
hematopoiesis. ERF is an ets-related gene that represses transcription and is
regulated by MAPK phosphorylation through its effect on ERF sub-cellular
localization. Using pluripotent human cell lines, we studied the effect of ERF on
erythroid differentiation. K562 and HEL cells expressing ERF expressed elevated
levels of the erythroid-specific markers CD71 and Glycophorin A, as well as
hemoglobin and GATA1. Treatment with the Erk kinase inhibitor PD98058 further
enhanced the erythroid phenotype in ERF-expressing cells and cells expressing a
non-phosphorylatable ERF mutant exhibited an even more enhanced phenotype. These 
results are consistent with the fact that ERF function is regulated by MAPK, and 
suggest that the effect of the MAPK pathway in erythroid differentiation is
partially mediated by ERF. The effect of ERF is similar to the one shown for ETS1
and opposite to the FLI1 function in these cells, suggesting that several ets
genes may play key roles in hematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 12894589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Aug;27(8):1161-6.

Evidence of neural differentiation in a case of post-therapy primitive
neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma of bone.

Collini P(1), Mezzelani A, Modena P, Dagrada P, Tamborini E, Luksch R, Gronchi A,
Navarria P, Sozzi G, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of pathology, Experimental Oncology, Istituto Nazionale Tumori,
Milan, Italy.

Neural differentiation with the appearance of ganglion-like cells has been
reported in untreated primitive neuroectodermal tumor/Ewing sarcoma (PNET/EWS) at
peculiar sites, such as the cauda equina, and following treatment. The case is
presented here of a 17-year-old girl with a tumor in the iliac bone. An open
biopsy was diagnosed as PNET/EWS of the bone. The tumor had the typical
morphology of this tumor type and showed diffuse membranous immunoreactivity for 
CD99, intense immunoreactivity for synaptophysin, and focal immunoreactivity for 
neuron-specific enolase and S-100 protein. Occasional reactivity for vimentin was
evident, while no immunoreactivity for NB84a, Hu, chromogranins A and B,
neurofilaments, cytokeratins, and desmin was present. The patient underwent
chemotherapy and radiotherapy, followed by right internal hemipelvectomy. The
post-treatment residual viable tumor showed a morphologic appearance resembling a
neuroblastoma, with immunoreactivity for NB84a, Hu, synaptophysin, and
chromogranins A and B, but not for CD99. RT-PCR performed on tumor tissue before 
and after therapy showed the presence of the EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript, type I
in both samples. This case of PNET/EWS is unique in the sense of showing the
typical fusion transcript associated with this tumor both in the morphologically 
typical pretherapy tumor and in the sample from the post-therapy specimen showing
neuroblastoma-like features.

PMID: 12883251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Am J Pathol. 2003 Aug;163(2):571-81.

Persistent down-regulation of Fli1, a suppressor of collagen transcription, in
fibrotic scleroderma skin.

Kubo M(1), Czuwara-Ladykowska J, Moussa O, Markiewicz M, Smith E, Silver RM,
Jablonska S, Blaszczyk M, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology and the Laboratory of Cancer Genomics,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

The molecular and cellular mechanisms that maintain proper collagen homeostasis
in healthy human skin and are responsible for the dysregulated collagen synthesis
in scleroderma remain primarily unknown. This study demonstrates that Fli1 is a
physiological negative regulator of collagen gene expression in dermal
fibroblasts in vitro and in human skin in vivo. This conclusion is supported by
the analyses of mouse embryonic fibroblasts from Fli1(-/-), Fli1(+/-), and
Fli1(+/+) mice. In cultured human and mouse fibroblasts Fli1 expression levels
are inversely correlated with the collagen type I expression levels. These in
vitro observations were validated in vivo. In healthy human skin Fli1 protein is 
expressed in fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Significantly, absence of Fli1
expression in individual fibroblasts correlates with elevated collagen synthesis.
In contrast to healthy skin, Fli1 protein is consistently absent from fibroblasts
and significantly reduced in endothelial cells in clinically involved scleroderma
skin, which correlates with enhanced collagen synthesis in systemic sclerosis
skin. This study supports the role of Fli1 as a suppressor of collagen
transcription in human skin in vivo. Persistent down-regulation of Fli1 in
scleroderma fibroblasts in vivo may directly contribute to uncontrolled matrix
deposition in scleroderma skin.

PMCID: PMC1868228
PMID: 12875977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 15;63(14):4268-74.

Functional analysis of the EWS/ETS target gene uridine phosphorylase.

Deneen B(1), Hamidi H, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90024, USA.

The EWS/ETS fusion proteins associated with Ewings family tumors (EFTs) are
thought to promote oncogenesis by acting as aberrant transcription factors.
Uridine phosphorylase is a gene that is up-regulated by structurally distinct
EWS/ETS fusions. Ectopic expression of uridine phosphorylase was able to support 
anchorage-independent cell growth, indicating that it plays an active role in the
oncogenic process. Transcriptional up-regulation of uridine phosphorylase is
shown to be mediated in a DNA binding-dependent manner, and reporter gene assays 
demonstrated that EWS/FLI1 and RAS mediate activation through a single activator 
protein 1/ETS site located in the uridine phosphorylase promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays reveal that EWS/FLI1 directly associates with the
uridine phosphorylase promoter in vivo. Up-regulation of uridine phosphorylase by
EWS/FLI1 sensitizes cells to growth inhibition by the pyrimidine analogue,
5'-deoxy-5'fluorouridine, both in tissue culture and in vivo model systems.

PMID: 12874036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 1;63(13):3464-8.

Ewing tumor fusion proteins block the differentiation of pluripotent marrow
stromal cells.

Torchia EC(1), Jaishankar S, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The Ewing family of tumors are poorly differentiated pediatric solid tumors
arising in bone and soft tissues from an unknown cell of origin. Ewing tumors are
molecularly defined by in-frame genomic fusions that combine EWS with one of
several ETS genes, most commonly FLI-1. We considered pluripotent marrow-derived 
stromal cells a likely candidate for the origin of Ewing tumors and assessed the 
effects of EWS/ETS proteins in this cell background. EWS/ETS expression in
marrow-derived stromal cells caused a dramatic change in cellular morphology that
was dependent on the presence of the ETS domain and unique to the fusion
proteins. EWS/ETS fusion proteins blocked differentiation along osteogenic and
adipogenic lineages, consistent with the undifferentiated appearance of Ewing
tumors. Inhibition of differentiation may be an important function of EWS/ETS
proteins in the genesis of Ewing tumors.

PMID: 12839926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Ther. 2003 Jun;7(6):811-6.

Small interfering RNAs expressed from a Pol III promoter suppress the EWS/Fli-1
transcript in an Ewing sarcoma cell line.

Dohjima T(1), Lee NS, Li H, Ohno T, Rossi JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope,
1450 East Duarte Road, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

The EWS/Fli-1 fusion gene encodes an oncogenic fusion protein. The fusion is a
product of the translocation t(11;22) (q24;q12), which is detected in 85% of
Ewing sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. Utilizing
intracellularly expressed 21- to 23-nucleotide small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
targeting the EWS/Fli-1 fusion transcript in an Ewing sarcoma cell line, we
achieved a greater than 80% reduction in the EWS/Fli-1 transcript. The reduction 
in transcript levels was accompanied by growth inhibition of an Ewing cell line. 
In addition to quantitating the reduction of the fusion transcript, we carefully 
monitored reduction of the endogenous EWS and Fli-1 mRNAs as well. One of the two
siRNAs targeted to the fusion transcript also partially downregulated the Fli-1
mRNA, further potentiating the growth inhibition. These results highlight both
the power of siRNAs and the potential side reactions that need to be carefully
monitored. In addition, these results provide the first demonstration of
expressed siRNAs downregulating an oncogenic fusion transcript. The results and
observations from these studies should prove useful in targeting other fusion
transcripts characteristic of sarcomas and erythroleukemias.

PMID: 12788655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Oncogene. 2003 May 22;22(21):3193-204.

Response of Ewing tumor cells to forced and activated p53 expression.

Kovar H(1), Pospisilova S, Jug G, Printz D, Gadner H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, 1090 Vienna, Austria. heinrich.kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

The EWS-FLI1 transcription factor is consistently expressed in 85% of Ewing
tumors (EFT). In heterologous cells, EWS-FLI1 induces p53-dependent cell cycle
arrest or apoptosis. It has been speculated that the p53 tumor suppressor pathway
may be generally compromised in EFT despite only rare p53 mutations. In order to 
test for functional integrity of this pathway, we have investigated a series of
EFT cell lines that differ from each other with respect to their endogenous p53
and INK4A gene status for their response to ectopic p53 expression and to
stimulation of endogenous p53 activity by X-ray treatment. Significant
interindividual and intratumoral variations in the apoptotic propensity of EFT
cell lines to transient expression of ectopic p53 were observed, which was
independent of the level of p53 expression. In cell lines with a low apoptotic
incidence, apoptosis was delayed and the surviving fraction showed a prolonged
growth arrest. Complete resistance to p53-induced apoptosis in two cell lines
established from the same patient was associated with a high BCL2/BAX ratio and
low levels of APAF1. Sensitivity to X-rays showed a trend towards a higher
apoptotic rate in wild-type (wt) p53 expressing than in p53 mutant cells.
However, one wt p53-expressing EFT cell line was completely refractory to
irradiation-stimulated cell death despite high apoptotic responsiveness to
ectopic p53. No difference in Ser15 phosphorylation and the transcriptional
activation of p53 targets was observed in wt p53 EFT cell lines irrespective of
the induction of cell death or growth arrest. All together, our results
demonstrate that despite significant variability in the outcome, cell death or
cell cycle arrest, the p53 downstream pathway and the DNA damage signaling
pathway are functionally intact in EFT.

PMID: 12761489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jun;23(11):3897-908.

PIM3 proto-oncogene kinase is a common transcriptional target of divergent
EWS/ETS oncoproteins.

Deneen B(1), Welford SM, Ho T, Hernandez F, Kurland I, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California-Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Despite significant structural diversity, present evidence suggests that EWS/ETS 
fusion proteins promote oncogenesis by transcriptionally modulating a common set 
of target genes. In order to identify these genes, microarray expression analyses
were performed on NIH 3T3 polyclonal populations expressing one of three EWS/ETS 
fusion genes. The majority of these genes can be grouped into seven functional
categories, including cellular metabolism and signal transduction. The biologic
significance of these target genes was pursued. The effects of modulating genes
involved in metabolism were assessed by flux studies and demonstrated shifts in
glucose utilization and lactate production as a result of EWS/FLI1 expression.
The proto-oncogene coding for serine/threonine kinase PIM3 was found to one of
several genes encoding signal transduction proteins that were up-regulated by
EWS/ETS fusions. PIM3 was found to be expressed in a panel of human Ewing's
family tumor cell lines. Forced expression of PIM3 promoted anchorage-independent
growth. Coexpression of a kinase-deficient PIM3 mutant attenuated
EWS/FLI1-mediated NIH 3T3 tumorigenesis in immunodeficent mice.

PMCID: PMC155223
PMID: 12748291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Oncogene. 2003 May 8;22(18):2699-709.

EAPII interacts with ETS1 and modulates its transcriptional function.

Pei H(1), Yordy JS, Leng Q, Zhao Q, Watson DK, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genomics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA.

Ets proteins constitute a family of conserved sequence-specific DNA-binding
proteins and function as transcription factors. ETS1 plays important roles in
differentiation, lymphoid cell development, invasiveness and angiogenesis. Such
diverse roles of ETS1 are likely to be dependent on its associated proteins. A
yeast two-hybrid screen was conducted and here we describe a novel ETS1
interacting protein designated as ETS1-associated protein II (EAPII). EAPII
protein interacts with ETS1 and other Ets proteins (ETS2 and FLI1) both in vitro 
and in vivo. Indirect immunofluorescence demonstrated that EAPII is predominately
localized to the nucleus of mammalian cells. EAPII negatively modulates ETS1
transcriptional activity and attenuates synergistic transactivation by ETS1 and
AP-1. Significantly, re-expression of EAPII inhibits the migration of epithelial 
cancer cells, but does not affect cell viability. Therefore, EAPII is a novel
ETS1 modulator that regulates specific aspects of the ETS1 functions.

PMID: 12743594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Oncol. 2003 Jun;22(6):1327-33.

Effects of overexpression of the Ets family transcription factor TEL on cell
growth and differentiation of K562 cells.

Sakurai T(1), Yamada T, Kihara-Negishi F, Teramoto S, Sato Y, Izawa T, Oikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Genetics, Sasaki Institute, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

Functional roles of several Ets transcription factors in megakaryocytic and
erythroid differentiation of the human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line
K562 was investigated. When K562 cells were induced to differentiate into the
megakaryocyte lineage by treatment with TPA, the expression of the c-ets-1, Fli-1
and TEL2 genes was increased, and that of the TEL gene was decreased at the onset
of differentiation. When the cells were induced to differentiate into the
erythroid lineage by treatment with Hemin, expression of the c-ets-1 gene was
increased, and that of the Fli-1 and TEL genes was decreased. To investigate the 
role of TEL in the growth and differentiation of K562 cells, we introduced an
expression plasmid containing the TEL gene into the cells. Overexpression of TEL 
in K562 cells leads to inhibition of the endogenous expression of
megakaryocyte-specific GPIIb and GPIbalpha genes, and inhibition of cell growth. 
DNA array analysis revealed that expression of genes such as the RhoG and D4-GDI 
genes was down-regulated in TEL-overexpressing cells, while that of the
representative growth-related genes such as the c-myc, c-fos and c-jun genes was 
not remarkably changed. These results suggest that several Ets family
transcription factors are implicated in megakaryocytic and erythroid
differentiation of K562 cells and TEL inhibits the expression of some
megakaryocyte-specific genes and growth in K562 cells.

PMID: 12739001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biol Pharm Bull. 2003 May;26(5):585-8.

Diagnostic significance and clinical applications of chimeric genes in Ewing's
sarcoma.

Yoshino N(1), Kojima T, Asami S, Motohashi S, Yoshida Y, Chin M, Shichino H,
Yoshida Y, Nemoto N, Kaneko M, Mugishima H, Suzuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Narashinodai,
Funabashi-shi, Chiba, Japan.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is one of the most malignant bone and soft tissue tumors in 
childhood. Morphologically, ES belongs to the small round cell tumors (SRCT). ES,
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), and Askin's tumor are
classified as ES family tumors (ESFT) because they share a common chromosomal
translocation. The EWS-FLI1 chimeric gene is generated by t (11; 22). Other
reciprocal translocations resulting in formation of chimeric genes between EWS
and ETS family genes (ERG, ETV1, E1AF, and FEV) are t (21; 22), t (7; 22), t (17;
22), and t (2; 22), respectively. Although it is generally difficult to
distinguish ES from SRCT, we could easily and quickly distinguish ES from other
SRCT by using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We looked
for specific chimeric genes in 23 tumor samples, including three ES clinical
samples. We detected five chimeric genes in the three ES samples. Three chimeric 
genes, all EWS-FLI1, were detected in one ES sample. Different chimeric genes,
EWS-ERG and EWS-ETV1, were detected in the other two ES samples. Moreover,
because we could not detect specific chimeric genes in samples from non-ESFT, it 
may be possible to use this technique to diagnose ESFT and to detect tumor cell
contamination before hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

PMID: 12736494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 May;23(10):3427-41.

Protein-protein interaction between Fli-1 and GATA-1 mediates synergistic
expression of megakaryocyte-specific genes through cooperative DNA binding.

Eisbacher M(1), Holmes ML, Newton A, Hogg PJ, Khachigian LM, Crossley M, Chong
BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Medical Sciences and
Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical School, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jun;24(11):5088.

Friend leukemia integration 1 (Fli-1) is a member of the Ets family of
transcriptional activators that has been shown to be an important regulator
during megakaryocytic differentiation. We undertook a two-hybrid screen of a K562
cDNA library to identify transcription factors that interacted with Fli-1 and
were potential regulators of megakaryocyte development. Here we report the
physical interaction of Fli-1 with GATA-1, a well-characterized, zinc finger
transcription factor critical for both erythroid and megakaryocytic
differentiation. We map the minimal domains required for the interaction and show
that the zinc fingers of GATA-1 interact with the Ets domain of Fli-1. GATA-1 has
previously been shown to interact with the Ets domain of the Fli-1-related
protein PU.1, and the two proteins appear to inhibit each other's activity. In
contrast, we demonstrate that GATA-1 and Fli-1 synergistically activate the
megakaryocyte-specific promoters GPIX and GPIbalpha in transient transfections.
Quantitative electrophoretic mobility shift assays using oligonucleotides derived
from the GPIX promoter containing Ets and GATA binding motifs reveal that Fli-1
and GATA-1 exhibit cooperative DNA binding in which the binding of GATA-1 to DNA 
is increased approximately 26-fold in the presence of Fli-1 (from 4.2 to 0.16
nM), providing a mechanism for the observed transcriptional synergy. To test the 
effect on endogenous genes, we stably overexpressed Fli-1 in K562 cells, a line
rich in GATA-1. Overexpression of Fli-1 induced the expression of the endogenous 
GPIX and GPIbalpha genes as measured by Northern blot and fluorescence-activated 
cell sorter analysis. This work suggests that Fli-1 and GATA-1 work together to
activate the expression of genes associated with the terminal differentiation of 
megakaryocytes.

PMCID: PMC154245
PMID: 12724402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Oncogene. 2003 Apr 17;22(15):2334-42.

Beta-platelet-derived growth factor receptor mediates motility and growth of
Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Uren A(1), Merchant MS, Sun CJ, Vitolo MI, Sun Y, Tsokos M, Illei PB, Ladanyi M, 
Passaniti A, Mackall C, Toretsky JA.

Author information: 
(1)Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetowm University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20057-1469, USA. au26@georgetown.edu

The Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) contain a translocation, t(11;22),
which results in the novel oncogenic fusion protein EWS/FLI1. Platelet-derived
growth factors (PDGF) and their receptors (PDGFR) are involved in the induction
and proliferation of numerous solid tumors and are the potential candidates for
novel targeted antitumor therapy. Since a relation was reported between PDGF-C
and EWS/FLI1, we sought to characterize the PDGF signaling pathway in ESFT. Eight
out of nine ESFT cell lines were found to express significant levels of
beta-PDGFR. Interestingly, none of the tested cell lines expressed alpha-PDGFR,
which is the receptor isotype required for PDGF-C binding. By immunohistochemical
staining 47 of 52 (90.4%) archival tumor samples from patients with ESFT were
positive for beta-PDGFR. ESFT cell lines were treated with PDGF-AA or PDGF-BB
ligands to evaluate downstream signaling. Autophosphorylation of beta-PDGFR and
tyrosine phosphorylation of PLC-gamma, PI3Kp85 and Shc were detected only in
PDGF-BB-stimulated cells that express beta-PDGFR. Receptor function was further
evaluated using chemotaxis assays that showed TC-32 cell migration towards
PDGF-BB. A specific PDGFR kinase inhibitor AG1295 blocked beta-PDGFR activation, 
downstream signaling, growth in cell culture and chemotaxis of TC-32 cells.
AG1295 also delayed tumor formation and prolonged survival in an ESFT animal
model. We conclude that ESFT express beta-PDGFR and that this is a functional and
potentially crucial signaling pathway. Therefore, beta-PDGFRs may provide a novel
therapeutic target in ESFT that can be utilized to design better treatment
modalities.

PMID: 12700668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2003 Apr;127(4):e190-3.

Primary primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumor of the prostate.
Immunophenotypic and molecular study of a case.

Colecchia M(1), Dagrada G, Poliani PL, Messina A, Pilotti S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Patologia, Istituto Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei
Tumori, Milano, Italy. colecchia@istitutotumori.mi.it

A case of primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumor arising in the prostate
gland of a 31-year-old man and first diagnosed through a biopsy is reported.
Microscopically, the tumor was made up of solid nests and sheets of small round
cells, and it was difficult to distinguish the neoplasm from other small round
cell tumors, such as small cell carcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, or malignant
lymphoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed immunoreactivity for
CD99, vimentin, neuron-specific enolase, and synaptophysin. The neoplasm was
excised by a radical surgical procedure preceded by chemotherapy and radiation
therapy. The morphologic diagnosis of the prostatectomy specimen was complemented
by molecular analysis performed on viable microdissected tissue obtained from
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor sections. Polymerase chain reaction and
sequencing assessment showed the presence of EWS/FLI1 type 2 chimeric transcript,
confirming the diagnosis of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. To our
knowledge, this is the first description of a primary peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor in the prostate gland.

PMID: 12683899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genomics. 2003 Mar;81(3):249-59.

Comparative and functional analyses of LYL1 loci establish marsupial sequences as
a model for phylogenetic footprinting.

Chapman MA(1), Charchar FJ, Kinston S, Bird CP, Grafham D, Rogers J, Grützner F, 
Graves JA, Green AR, Göttgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
University, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.

Comparative genomic sequence analysis is a powerful technique for identifying
regulatory regions in genomic DNA. However, its utility largely depends on the
evolutionary distances between the species involved. Here we describe the
screening of a genomic BAC library from the stripe-faced dunnart, Sminthopsis
macroura, formerly known as the narrow-footed marsupial mouse. We isolated a
clone containing the LYL1 locus, completely sequenced the 60.6-kb insert, and
compared it with orthologous human and mouse sequences. Noncoding homology was
substantially reduced in the human/dunnart analysis compared with human/mouse,
yet we could readily identify all promoters and exons. Human/mouse/dunnart
alignments of the LYL1 candidate promoter allowed us to identify putative
transcription factor binding sites, revealing a pattern highly reminiscent of
critical regulatory regions of the LYL1 paralogue, SCL. This newly identified
LYL1 promoter showed strong activity in myeloid progenitor cells and was bound in
vivo by Fli1, Elf1, and Gata2-transcription factors all previously shown to bind 
to the SCL stem cell enhancer. This study represents the first large-scale
comparative analysis involving marsupial genomic sequence and demonstrates that
such comparisons provide a powerful approach to characterizing mammalian
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12659809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2003 Mar;141(2):138-42.

Characterization of the A673 cell line (Ewing tumor) by molecular cytogenetic
techniques.

Martínez-Ramírez A(1), Rodríguez-Perales S, Meléndez B, Martínez-Delgado B,
Urioste M, Cigudosa JC, Benítez J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Molecular Pathology Program, Spanish National
Cancer Center (CNIO), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
angmartinez@cnio.es

Comment in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2004 Jan 1;148(1):86.

The A673 cell line was established from a patient with a primary rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS), which is referred to in the literature either as a Ewing tumor (ET) or as 
RMS. Although the two tumoral types are associated with specific and
well-characterized translocations, no cytogenetic report on this cell line has
been published. We characterized the A673 cell line using a combination of
spectral karyotyping (SKY), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), and
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which revealed the
presence of a complex karyotype and a translocation involving chromosomes 11 and 
22 and the fusion of EWS and FLI1 genes, both events being specific to ET.
Neither cytogenetics nor molecular alterations specific to RMS were found.

PMID: 12606131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):15105-15. Epub 2003 Jan 30.

Identification of p21WAF1/CIP1 as a direct target of EWS-Fli1 oncogenic fusion
protein.

Nakatani F(1), Tanaka K, Sakimura R, Matsumoto Y, Matsunobu T, Li X, Hanada M,
Okada T, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Translocation t(11;22) is a karyotypic abnormality detected in over 90% of
Ewing's family tumors. This translocation results in the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene,
which has been shown to be a potent, single-step transforming gene. We reported
previously that suppression of the EWS-Fli1 fusion protein altered the expression
of G(1) regulatory cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors both at mRNA
and protein levels, resulting in G(1) growth arrest in Ewing's family tumor cell 
lines. These data suggest that the G(1) regulatory molecules may be targets of
the EWS-Fli1 fusion protein, which functions as an aberrant transcription factor.
By using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show here the direct
association of EWS-Fli1 fusion protein with ETS consensus sequences, which are in
the promoter of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) gene. Reporter gene assays revealed that the
activity of the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter is negatively regulated by EWS-Fli1
fusion protein through at least two ETS-binding sites in the promoter. EWS-Fli1
interacted with p300 cotransactivator and suppressed its histone
acetyltransferase activity, which may explain the down-regulation of
p21(WAF1/CIP1) by EWS-Fli1. In the presence of a histone deacetylase inhibitor,
the histone acetyltransferase activity of the Ewing's family tumor cell was
recovered resulting in the induction of p21, and the cell growth was dramatically
inhibited. These results demonstrated that p21(WAF1/CIP1) might be one of the
direct targets of EWS-Fli1, and that p21(WAF1/CIP1) could serve as a target for a
molecularly based therapy for Ewing's family tumors.

PMID: 12560328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Mar;36(3):224-32.

Induction of tenascin-C by tumor-specific EWS-ETS fusion genes.

Watanabe G(1), Nishimori H, Irifune H, Sasaki Y, Ishida S, Zembutsu H, Tanaka T, 
Kawaguchi S, Wada T, Hata J, Kusakabe M, Yoshida K, Nakamura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are
associated with a chromosomal translocation resulting in a fusion of the
amino-terminus of EWS with the DNA-binding domain of an ETS transcription factor 
(most commonly FLI1 or ERG). Although previous reports suggested that these
chimera proteins would act as aberrant transcription factors, their downstream
targets have not been fully elucidated. To identify downstream targets of these
EWS-ETS fusion proteins, we introduced EWS-ETS fusion constructs into a human
fibrosarcoma cell line, HT-1080, by retroviral transduction. Here we report that 
Tenascin-C (TNC) is induced to a significantly higher level in cells expressing
EWS-ETSs than in cells expressing normal ETSs. Furthermore, through use of an
antisense cDNA expression vector we show that expression of endogenous TNC mRNA
and protein were reduced coordinately with attenuation of EWS-FLI1 fusion protein
expression. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed direct interaction
between the TNC promoter and the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein in vivo. In addition, a 
luciferase reporter assay revealed that EWS-ETSs upregulated the TNC gene through
four ETS binding sites in the TNC promoter. High levels of TNC expression were
observed in a subset of ES cell lines (3 of 6) and primary tumors (4 of 6).
Together with previous studies showing that TNC expression is involved in the
invasive and malignant phenotype of several tumor types, our data suggest that
the oncogenic effect of EWS-ETS may be mediated in part by upregulating of TNC
expression.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12557222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Br J Cancer. 2003 Jan 13;88(1):137-45.

Transformation induced by Ewing's sarcoma associated EWS/FLI-1 is suppressed by
KRAB/FLI-1.

Chan D(1), Wilson TJ, Xu D, Cowdery HE, Sanij E, Hertzog PJ, Kola I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Diseases, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Ewing's sarcoma is a childhood bone tumour with poor prognosis, most commonly
associated with a t(11;22)(q24;q12) reciprocal translocation that fuses the EWS
and FLI-1 genes, resulting in the production of an aberrant chimeric
transcription factor EWS/FLI-1. To elucidate the mechanisms by which EWS/FLI-1
mediates transformation in mouse models, we have generated a murine Ews/Fli-1
fusion protein. We demonstrate that this protein transforms fibroblast cells in
vitro similar to human EWS/FLI-1 as demonstrated by serum and
anchorage-independent growth, the formation of tumours in nude mice and elevation
of the oncogenic marker c-myc. Furthermore, transformation of these cells was
inhibited by a specific repressor, KRAB/FLI-1. The KRAB/FLI-1 repressor also
suppressed the tumorigenic phenotype of a human Ewing's sarcoma cell line. These 
findings suggest that the transformed phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma cells can be
reversed by using the sequence-specific FLI-1-DNA-binding domain to target a gene
repressor domain. The inhibition of EWS/FLI-1 is the first demonstration of the
KRAB domain suppressing the action of an ETS factor. This approach provides
potential avenues for the elucidation of the biological mechanisms of EWS/FLI-1
oncogenesis and the development of novel therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC2376791
PMID: 12556973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(4):1390-402.

Functional cross-antagonism between transcription factors FLI-1 and EKLF.

Starck J(1), Cohet N, Gonnet C, Sarrazin S, Doubeikovskaia Z, Doubeikovski A,
Verger A, Duterque-Coquillaud M, Morle F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, 69622
Villeurbanne, France.

FLI-1 is an ETS family transcription factor which is overexpressed in Friend
erythroleukemia and contributes to the blockage of differentiation of
erythroleukemic cells. We show here that FLI-1 represses the transcriptional
activity of the beta-globin gene promoter in MEL cells and interacts with two of 
its critical transactivators, GATA-1 and EKLF. Unexpectedly, FLI-1 enhances the
stimulating activity of GATA-1 on a GATA-1-responsive promoter but represses that
of EKLF on beta-globin and an EKLF-responsive artificial promoters. This
repressive effect of FLI-1 requires the ETS DNA binding domain and its
association with either the N- or C-terminal domain, which themselves interact
with EKLF but not with GATA-1. Furthermore, the FLI-1 ETS domain alone behaves as
an autonomous repression domain when linked to the Gal4 DNA binding domain. Taken
together, these data indicate that FLI-1 represses EKLF-dependent transcription
due to the repression activity of its ETS domain and its indirect recruitment to 
erythroid promoters by protein-protein interaction with EKLF. Reciprocally, we
also show that EKLF itself represses the FLI-1-dependent megakaryocytic GPIX gene
promoter, thus further suggesting that functional cross-antagonism between FLI-1 
and EKLF might be involved in the control of the erythrocytic versus
megakaryocytic differentiation of bipotential progenitors.

PMCID: PMC141137
PMID: 12556498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2003 Mar;20(2):119-40.

Stable transgenic expression of IL-2 and HSV1-tk by single and fusion tumor cell 
lines bearing EWS/FLI-1 chimeric genes.

Staege MS(1), Gorelov V, Bulankin A, Fischer U, Dumon K, Hohndorf L, Hattenhorst 
U, Kramm C, Burdach S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Center, Department of Pediatrics and BioCenter,
Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany.

In augmenting systemic anti-tumor immune response, the authors evaluated the
genetic modification of Ewing family tumor (EFT) cell lines for use as allogeneic
vaccines. EFT cell lines A673 and RD-ES were transfected with cDNAs for human
interleukin (IL)-2 and/or HSV1 thymidine kinase (HSV1-tk), respectively. Clones
with high and stable secretion of IL-2 alone or with coexpression of functional
HSV1-tk were obtained and their features were analyzed. IL-2 expressing clones
derived from the A673 cell line demonstrated decreased expression of HLA class I 
molecules compared with the parental cell line and corresponding clones derived
from RD-ES. However, IFN-gamma could upregulate the expression of HLA class I
antigens by IL-2 transfected A673 cells. Ganciclovir induced apoptosis in
double-transfected cell clones. IL-2/HSV1-tk cells continued to produce and
release IL-2 after initial ganciclovir treatment. After gamma-irradiation,
transfected clones released bioactive IL-2 in a quantity sufficient to activate T
and natural killer cells in culture. A polyvalent allogeneic vaccine was also
obtained using fusion of two different transgenic cell lines. The resulting
hybrids inherited antigenic and transgenic characteristics of both parental cell 
lines. It is presumed that the cell lines generated here could be used as
allogeneic vaccines for treatment of patients with EFTs.

PMID: 12554523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;112(2):143-55. Epub 2002 Nov 16.

Arrangement of chromosome 11 and 22 territories, EWSR1 and FLI1 genes, and other 
genetic elements of these chromosomes in human lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma
cells.

Taslerová R(1), Kozubek S, Lukásová E, Jirsová P, Bártová E, Kozubek M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Optical Microscopy, Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University, 
Botanická 68a, 602 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Standard and repeated fluorescence in situ hybridization and high-resolution
cytometry were used to study topographical parameters of chromosome 11 and 22
territories, EWSR1 and FLI1 genes, and other genetic elements of these
chromosomes in human lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma cells. HSA 11 and its elements
(BCL1, FLI1, centromere) were found, on average, more peripherally in comparison 
with HSA 22 and investigated elements (BCR, EWSR1, centromere). After the
elimination of fluctuations of chromosome territories in nuclear volume, it was
found that genetic elements in most cases adhered to their territories. The
investigated genetic elements of HSA 11 were found close to each other relative
to the large molecular lengths among them. This finding indicates a higher degree
of chromatin condensation of at least a part of HSA 11 compared with HSA 22. In
general, there is no correlation between the physical and molecular distance of
two loci of the same chromosome territory. The topographical parameters of the
EWSR1 and FLI1 genes do not differ substantially for G(0)-lymphocytes, stimulated
lymphocytes and Ewing sarcoma cells. The fusion genes pertaining to both
derivative chromosomes 11 and 22 in Ewing sarcoma cell nuclei are shifted to the 
midway position between the native EWSR1 and FLI1 genes. Comparing results
obtained for the EWSR1/FLI1 and ABL1/BCR genes in samples of patients suffering
from Ewing sarcoma or chronic myelogenous leukaemia, it can be concluded that the
mean positions of the fusion genes are determined by the final structure of the
chimeric chromosomes and do not depend on the location of the translocation
event.

PMID: 12522555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):482-92.

Alteration of mesodermal cell differentiation by EWS/FLI-1, the oncogene
implicated in Ewing's sarcoma.

Eliazer S(1), Spencer J, Ye D, Olson E, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Simmons Cancer Center
and Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-8593, USA.

The chimeric fusion gene EWS/FLI-1 is detected in most cases of Ewing's sarcoma
(ES), the second most common malignant bone tumor of childhood. Although 80% of
ES tumors develop in skeletal sites, the remainder can arise in almost any soft
tissue location. The lineage of the cell developing the EWS/FLI-1 gene fusion has
not been fully characterized but is generally considered to be of either
mesenchymal or neural crest origin. To study this oncogene in a conceptually
relevant target cell, EWS/FLI-1 was introduced into the murine cell line C2C12, a
myoblast cell line capable of differentiation into muscle, bone, or fat. In this 
cellular context, EWS/FLI-1 profoundly inhibited the myogenic differentiation
program. The block in C2C12 myogenic differentiation required the nuclear
localization and DNA-binding functions of EWS/FLI-1 and was mediated by
transcriptional and posttranscriptional suppression of the myogenic transcription
factors MyoD and myogenin. Interestingly, C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cells constitutively
expressed alkaline phosphatase, a bone lineage marker, and were alkaline
phosphatase positive by histochemistry but showed no other evidence of bone
lineage commitment. Consistent with recent findings in human ES tumor cell lines,
C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cells constitutively expressed cyclin D1 and demonstrated
decreased expression of the cell cycle regulator p21(cip1), even under
differentiation conditions and at confluent density. This C2C12-EWS/FLI-1 cell
model may assist in the identification of novel differentially expressed genes
relevant to ES and provide further insight into the cell(s) of origin developing 
ES-associated genetic fusions.

PMCID: PMC151529
PMID: 12509448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Eur J Cancer. 2003 Jan;39(1):19-30.

A systematic review of molecular and biological markers in tumours of the Ewing's
sarcoma family.

Riley RD(1), Burchill SA, Abrams KR, Heney D, Sutton AJ, Jones DR, Lambert PC,
Young B, Wailoo AJ, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Leicester, 22-28
Princess Road West, Leicester LE1 6TP, UK. rdr3@leicester.ac.uk

The aims of this study were to perform the first systematic review of molecular
and biological tumour markers in tumours of the Ewing's sarcoma family (ESFT),
and evaluate the current evidence for their clinical use. A well-defined,
reproducible search strategy was used to identify the relevant literature from
1966 to February 2000. Papers were independently assessed for tumour markers used
in the screening, diagnosis, prognosis or monitoring of patients with ESFT.
Eighty-four papers studying the use of 70 different tumour markers in ESFT's were
identified. Low-quality, inconsistent reporting limited meta-analysis to that of 
prognostic data for 28 markers. Patients with tumours lacking S-100 protein
expression have a better overall survival (OS) (hazard ratio (HR)=0.41, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.19, 0.89) than those with expression; patients with
high levels of serum LDH had a worse OS and disease-free survival (DFS) (OS:
HR=2.92, CI 2.16, 3.94, DFS: HR=3.38, 95% CI 2.28, 4.99); patients with localised
disease and tumours expressing type 1 EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts had an improved
DFS compared with those with other fusion transcript types (HR=0.17, 95% CI
0.079, 0.37). The knowledge base formed should facilitate more informative future
research. Improved statistical reporting and large, multicentre prospective
studies are advocated.

PMID: 12504654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 28;21(54):8302-9.

The Id2 gene is a novel target of transcriptional activation by EWS-ETS fusion
proteins in Ewing family tumors.

Nishimori H(1), Sasaki Y, Yoshida K, Irifune H, Zembutsu H, Tanaka T, Aoyama T,
Hosaka T, Kawaguchi S, Wada T, Hata J, Toguchida J, Nakamura Y, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, S-1, W-17, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, 060-8556, Japan.

We report here that the Id2 (inhibitor of DNA binding 2) gene is a novel target
of transcriptional activation by EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG, two fusion proteins that
characterize Ewing family tumors (EFTs). To identify downstream targets of these 
EWS-ETS fusion proteins, we introduced EWS-ETS fusion constructs into a human
fibrosarcoma cell line by retroviral transduction. cDNA microarray analysis
revealed that Id2 expression was up-regulated by introducing the EWS-ETS fusion
gene but not by the normal full-length ETS gene. An Id2 promoter-luciferase
reporter assay showed that transactivation by EWS-ETS involves the minimal Id2
promoter and may function in cooperation with c-Myc within the full-length
regulatory region. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed direct
interaction between the Id2 promoter and EWS-FLI1 fusion protein in vivo.
Significantly higher expression of Id2 and c-Myc was observed in all of the six
EFT cell lines examined compared to six other sarcoma cell lines. Moreover, high 
levels of Id2 expression were also observed in five of the six primary tumors
examined. Id2 is generally thought to affect the balance between cell
differentiation and proliferation in development and is highly expressed in
several cancer types. Considering these previous studies, our data suggest that
the oncogenic effect of EWS-ETS may be mediated in part by up-regulating Id2
expression. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1206025

PMID: 12447693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Jul-Aug;1(4):428-32.

The pro-oncoprotein EWS (Ewing's Sarcoma protein) interacts with the Brn-3a POU
transcription factor and inhibits its ability to activate transcription.

Thomas GR(1), Latchman DS.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Molecular Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College 
London, UK.

The Brn-3a POU family transcription factor is able to induce the expression of a 
number of neuronally-expressed genes as well as to enhance neuronal
differentiation and inhibit apoptosis. Many of these effects are mediated by the 
C-terminal POU domain of Brn-3a which acts both as a DNA binding domain and a
transcriptional activation domain. To identify the mechanisms by which this
domain acts, we carried out a yeast two hybrid assay to identify proteins which
interact with it. We show that both full length Brn-3a and the isolated POU
domain interact with the EWS transcription factor and its oncogenic derivative
EWS-Fli1. Moreover, EWS can block Brn-3a-mediated activation of the Bcl-x
promoter whereas this effect is lost in EWS-Fli1. The significance of this novel 
interaction is discussed in terms of the manner in which Brn-3a regulates its
target promoters and the mechanism of oncogenic transformation by EWS-Fli1.

PMID: 12432261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Jul-Aug;1(4):330-6.

EWS-FLI1 and Ewing's sarcoma: recent molecular data and new insights.

Ladanyi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
10021, USA. ladanyim@mskcc.org

The EWS-FLI1 fusion resulting from the specific t(11;22)(q24;q12) of Ewing's
sarcoma was the first sarcoma gene fusion to be cloned, a decade ago. Moving from
the cloning of this oncogenic chimeric transcription factor to the further
elucidation of its pathogenetic mechanisms has revealed new complexities in the
biology of this tumor which may be relevant to other fusion oncogenes as well.
The present review highlights recent advances in three avenues of investigation
that are providing new insights into this particular neoplasm and into the
biology of EWS-FLI1 and related fusion proteins, namely the identification of
various mitogenic targets of this aberrant transcription factor, its possible
role as a deregulator of splicing, and the role of the p53 pathway in modulating 
its oncogenicity.

PMID: 12432241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Development. 2002 Dec;129(24):5683-95.

Adult and embryonic blood and endothelium derive from distinct precursor
populations which are differentially programmed by BMP in Xenopus.

Walmsley M(1), Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

Blood and blood vessels develop in close association in vertebrate embryos and
loss-of-function mutations suggest common genetic regulation. By the criteria of 
co-expression of blood and endothelial genes, and lineage tracing of progeny, we 
locate two distinct populations of progenitors for blood and endothelial cells in
developing Xenopus embryos. The first population is located immediately posterior
to the cement gland during neurula stages and gives rise to embryonic blood and
vitelline veins in the anterior ventral blood island (aVBI), and to the
endocardium of the heart. The second population resides in the dorsal lateral
plate mesoderm, and contains precursors of adult blood stem cells and the major
vessels. Both populations differentiate into endothelial cells in situ but
migrate to new locations to differentiate into blood, suggesting that their
micro-environments are unsuitable for haematopoietic differentiation. Both
require BMP for their formation, even the Spemann organiser-derived aVBI, but
individual genes are affected differentially. Thus, in the embryonic population, 
expression of the blood genes, SCL and GATA2, depend on BMP signalling while
expression of the endothelial gene, Xfli1, does not. By contrast, Xfli1
expression in the adult, DLP population does require BMP. These results indicate 
that both adult and the anterior component of embryonic blood in Xenopus embryos 
derive from populations of progenitors that also give rise to endothelial cells. 
However, the two populations give rise to distinct regions of the vasculature and
are programmed differentially by BMP.

PMID: 12421708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Oct 21;1592(2):123-7.

Caspase cleavage of the transcription factor FLI-1 during preB leukemic cell
death.

Sarrazin S(1), Bonod-Bidaud C, Remy P, Mehlen P, Morlé F.

Author information: 
(1)Transcription/Différenciation Hématopoïétique and Apoptose/Différenciation,
label la ligue contre le cancer-Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS UMR 5534, 43 Boulevard du 11 Novembre 1918, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.

Programmed cell death (apoptosis) is a complex phenomenon that is mediated in
mammals mainly via the selective cleavage of intracellular proteins by the large 
family of cysteine aspartate protease caspases. Apoptosis is tightly regulated by
the competitive effect of numerous proteins displaying either pro-apoptotic or
anti-apoptotic activity. The ETS-family transcription factor FLI-1, frequently
associated with malignant transformation, has been shown to display
anti-apoptotic activity in several cell types including avian erythroblasts,
mouse fibroblasts or lymphoid cells. We show here that apoptosis of murine preB
leukemic cells is accompanied with the specific cleavage of FLI-1 by a
caspase-like activity. We also demonstrate that the two isoforms of FLI-1 are
indeed cleaved at three conserved sites by caspase 3 in vitro. The conservation
of these cleavage sites among species suggests that the caspase cleavage of the
anti-apoptotic transcription factor FLI-1 may represent a critical step to ensure
irreversible cell death.

PMID: 12379474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Ann Oncol. 2002 Oct;13(10):1656-64.

Population-based genetic alterations in Ewing's tumors from Japanese and European
Caucasian patients.

Ozaki T(1), Schaefer KL, Wai D, Yokoyama R, Ahrens S, Diallo R, Hasegawa T,
Shimoda T, Hirohashi S, Kawai A, Naito N, Morimoto Y, Inoue H, Boecker W,
Juergens H, Winkelmann W, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Poremba C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Westfaelische Wilhelms-University, Münster,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of Ewing's tumors (ETs) is lower in Asians or
African-Americans than in Caucasians.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Japanese ETs were available for analysis of chromosomal
aberrations by comparative genomic hybridization (n = 16) and for expression of
chimeric EWS transcripts by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (n = 
11). These results in Japanese patients were compared with those of 62 ETs in
European Caucasian patients registered in the European Intergroup Cooperative
Ewing's Sarcoma Study.
RESULTS: Japanese patients with ET had lower overall survival (P = 0.0446) and
relapse-free survival (P = 0.0371) compared with European Caucasian patients. Ten
of 11 Japanese ETs and 31 of 62 European Caucasian ETs had type I (EWS exon 7 to 
FLI1 exon 6) fusion transcripts. In Japanese ETs, the median numbers of
chromosomal aberrations were 2.0 and 6.0 in 11 primary tumors and five relapsed
tumors, respectively. In European Caucasian ETs, the median number of changes
were 2.5 and 5.0 in 52 primary and 10 relapsed tumors, respectively. Frequent
gains were 8q (38%), 8p (31%) and 12q (25%) in Japanese ETs and 8q (52%), 8p
(48%) and 12q (19%) in European Caucasian ETs. Frequent losses were 19q (44%),
19p (38%) and 17p (25%) in Japanese ETs and 16q (21%), 19q (18%) and 17p (15%) in
European Caucasian ETs. The incidence of losses of 19p (P = 0.0215) and 19q (P = 
0.0277) were significantly higher in Japanese ETs than in European Caucasian ETs.
An amplification (1p33-p34) was observed in only one Japanese ET.
CONCLUSIONS: Japanese patients with ET in this study had a worse prognosis than
European Caucasian patients. In molecular genetic analyses, Japanese ETs had a
higher frequency of loss of chromosome 19 than European Caucasian ETs. Different 
genetic aberrations may explain the different incidences and prognoses of ET
between Caucasian and Japanese patients.

PMID: 12377657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48333-41. Epub 2002 Sep 30.

Cloning and analysis of the thrombopoietin-induced megakaryocyte-specific
glycoprotein VI promoter and its regulation by GATA-1, Fli-1, and Sp1.

Holmes ML(1), Bartle N, Eisbacher M, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, St. George Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The exposure of collagen fibers at sites of vascular injury results in the
adherence of platelets and their subsequent activation. The platelet collagen
receptor glycoprotein (GP)(1) VI plays a crucial role in platelet activation and 
thrombus formation and decreased levels or defective GPVI may lead to excessive
bleeding. In addition, elevated levels of collagen receptors may predispose
individuals to coronary heart disease or strokes. GPVI expression is restricted
to platelets and their precursor cell, the megakaryocyte. In this study we
investigate the regulation of GPVI expression and show that thrombopoietin
induces its expression in the megakaryocytic cell line UT-7/TPO. A 5'-region
flanking the transcription start point of the GPVI gene was cloned (-694 to +29) 
and we report that this putative GPVI promoter bestows megakaryocye-specific
expression. Deletion analyses and site-directed mutagenesis identified Sp1(227), 
GATA(177), and Ets(48) sites as essential for GPVI expression. We show that
transcription factors GATA-1, Fli-1, and Sp1 can bind to and activate this
promoter. Finally, GPVI mRNA was detected only in megakaryocytic cell lines
expressing both Fli-1 and GATA-1, and we show that overexpression of Fli-1 in a
stable cell line (which expresses endogenous GATA-1 and Sp1) results in
expression of the endogenous GPVI gene.

PMID: 12359731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Leukemia. 2002 Sep;16(9):1827-34.

F-MuLV acceleration of myelomonocytic tumorigenesis in SV40 large T antigen
transgenic mice is accompanied by retroviral insertion at Fli1 and a novel locus,
Fim4.

Kone J(1), Arroyo J, Savinelli T, Lin S, Boyd K, Wu Y, Nimmakayalu M, Copeland
NG, Jenkins NA, Qumsiyeh M, Hu P, Prescott A, Wu H, Yang L, Roe B, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.

We describe here the development of a murine system for the identification of
genes involved in myelomonocytic neoplasms. Transgenic C57BL/6J mice expressing
SV40 early region under a myelomonocytic promoter develop histiocytic sarcomas
with a latency of 167 days. We used retroviral proviral tagging to accelerate
tumorigenesis and to uncover genetic changes that contribute to tumor
development. Infection of transgenic mice with Friend murine leukemia virus
(F-MuLV) shortened the latency of morbidity to 103 days (P< 0.001); this was
associated with clonal proviral integrations in tumor DNA. As expected for
F-MuLV, proviral insertions occurred at Fli1 in both transgenic and nontransgenic
tumors. Four insertions were found at a novel locus, termed Fim4, on chromosome
6. This region is syntenic to human 7q32, a region that is commonly deleted in
human myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. A murine BAC
containing Fim4 was sequenced and analyzed, and while there was significant
human-mouse homology in the area of the insertions, no candidate gene has been
identified. Thus we have established a system to identify genes involved in
myelomonocytic tumors, and have used it to identify Fim4, a new common site of
proviral insertion. Study of this locus may provide insight into genes involved
in AML-associated 7q32 deletions in humans.

PMID: 12200699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(4):1065-70.

Gene expression analysis of 1,25(OH)2D3-dependent differentiation of HL-60 cells:
a cDNA array study.

Savli H(1), Aalto Y, Nagy B, Knuutila S, Pakkala S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Haartman Institute and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

The alterations in gene expression associated with 1,25(OH)2D3-induced
differentiation of HL-60 cells were studied in order to identify potential
targets for further investigation of the genetic basis of acute myeloid
leukaemia. Atlas human haematology filters, including 406 genes (Clontech), were 
used to study gene expression in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 (concentration, 5 x 10-8
mol/l) for 24 and 72 h. Compared with untreated cells, expression differences
were found in 43 genes. Downregulated genes at both time-points were: IL2RA,
CMYC, NPM, DEK, AF4, FLI1, htlf, MNDA, BCR, IKAROS, BPI and NFAT4. Upregulated
genes at both time-points were IL1B, CD14 and MCL1. CD55, CD58, IRF2, CREB1,
ATF4, RAC1, TIAR, KIAA0053, BAT2, BTK, RCK, EV12B and EDN were downregulated at
24 h, while SPI1, MKK3, BTG1 and IL8 were upregulated. At 72 h the upregulated
genes were IL1RA, IL2RG, CXCR4, SCYA1, SCYA3, SCYA4, SCYA5, SCYA22, ANX2, CD83
and UPAR. cDNA array results were confirmed on randomly selected genes using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction for three upregulated (CXCR4,
IL1B and CD14) and three downregulated (DEK, AF4 and FLI1) genes. Gene expression
analysis after differentiation induction may provide a tool to study the roles of
DEK, AF4 and FLI1 in cell proliferation and differentiation. To demonstrate the
genes that initiate differentiation, sequential gene expression analysis has to
be performed during the first 24 h of the differentiation process.

PMID: 12199786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Curr Biol. 2002 Aug 20;12(16):1405-12.

Analysis of a zebrafish VEGF receptor mutant reveals specific disruption of
angiogenesis.

Habeck H(1), Odenthal J, Walderich B, Maischein H, Schulte-Merker S; Tübingen
2000 screen consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Artemis Pharmaceuticals/Exelixis Deutschland GmbH, 72076, Tübingen, Germany.

Blood vessels form either by the assembly and differentiation of mesodermal
precursor cells (vasculogenesis) or by sprouting from preexisting vessels
(angiogenesis). Endothelial-specific receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands 
are known to be essential for these processes. Targeted disruption of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or its receptor kdr (flk1, VEGFR2) in mouse
embryos results in a severe reduction of all blood vessels, while the complete
loss of flt1 (VEGFR1) leads to an increased number of hemangioblasts and a
disorganized vasculature. In a large-scale forward genetic screen, we identified 
two allelic zebrafish mutants in which the sprouting of blood vessels is
specifically disrupted without affecting the assembly and differentiation of
angioblasts. Molecular cloning revealed nonsense mutations in flk1. Analysis of
mRNA expression in flk1 mutant embryos showed that flk1 expression was severely
downregulated, while the expression of other genes (scl, gata1, and fli1)
involved in vasculogenesis or hematopoiesis was unchanged. Overexpression of
vegf(121+165) led to the formation of additional vessels only in sibling larvae, 
not in flk1 mutants. We demonstrate that flk1 is not required for proper
vasculogenesis and hematopoiesis in zebrafish embryos. However, the disruption of
flk1 impairs the formation or function of vessels generated by sprouting
angiogenesis.

PMID: 12194822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cancer Res. 2002 Aug 15;62(16):4583-7.

Interaction of the EWS NH2 terminus with BARD1 links the Ewing's sarcoma gene to 
a common tumor suppressor pathway.

Spahn L(1), Petermann R, Siligan C, Schmid JA, Aryee DN, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, 1090 Vienna,
Austria.

In 85% of Ewing family tumors, the NH2 terminus of EWS is fused to the
DNA-binding domain of FLI1, an ets transcription factor. The resulting chimeric
protein is a strong transcriptional activator with transforming activity. We
report that EWS and EWS-FLI1 interact via their common NH2 terminus with the COOH
terminus of BARD1, a putative tumor suppressor, in vitro and in vivo. Because
BARD1 associates via its NH2-terminal RING domain with the breast cancer
susceptibility gene BRCA1 that provides a platform for interactions with proteins
involved in DNA repair and checkpoint control, our results provide a link between
the Ewing's sarcoma gene product and the genome surveillance complex.

PMID: 12183411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Dev Biol. 2002 Aug 15;248(2):307-18.

In vivo imaging of embryonic vascular development using transgenic zebrafish.

Lawson ND(1), Weinstein BM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD/NIH, Building 6B, 6 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In this study we describe a model system that allows continuous in vivo
observation of the vertebrate embryonic vasculature. We find that the zebrafish
fli1 promoter is able to drive expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) in all blood vessels throughout embryogenesis. We demonstrate the utility 
of vascular-specific transgenic zebrafish in conjunction with time-lapse
multiphoton laser scanning microscopy by directly observing angiogenesis within
the brain of developing embryos. Our images reveal that blood vessels undergoing 
active angiogenic growth display extensive filopodial activity and pathfinding
behavior similar to that of neuronal growth cones. We further show, using the
zebrafish mindbomb mutant as an example, that the expression of EGFP within
developing blood vessels permits detailed analysis of vascular defects associated
with genetic mutations. Thus, these transgenic lines allow detailed analysis of
both wild type and mutant embryonic vasculature and, together with the ability to
perform large scale forward-genetic screens in zebrafish, will facilitate
identification of new mutants affecting vascular development.

PMID: 12167406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Gastroenterol. 2002;37(7):543-9.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the transverse colonic mesentery defined by
the presence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA in a Japanese woman.

Tokudome N(1), Tanaka K, Kai MH, Sueyoshi K, Matsukita S, Setoguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kagoshima City Hospital, Japan.

We report a case of primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) arising in the
transverse colonic mesentery. A 24-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to
Kagoshima City Hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and sensations of
abdominal fullness of 5 months' duration. On palpation, a mass the size of an
infant's head was noted in the right flank. Abdominal computed tomography (CT)
and ultrasonography showed a huge mass that consisted of multiple cystic
components. On arteriography, a slight tumor stain appeared, with stretched and
displaced tributaries of the right colic and middle colic arteries. Barium
swallow examination demonstrated that the ascending colon was shifted to the
right and small intestine to the left. We performed an en-bloc resection of the
tumor in the transverse colonic mesentery, including the ascending colon,
proximal jejunum (20 cm in length), and greater omentum. The resected tumor was
12 x 10 x 7 cm in size, 590g in weight, elastic soft in consistency, and
multicystic. Histologically, the specimens showed a sheet-like proliferation of
spindle-to-polygonal cells, and focally, the tumor formed rosette structures.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for neuron-specific enolase 
(NSE) and mic-2. EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Based on the above findings, we
finally diagnosed the tumor as PNET of the colonic mesentery. There has been no
recurrence for 20 months after operation. PNET arising in the mesentery is very
rare, and we distinguished PNET from other tumors by immunohistochemical
examination and by demonstration of the presence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric mRNA in the
tumor.

PMID: 12162413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Aug;269(15):3607-18.

Transcriptional regulation of erythropoiesis. Fine tuning of combinatorial
multi-domain elements.

Perry C(1), Soreq H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Israel.

Haematopoiesis, the differentiation of haematopoietic stem cells and progenitors 
into various lineages, involves complex interactions of transcription factors
that modulate the expression of downstream genes and mediate proliferation and
differentiation signals. Commitment of pluripotent haematopoietic stem cells to
the erythroid lineage induces erythropoiesis, the production of red blood cells. 
This process involves a concerted progression through an erythroid burst forming 
unit (BFU-E), an erythroid colony forming unit (CFU-E), proerythroblast and an
erythroblast. The terminally differentiated erythrocytes, in mammals, lose their 
nucleus yet function several more months. A well-coordinated cohort of
transcription factors regulates the formation, survival, proliferation and
differentiation of multipotent progenitor into the erythroid lineage. Here, we
discuss broad-spectrum factors essential for self-renewal and/or differentiation 
of multipotent cells as well as specific factors required for proper erythroid
development. These factors may operate solely or as part of transcriptional
complexes, and exert activation or repression. Sequence comparisons reveal
evolutionarily conserved modular composition for these factors; X-ray
crystallography demonstrates that they include multidomain elements (e.g. HLH or 
zinc finger motifs), consistent with their complex interactions with other
proteins. Finally, transfections and genomic studies show that the timing of each
factor's expression during the hematopoietic process, the cell lineages affected 
and the existing combination of other factors determine the erythroid cell fate.

PMID: 12153557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Curr Opin Oncol. 2002 Jul;14(4):412-9.

Chromosomal translocations and sarcomas.

Bennicelli JL(1), Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
jbennice@mail.med.upenn.edu

This review examines how the identification of tumor-specific translocations and 
fusion proteins has advanced the basic scientific and clinical understanding of
sarcomas. Recent genetic advances, including the ASPL-TFE3 fusion of alveolar
soft part sarcoma, the JAZF1-JJAZ1 fusion of endometrial stromal sarcoma, and
HMGIC fusions in liposarcoma, are discussed. Next, the review addresses the ways 
in which molecular genetic data have influenced diagnostic and prognostic
paradigms. For example, recent studies describe the detection of occult tumor
cells and the identification of primary renal neoplasms that are genetically
related to alveolar soft part sarcoma. In addition, the review discusses
potential therapies based on the targeting of sarcoma-specific fusion proteins.
These reports describe the potential use of Gleevec (STI571) for
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and the use of tumor-specific fusion proteins as 
potential targets for immunotherapy. Finally, basic scientific findings are
reviewed that elucidate, for example, the aberrant functions of SYT-SSX in
chromatin remodeling and of EWS-FLI1 in transcription and mRNA splicing. These
and other emerging models of tumorigenesis will help identify new therapeutic
targets.

PMID: 12130926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Cancer Cell. 2002 May;1(4):393-401.

The Ewing's sarcoma oncoprotein EWS/FLI induces a p53-dependent growth arrest in 
primary human fibroblasts.

Lessnick SL(1), Dacwag CS, Golub TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma is associated with a fusion between the EWS and FLI1 genes,
forming an EWS/FLI fusion protein. We developed a system for the identification
of cooperative mutations in this tumor through expression of EWS/FLI in primary
human fibroblasts. Gene expression profiling demonstrated that this system
recapitulates many features of Ewing's sarcoma. EWS/FLI-expressing cells
underwent growth arrest, suggesting that growth arrest-abrogating collaborative
mutations may be required for tumorigenesis. Expression profiling identified
transcriptional upregulation of p53, and the growth arrest was rescued by
inhibition of p53. These data support a role for p53 as a tumor suppressor in
Ewing's sarcoma and demonstrate the use of transcriptional profiling of model
systems in the identification of cooperating mutations in human cancer.

PMID: 12086853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. EMBO J. 2002 Jun 17;21(12):3039-50.

Establishing the transcriptional programme for blood: the SCL stem cell enhancer 
is regulated by a multiprotein complex containing Ets and GATA factors.

Göttgens B(1), Nastos A, Kinston S, Piltz S, Delabesse EC, Stanley M, Sanchez MJ,
Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R, Green AR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for
Medical Research, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK. bg200@cam.ac.uk

Stem cells are a central feature of metazoan biology. Haematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) represent the best-characterized example of this phenomenon, but the
molecular mechanisms responsible for their formation remain obscure. The stem
cell leukaemia (SCL) gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factor with an essential role in specifying HSCs. Here we have addressed the
transcriptional hierarchy responsible for HSC formation by characterizing an SCL 
3' enhancer that targets expression to HSCs and endothelium and their bipotential
precursors, the haemangioblast. We have identified three critical motifs, which
are essential for enhancer function and bind GATA-2, Fli-1 and Elf-1 in vivo. Our
results suggest that these transcription factors are key components of an
enhanceosome responsible for activating SCL transcription and establishing the
transcriptional programme required for HSC formation.

PMCID: PMC126046
PMID: 12065417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25143-51. Epub 2002 May 3.

Ets-1 regulates fli-1 expression in endothelial cells. Identification of ETS
binding sites in the fli-1 gene promoter.

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Mattot V, Spruyt N, Soncin F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8526, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1 rue Calmette, 59021 Lille
Cedex, France.

To understand the role of the Ets-1 transcription factor during angiogenesis, we 
have overexpressed it in endothelial cells and analyzed the levels of expression 
of several candidate target genes involved in angiogenesis. The transcripts
levels of the ETS transcription factor fli-1 are specifically up-regulated in
endothelial cells, which overexpress Ets-1, but not in fibroblasts. Analysis of
the promoter of the mouse fli-1 gene reveals that the 1-kb region that comprises 
the transcription starts and part of exon 1 is responsible for the response of
the promoter to Ets-1. The -270/-41 fragment contains two known Spi-1-responding 
Ets binding sites (EBS), which are also necessary for the activation by Ets-1. In
contrast to Spi-1, a third EBS is necessary for the full response of this
promoter fragment to Ets-1. The rest of the promoter activity has been located in
the -986/-505 region, where three active EBSs have been identified. Furthermore, 
endogenous Fli-1 was found to be bound to its own gene promoter and to be able to
promote the transactivation of its gene. These results suggest that Ets-1
activates an auto-regulatory loop of expression of fli-1 in endothelial cells, a 
mechanism that could have significant implications for the endothelial cell fate.

PMID: 11991951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2890-5.

Differential regulation of the response to DNA damage in Ewing's sarcoma cells by
ETS1 and EWS/FLI-1.

Soldatenkov VA(1), Trofimova IN, Rouzaut A, McDermott F, Dritschilo A, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Vincent T. Lombardi Cancer Center,
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington DC 20007, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma (EWS) cells contain levels of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) 
significantly higher than other eukaryotic cells. Previously, we cloned the PARP 
gene promoter region from EWS cells, showed that it contained multiple
ETS-binding sites and demonstrated a positive regulation of PARP by ETS1. We now 
report that, contrary to ETS1, EWS/FLI-1, an aberrant ETS transcription factor
present in most EWS cells, is a negative effector of PARP transcription. Because 
PARP levels have been associated with cellular resistance or sensitivity to
genotoxic agents, we studied the effect of modifying PARP levels in EWS cells on 
their response to DNA damage by modulating the expression of ETS1 or EWS/FLI-1
using antisense methodology. Results show that stable down-regulation of ETS1
increases the resistance of EWS cells to various genotoxic agents, whereas
down-regulation of EWS/FLI-1 has pro-apoptotic effects. Because down-regulation
EWS/FLI-1 does not dramatically change PARP levels, these results suggest a
direct effect for EWS/FLI-1 in the DNA damage response of EWS cells. Since
expression of the aberrant fusion proteins by EWS cells is essential for
maintaining their neoplastic phenotype, our results suggest that the use of
antisense oligonucleotides in combination with chemotherapeutic agents or
radiation may be doubly effective by causing both an increase in sensitivity to
therapeutic agents and a simultaneous down-regulation, or reversion, of the
neoplastic phenotype of EWS cells.

PMID: 11973649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Histopathology. 2002 Jan;40(1):108-9.

Immunophenotypic and genotypic analysis of a case of primary peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumour (pPNET) of the urinary bladder.

Colecchia M, Dagrada GP, Poliani PL, Pilotti S.

Comment on
    Histopathology. 1997 May;30(5):486-90.
    Histopathology. 1998 May;32(5):477-8.

PMID: 11903609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Feb;133(1):72-5.

EWS/FLI-1 fusion signal inserted into chromosome 11 in one patient with
morphologic features of Ewing sarcoma, but lacking t(11;22).

Batanian JR(1), Bridge JA, Wickert R, Vogler C, Gadre B, Huang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO,
USA. batanijr@slu.edu

A reciprocal t(11;22)(q24;q12) is found in 85% of Ewing sarcomas (ES) cases. We
report a case of a child with ES, in whom trisomy 8 was observed as the sole
chromosomal abnormality. Fluorescence in situ hybridization---using a set of
probes that localize to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) and usually show the
translocation as fusion (red-green) signal on der(22)---showed a fusion signal on
der(11) suggesting an insertion as the mechanism that led to the EWS-FLI-1 gene
rearrangement. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction studies revealed
the presence of two EWS/FLI1 fusion gene products.

PMID: 11890993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 22;292(1):287-91.

IL-6 induces expression of the Fli-1 proto-oncogene via STAT3.

Hodge DR(1), Li D, Qi SM, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, NCI Cancer Research and Development
Center at Frederick, Bld. 560, Rm. 31-76, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Induction of gene expression by IL-6 has become an area of intense interest due
to the role this cytokine plays in mediating aspects of inflammation, cellular
differentiation, and proliferation. The ETS family of transcription factors
represents a group of positive and negative regulators of transcription, that are
differentially expressed in a cell and tissue specific manner. The ETS protein
Fli-1 is known to induce differentiation in the erythroblastic leukemia cell line
K562 along megakaryocytic developmental pathways. Here we show that IL-6
treatment of K562 induces the expression of Fli-1 via the STAT3 transcription
factor. Upregulation of Fli-1 expression can be abrogated by the addition of
AG490, a chemical inhibitor of JAK kinases, and by transfecting the cells with a 
dominant negative STAT3 expression construct.

PMID: 11890706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 Nov;23(8):530-2.

Ewing sarcoma of the small intestine.

Shek TW(1), Chan GC, Khong PL, Chung LP, Cheung AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Pokfulam. whshek@hkucc.hku.hk

This report describes a rare case of Ewing sarcoma (ES) of the small intestine.
The patient was a 9-year-old girl with progressive abdominal distension. Computed
tomography showed a large mass in the small bowel. Histopathologic examination of
the resected tumor showed ES with typical histologic, immunohistochemical, and
ultrastructural features. The tumor recurred in the pelvic cavity 18 months after
the original surgery. Molecular study of the recurrent tumor confirmed a
diagnostic EWS-FLI1 gene fusion. This patient illustrates the unique occurrence
of ES in the small intestine.

PMID: 11878783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Am J Surg Pathol. 2002 Mar;26(3):320-7.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney: a
clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis of 11 cases.

Jimenez RE(1), Folpe AL, Lapham RL, Ro JY, O'Shea PA, Weiss SW, Amin MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2003 Aug;27(8):1177.

Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) is an extraordinarily
rare primary tumor in the kidney and can be mistaken for a variety of other round
cell tumors, including blastema-predominant Wilms' tumor (WT). Approximately 90% 
of ES/PNET have a specific t(11;22), which results in a chimeric EWS-FLI-1
protein. Immunohistochemistry for the carboxy-terminus of FLI-1 is sensitive and 
highly specific for the diagnosis of ES/PNET. WT-1, the WT-associated tumor
suppressor gene, is overexpressed in WT but not in ES/PNET. No study has examined
FLI-1 or WT-1 expression in renal ES/PNET. The clinicopathologic features of 11
renal ES/PNET were studied along with immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin,
desmin, CD99, FLI-1, and WT-1. WT were also immunostained for CD99 (5 cases),
FLI-1 (10 cases), and WT-1 (9 cases). The patients (6 men, 5 women) ranged from
18 to 49 years of age (mean, 34 yr). The mean tumor size was 11.8 +/- 3.8 cm
(mean +/- standard deviation). Presenting symptoms included abdominal/flank pain 
and/or hematuria. Grossly, all tumors showed necrosis and hemorrhage, and 4 had
cystic change. Microscopically, all tumors showed vaguely lobular growth,
primitive round cells, and variable rosette formation. Epithelial, myogenous, or 
cartilaginous differentiation was not seen. Immunohistochemical results on the
renal ES/PNET were cytokeratin (2/8 focal), desmin (0/9), CD99 (8/8), FLI-1
(5/8), and WT-1 (0/8). In comparison, the WT only rarely expressed CD99 (1/5) and
did not express FLI-1 (0/10), but were usually WT-1-positive (7/9). Follow-up on 
8 cases (mean, 28 mo; range, 6-64 mo) showed 4 lung and pleural metastases, 1
bone metastasis, liver metastasis, 2 local recurrences, and 5 deaths from disease
(median time to death, 16.8 mo). No case had distant metastatic disease at
presentation. Adjuvant therapy included chemotherapy (8 cases), radiation (3
cases), and bone marrow transplantation (1 case). Our study affirms a unique
proclivity of renal ES/PNET for young adults and that it is a highly aggressive
neoplasm, with rapid death in many cases, usually after the development of
treatment-resistant lung metastases. These tumors must be distinguished from
blastema-predominant WT and other primitive renal tumors that require different
therapy. FLI-1 and WT-1 immunohistochemistry may be valuable in this differential
diagnosis, given the known immunophenotypic overlap between ES/PNET and
blastema-predominant WT with regard to CD99, cytokeratin, and desmin. The
accurate distinction between these two entities has clear prognostic and
therapeutic implications.

PMID: 11859203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 May;23(4):221-4.

Molecular confirmation of Ewing sarcoma.

Dagher R(1), Pham TA, Sorbara L, Kumar S, Long L, Bernstein D, Mackall C, Raffeld
M, Tsokos M, Helman L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch , National Cancer Institute. National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze retrospectively results of reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing and demographic information in patients with
known or suspected Ewing sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor family of tumors
referred to the National Cancer Institute and to describe factors influencing the
determination of molecular marker status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor samples from 76 patients from February 1997 to
December 1999 were analyzed. In all cases, the diagnosis of this family of tumors
was confirmed by histopathologic review.
RESULTS: In 58 patients, the presence of a translocation associated with this
family of tumors was confirmed using RT-PCR. Specifically, there were 45 Ewing
sarcoma (EWS)-FLI type 1 translocations, four EWS-FLI type 2 translocations, five
EWS-ERG translocations, and four less common EWS-FLI variants. Of patients with a
confirmed translocation, four were confirmed only after nested RT-PCR techniques 
were used. In five patients who initially underwent needle biopsy, the diagnosis 
was confirmed only after open biopsy or repeat needle biopsy was undertaken.
Samples from 18 patients were translocation-negative. Of these, seven samples
were deemed inadequate for RT-PCR testing as a result of inappropriate tissue
handling or the presence of necrotic material. Five patients were found to have a
different diagnosis after complete histopathologic and molecular
characterization. Six samples remained, in which adequate tissue was obtained
with no evidence of a characteristic translocation.
CONCLUSIONS: In apparently translocation-negative samples, close attention should
be given to the possibility of an alternative diagnosis, the potential need for
nested RT-PCR, and the possibility of an inadequate sample. Strong consideration 
should be given to the use of open biopsy as opposed to needle biopsy to avoid
the need for repeat biopsies and the potential for inaccurate assessment of
molecular marker status.

PMID: 11846300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Hum Pathol. 2002 Jan;33(1):130-2.

Esophageal extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma.

Maesawa C(1), Iijima S, Sato N, Yoshinori N, Suzuki M, Tarusawa M, Ishida K,
Tamura G, Saito K, Masuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine, Morioka,
Japan.

Extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma is a rare tumor. The most common sites of
occurrence are on the trunk, extremities, and retroperitoneum. This type of tumor
is well characterized by recurrent chromosomal translocation such as t (11;22)
(q24;q12) (EWSR1/FLI1) or t (21;22) (q22;q12) (EWSR1/ERG) and overexpression of
MIC2/CD99 on tumor cell membrane. We describe the first reported case of an
esophageal extraskeletal Ewing's sarcoma with confirmation from
immunohistochemical and molecular diagnoses. A 56-year-old man developed a
polypoid tumor located in the lower part of the esophagus. The tumor was composed
of small-sized round cells showing prominent fibrillar cytoplasmic processes.
Intracytoplasmic glycogen was detected in all the tumor cells. Immunoreactivity
for MIC2/CD99 was positive on the membrane of all tumor cells. A reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction followed by sequencing revealed an
EWSR1/ERG chimeric transcript, which combined EWSR1 exon 10 with ERG exon 6. The 
present report added a new entity of esophageal small round cell tumor.

Copyright 2002 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11823984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2002 Jan-Feb;5(1):86-90.

Molecular genetic analysis of a small bowel primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Graham DK(1), Stork LC, Wei Q, Ingram JD, Karrer FM, Mierau GW, Lovell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Bone Marrow Transplant, The Children's
Hospital, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80218, USA.

Comment in
    Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2003 May-Jun;6(3):278-9.

We present a pediatric peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET)
localized exclusively to the small bowel. The tumor presented in an adolescent
male and the diagnosis was confirmed by electron microscopy, CD99
immunopositivity, and molecular genetic analysis that demonstrated an EWS-FLI1
type 2 fusion transcript. This case report and a review of the literature
underscore the considerable phenotypic overlap in EWS-related tumors in this site
and the necessity for molecular genetic analysis to permit accurate
classification.

PMID: 11815873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Oncogene. 2002 Jan 10;21(2):307-18.

Anchorage-independent multi-cellular spheroids as an in vitro model of growth
signaling in Ewing tumors.

Lawlor ER(1), Scheel C, Irving J, Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's and Women's Health Centre of British
Columbia, and the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Little is known about the growth-signaling pathways that govern the proliferation
of Ewing tumor (ET) cells either in vitro or in vivo. We have studied signal
transduction pathways in ET cell lines and compared kinase expression levels and 
proliferation rates with primary tumors. Cell lines were studied both as
conventional adherent monolayers and as anchorage-independent multi-cellular
spheroids. Importantly, we observed significant differences between these in
vitro models and found that ET spheroids were more closely related to primary
tumors with respect to cell morphology, cell-cell junctions, proliferative index 
and kinase activation. Monolayer ET cells demonstrated serum-dependent
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and AKT and constitutively high serum-independent
cyclin D1 protein expression. However, when ET cells were placed in suspension
culture, there was immediate serum-independent activation of ERK1/2 and AKT. In
addition, cyclin D1 protein expression was completely blocked until stable
multi-cellular spheroids had formed, indicating that cell-cell adhesion is
necessary for the proliferation of anchorage independent ET cells. This reduction
in cyclin D1 expression was post-transcriptional and could be mimicked in
monolayer cells by treatment with phosphatidyl inositol-3 kinase (PI3K)
inhibitors. Moreover, PI3K inhibition significantly reduced ET cell proliferation
and, in primary ET samples, cyclin D1 expression correlated with expression of
activated AKT. Thus, the PI3K-AKT pathway appears to be critical for the
proliferation of ET cells both in vitro and in vivo and tumor cell growth in vivo
may be better represented by the study of anchorage-independent multi-cellular
spheroids.

PMID: 11803474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2000 Jan;22(1):48-9.

[Minimal residual disease in bone marrow in patients with Ewing's sarcoma
detected by RT-PCR amplification of EWS-FLI-1 fusion gene transcript].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang S(1), Huang D, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To set up a system for sensitively detecting minimal Ewing's sarcoma
cells in bone marrow.
METHODS: Ewing's sarcoma cell line T1 cells were serially diluted with normal
bone marrow cells so that the concentration of tumor cells was 10(-3), 10(-4),
10(-5), 10(-6), 10(-7), and 0, respectively. Total RNA was isolated from these
samples and cDNA was synthesized. EWS-FLI-1, a fusion gene formed due to
chromosome translocation, was amplified with PCR. Bone marrow samples from five
patients with Ewing's sarcoma patients with tumor metastasis were examined for
EWS-FLI-1 transcript.
RESULTS: T1 cells could be detected when one was present in 10(6) normal bone
marrow cells. Thus the sensitivity of detection was 10(-6). A 434 bp EWS-FLI-1
transcript was detected in five Ewing's sarcoma patients examined at the time of 
diagnosis. After complete remission, EWS-FLI-1 was still positive on RT-PCR in 3 
patients, although BM pathological examination was negative in all cases.
CONCLUSION: RT-PCR for EWS-FLI-1 is sensitive enough to detect minimal residual
Ewing's sarcoma cells in the bone marrow. It can identify residual tumor cells in
pathologically negative bone marrow specimens.

PMID: 11776597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Jan 1;11(1):13-21.

Chromosome-wide assessment of replication timing for human chromosomes 11q and
21q: disease-related genes in timing-switch regions.

Watanabe Y(1), Fujiyama A, Ichiba Y, Hattori M, Yada T, Sakaki Y, Ikemura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Evolutionary Genetics, Department of Population Genetics, National
Institute of Genetics, Yata 1111, Mishima, Shizuoka-ken 411-8540, Japan.

The completion of the human genome sequence will greatly accelerate development
of a new branch of bioscience and provide fundamental knowledge to biomedical
research. We used the sequence information to measure replication timing of the
entire lengths of human chromosomes 11q and 21q. Megabase-sized zones that
replicate early or late in S phase (thus early/late transition) were defined at
the sequence level. Early zones were more GC-rich and gene-rich than were late
zones, and early/late transitions occurred primarily at positions identical to or
near GC% transitions. We also found the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
frequency was high in the late-replicating and replication-transition regions. In
the early/late transition regions, concentrated occurrence of cancer-related
genes that include CCND1 encoding cyclin D1 (BCL1), FGF4 (KFGF), TIAM1 and FLI1, 
was observed. The transition regions contained other disease-related genes
including APP associated with familial Alzheimer's disease (AD1), SOD1 associated
with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS1) and PTS associated with
phenylketonuria. These findings are discussed with respect to the prediction that
increased DNA damage occurs in replication-transition regions. We propose that
genome-wide assessment of replication timing serves as an efficient strategy for 
identifying disease-related genes.

PMID: 11772995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Oncogene. 2001 Oct 11;20(46):6731-41.

Loss of p16 pathways stabilizes EWS/FLI1 expression and complements EWS/FLI1
mediated transformation.

Deneen B(1), Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Labs, University of 
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Ewings sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNET) are characterized
by the fusion of the N-terminus of the EWS gene to the C-terminus of a member of 
the ETS family of transcription factors. While such fusion proteins are thought
to play dominant oncogenic roles, it is unlikely that a single genetic alteration
by itself will support cellular transformation. Given that EWS/FLI1 is only able 
to transform immortalized 3T3 fibroblasts and that 30% of ES/PNET tumors contain 
a homozygous deletion of the p16 locus, it is likely that other genetic events
are required for EWS/FLI1 oncogenesis. Here we describe a complementary mechanism
utilized in the establishment ES/PNET tumors. EWS/FLI1 has the capacity to induce
apoptosis and growth arrest in normal MEFs. Such effects prevent the
establishment of stable expression of the protein in these cells. When expressed 
in p16, p19(ARF), or p53 deficient MEFs, the apoptotic and growth arrest effects 
are attenuated, creating a environment permissive for stable expression of the
protein. While loss of a single tumor suppressor is sufficient to establish
expression of EWS/FLI1, cellular transformation requires further genetic
perturbation.

PMID: 11709708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Clin Pathol. 2001 Nov;54(11):877-9.

Malignant mesenchymoma of the lower leg.

Kudawara I(1), Araki N, Nakanishi H, Mano M, Ishiguro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Osaka National Hospital, 2-1-14 Hoenzaka,
Chuo-ku, Osaka 540-0006, Japan. kudawara@onh.go.jp

A 24 year old man had a two year history of a painless mass on his right
popliteal region. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a 6 x 8 cm tumour mass 
in the lateral gastrocnemius. Histological examination of the tumour resected by 
radical surgery revealed that it consisted of myoblastic sarcoma and
chondrosarcoma. Immunohistochemical studies were positive for Ki-67 and p53
throughout the area and for S-100 protein in the chondrosarcomatous area; in
addition, they showed partial positivity for muscle common actin (HHF-35), smooth
muscle actin, and myoglobin in the spindle cells. The percentages of Ki-67, p53, 
and p21/WAF1 positive cells in the spindle cell component were 34%, 65.7%, and < 
0.1%, respectively. In addition, staining was negative for pancytokeratin,
desmin, and glial fibrillary acidic protein. The SYT-SSX, TLS-CHOP, and EWS-FLI1 
fusion genes were not detected using the reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Given the results, the definitive histological diagnosis is malignant
mesenchymoma. This is the first report of malignant mesenchymoma of the lower leg
with immunohistochemical and molecular studies.

PMCID: PMC1731318
PMID: 11684725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Hum Pathol. 2001 Oct;32(10):1109-15.

Visceral primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumors: a clinicopathologic and
molecular study.

O'Sullivan MJ(1), Perlman EJ, Furman J, Humphrey PA, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Washington University
Medical Center, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Ewing sarcoma-primitive neuroectodermal tumor (EWS/PNET) belongs to the group of 
pediatric small round blue cell tumors; although EWS/PNET is classically a tumor 
of the soft tissue or bone in children and young adults, individual cases have
been described in patients of all ages. A group of chromosomal translocations
involving the EWS gene and a member of the Ets transcription factor family of
genes has been detected in EWS/PNET, and heterogeneity in the precise breakpoint 
of the translocation has been shown to generate a group of related fusion
transcripts that may have prognostic significance. Within the last decade, the
clinicopathologic spectrum of EWS/PNET has been markedly expanded by recognition 
that the tumor may also have a visceral origin. To determine whether visceral
EWS/PNET has the same pattern of genetic alterations and range of fusion
transcripts as EWS/PNET of bone and soft tissue, we performed
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction-based testing of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissue from a series of visceral tumors for which the diagnosis
of EWS/PNET was well established. Together with additional cases compiled from
the literature, EWS-Fli1 (or a related fusion transcript) was present in 18 of 19
visceral EWS/PNET, with a distribution of transcript types not statistically
different from EWS/PNET of soft tissue and bone (P >.05, chi(2) test). These
results firmly establish the genetic relationship between EWS/PNET of visceral
sites, soft tissue, and bone.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11679946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Gene. 2001 Aug 22;274(1-2):169-77.

Identification of interaction partners for two closely-related members of the ETS
protein family, FLI and ERG.

Deramaudt TB(1), Remy P, Stiegler P.

Author information: 
(1)FRE 2168 du CNRS, Mécanismes Moléculaires de la Division Cellulaire et du
Développement, Institut de Physiologie et de Chimie Biologique, 21 rue René
Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Erratum in
    Gene 2001 Oct 31;278(1-2):265.

Fli and erg are two members of the ETS gene family that encodes transcription
factors related to the c-ets-1 proto-oncogene. The products of the ETS genes act 
as transcriptional effectors in cell proliferation, differentiation, and
oncogenic transformation. FLI and ERG, two closely-related proteins, bind, as do 
all the ETS proteins characterized so far, to DNA sequences with an invariable
central GGA core flanked by preferred nucleotides. Nevertheless,
promoter-specific responses to FLI or ERG may be driven by mechanisms involving
multicomponent complexes. Using a yeast two-hybrid screen, we have identified
several proteins that physically interact with either FLI or ERG proteins used as
bait. The Xenopus developmentally implicated Xvent-2 and Xvent-2B proteins, and
the Xenopus splicing factor RNP-C/U1C physically interact with Xl-FLI and Xl-ERG,
both in the yeast two-hybrid system and in vitro. We also report the potential
interaction of FLI and ERG with Sox-D, a stabilizing protein that may modulate
their transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the possible involvement of the
transcriptional effectors FLI and ERG in mRNA processing, hematopoiesis or in the
control of angiogenesis is suggested through possible interactions with,
respectively, RNA binding proteins and hnRNPs, a repressor of the hematopoietic
pathway (SAP18), and the HAF protein.

PMID: 11675009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Gastroenterol. 2000 Dec;35(12):933-40.

Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET) arising in the
omentum as a multilocular cyst with intracystic hemorrhage.

Tanida S(1), Tanioka F, Inukai M, Yoshioka N, Saida Y, Imai K, Nakamura T,
Kitamura H, Sugimura H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Iwata City Hospital, Iwata, Japan.

A rare case of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising
in the greater omentum in a 41-year-old man is reported. The patient presented
with a hemorrhagic mesenteric cyst that was disclosed by the results of an
abdominal echogram, a computed tomography scan, and magnetic resonance imaging. A
laparotomy showed a multilocular cyst with intra-cystic hemorrhage.
Histologically, the tumor wall consisted of sheets of small round cells separated
by thick desmoplastic stroma. Rosette formations or ribbon-like cell arrangements
were absent. Further pathological examination revealed that the membrane of the
tumor cells was positive for MIC-2, and negative for epithelial membrane antigen,
cytokeratin, and desmin, which are usually positive in intra-abdominal
desmoplastic small round-cell tumors. An EWS/FLI1 fused transcript was detected
by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These findings confirmed the 
diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. The
patient died of tumor recurrence 4 months after his first admission. The
autopsied tumor tissue exhibited neural differentiation in certain regions. To
our knowledge, this is the first case to be reported of Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor arising in the omentum with
unique pathological features and the occurrence of partial neural differentiation
during the clinical course. This case pointed out to us, as gastroenterologists, 
that only thorough examination confirms a definitive diagnosis of small
round-cell tumor of the abdomen, it also shows that Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor should be included in the differential diagnosis 
of cystic lesions in the omentum.

PMID: 11573731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2001 Oct;125(10):1358-60.

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma in a 77-year-old woman.

Cheung CC(1), Kandel RA, Bell RS, Mathews RE, Ghazarian DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma (EES) is a rare soft tissue tumor that is
morphologically indistinguishable from Ewing sarcoma of bone. It is usually found
in young people, but several cases have occurred in patients older than 50 years.
The differential diagnoses include other small, blue round cell tumors (SBRCTs)
and other members of the Ewing family of tumors such as the primitive
neuroectodermal tumor. We present a case of EES in the left inguinal region of a 
77-year-old woman. The tumor was distinguished from other SBRCTs by lack of
immunoreactivity for epithelial, lymphoid, vascular, neuroendocrine, neural,
histiocytic, and muscle markers. Primitive neuroectodermal tumor was excluded
because of the lack of neural differentiation by histologic analysis,
immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy. Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma was
confirmed by characteristic features on histologic analysis, histochemistry,
immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy and by the presence of the
t(11;22)(q24;q12) fusion transcript detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase 
chain reaction. This case serves to remind the reader that EES is not a tumor
that occurs exclusively in young patients.

PMID: 11570916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Hum Pathol. 2001 Sep;32(9):1012-6.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumor arising in the adrenal gland--possible diagnostic
pitfall in pediatric pathology: histologic, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural,
and molecular study.

Kato K(1), Kato Y, Ijiri R, Misugi K, Nanba I, Nagai J, Nagahara N, Kigasawa H,
Toyoda Y, Nishi T, Tanaka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Kanagawa Children's Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.

We present an adrenal Ewing's sarcoma family of tumor (ESFT) arising in an
11-year-old Japanese boy. Although intensive chemoradiotherapy and radical
surgery were performed, the patient died of obstinate disease 1 year and 3 months
after the initial presentation. The primary site (adrenal gland) with radiologic 
findings (with foci of calcification), high titer of serum neuron specific
enolase, and sheets of monotonous primitive rounded cells on histology mostly
favored neuroblastoma. However, a diagnosis of ESFT was confirmed by
immunohistochemical profile, including MIC2-positivity and molecular study
disclosing EWS-FLI1 chimera gene verified by direct sequencing. Recognition of
adrenal ESFT and use of newly developed diagnostic techniques are required for
differential diagnosis of undifferentiated small round cell tumor of the adrenal 
gland.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company

PMID: 11567233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2001 Sep;9(3):255-60.

Immunohistochemical detection of EWS and FLI-1 proteinss in Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumors: comparative analysis with CD99 (MIC-2)
expression.

Llombart-Bosch A(1), Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.
antonio.llombart@uv.es

The molecular analysis of the t(11;22) rearrangement involving EWS/FLI-1 genes is
likely to be of diagnostic value in Ewing sarcoma (ES) and primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET). The objective of the current study was to analyze 
the immunohistochemical expression of the EWS and FLI-1 proteins in a group of
small round-cell tumors (SRCT) to determine their specificity and relevance in
their differential diagnosis. Forty-eight cases-10 conventional ES, 4 large-cell 
ES, 5 PNET, 9 neuroblastomas (NB), 6 undifferentiated synovial sarcomas (SS), 5
rhabdomyosarcomas (RB), 5 non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL), 1 round-cell liposarcoma, 
and 3 mesenchymal chondrosarcomas-were analyzed. Immunocytochemistry was
performed on paraffin sections after the LSAB method and antigen retrieval using 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid buffer (pH 6). Primary antibodies included FLI-1 
(C-19), EWS (N-18), EWS (C-19), and CD99 (MIC-2). As expected, CD-99 expression
was found in 100% of ES/PNET cases, in 2 cases of RB, 2 SS, and 1 NHL. FLI-1
protein was observed as nuclear staining in 16 cases of ES/PNET (84%) and in 4
cases of NHL, 2 NB, and 3 SS. Normal endothelial cells and lymphocytes also were 
positive. EWS expression (both proteins N-18 and C-19) was detected not only in
95% of ES/PNET cases but also in more than 50% of cases from the other tumoral
types (4 of 9 and 7 of 9 NB, 5 of 6 and 6 of 6 SS, 3 of 5 and 5 of 5 RB, and 2 of
5 and 3 of 5 NHL, respectively). Whereas EWS expression does not appear specific 
for ES/PNET, analysis of FLI-1 expression together with CD-99 is a powerful
marker for ES/PNET and important factors in the differential diagnosis of SRCT.

PMID: 11556754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41977-84. Epub 2001 Sep 11.

DNA binding domain-independent pathways are involved in EWS/FLI1-mediated
oncogenesis.

Welford SM(1), Hebert SP, Deneen B, Arvand A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Specific chromosomal translocations involving the ews gene and one of five
members of the ets family of transcription factors create ews/ets fusion genes
that are found in approximately 85% of Ewing's family of tumors. ews/ets fusion
genes consistently maintain an intact and functional ets DNA binding domain (DBD)
in all of these cases. We demonstrate here, however, that EWS/FLI1, the most
prevalent EWS/ETS fusion, activates oncogenic pathways independent of its DBD. In
in vivo tumor assays, EWS/FLI1 molecules with either point mutations or a large
deletion in the ets DBD retain the ability to accelerate tumors in NIH 3T3 cells,
whereas they lose the ability to bind DNA in vitro. Additionally, whereas
inhibition of DBD functions of EWS/FLI1 with a dominant negative form of FLI1 is 
sufficient to inhibit anchorage-independent growth in NIH 3T3 cells, it is
ineffective in inhibiting tumor growth in SCID mice. Usage of this dominant
negative construct in a Ewing's tumor cell line, however, does reduce the rate of
tumor formation, supporting the need for a functional DBD in this context.
Together, these results suggest that EWS/FLI1 induces both DBD-dependent and
DBD-independent oncogenic pathways.

PMID: 11553628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 26;276(43):39508-11. Epub 2001 Sep 10.

Interleukin-6 regulation of the human DNA methyltransferase (HDNMT) gene in human
erythroleukemia cells.

Hodge DR(1), Xiao W, Clausen PA, Heidecker G, Szyf M, Farrar WL.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, NCI-Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, MD
21702, USA. hodge@mail.ncifcrf.gov

Methylation of mammalian DNA by the DNA methyltransferase enzyme (dnmt-1) at CpG 
dinucleotide sequences has been recognized as an important epigenetic control
mechanism in regulating the expression of cellular genes (Yen, R. W., Vertino, P.
M., Nelkin, B. D., Yu, J. J., el-Deiry, W., Cumaraswamy, A., Lennon, G. G.,
Trask, B. J., Celano, P., and Baylin, S. B. (1992) Nucleic Acids Res. 20,
2287-2291; Ramchandani, S., Bigey, P., and Szyf, M. (1998) Biol. Chem. 379,
535-5401). Here we show that interleukin (IL)-6 regulates the methyltransferase
promoter and resulting enzyme activity, which requires transcriptional activation
by the Fli-1 transcription factor (Spyropoulos, D. D., Pharr, P. N., Lavenburg,
K. R., Jackers, P., Papas, T. S., Ogawa, M., and Watson, D. K. (1998) Mol. Cell. 
Biol. 15, 5643-5652). The data suggest that inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6
may exert many epigenetic changes in cells via the regulation of the
methyltransferase gene. Furthermore, IL-6 regulation of transcription factors
like Fli-1, which can help to direct cells along opposing differentiation
pathways, may in fact be reflected in part by their ability to regulate the
methylation of cellular genes.

PMID: 11551897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Oct;32(2):164-71.

Genetic imbalances revealed by comparative genomic hybridization in Ewing tumors.

Ozaki T(1), Paulussen M, Poremba C, Brinkschmidt C, Rerin J, Ahrens S, Hoffmann
C, Hillmann A, Wai D, Schaefer KL, Boecker W, Juergens H, Winkelmann W,
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Westfälische Wilhelms-University, Domagkstrasse
17, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Ewing tumors are characterized by reciprocal translocations involving the EWS
gene on 22q12 fused to ETS transcription-factor family members. Little is known
about further aberrations contributing to tumor development and progression.
Sixty-two frozen tumors with known EWS rearrangements (52 primary tumors, 10
relapses) of ET patients registered in the EICESS protocol were analyzed by
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). The median number of changes in 52
primary and 10 relapsed cases was 2.5 and 5.0 per tumor (P = 0.153). Frequent
abnormalities included gains of chromosomes 8, 12, 20, and 1q and losses of 16q
and 19q. Neither number nor type of aberration was associated with histology,
tumor size, disease stage, tumor localization, or histologic tumor response to
chemotherapy. Among the 52 primary tumors, 26 with Type I fusion (EWS exon 7 to
FLI1 exon 6) and 26 with other fusion types had a median of 2.0 and 3.0
aberrations per tumor, respectively (P = 0.031). Combinations of gains of
chromosomes 8 and 12, gains of chromosome 20, and either gains of 8q or 18q and
losses of 16q and 17p frequently occurred. The cumulative overall survival (OAS) 
was different between 35 patients with <5 aberrations and 13 patients with > or
=5 aberrations (P = 0.009). Univariate analysis showed that patients with gains
of 1q, 2q, 12, and 20 or losses of 16q and 17p had significantly lower OAS than
those without aberrations. By multivariate analysis, loss of 16q (relative risk
[RR] = 5.3; P = 0.0006) was an independent prognostic factor.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11550284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Cancer. 2001 Sep;93(6):769-72.

No EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts in giant-cell tumors of bone.

Panagopoulos I(1), Mertens F, Domanski HA, Isaksson M, Brosjö O, Gustafson P,
Mandahl N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
ioannis.ganagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

Giant-cell tumor of bone (GCT) is a locally aggressive neoplasm of unknown
etiology and pathogenesis. Cytogenetically, no consistent chromosomal
alterations, apart from telomeric associations involving various chromosome ends,
have been described. Recently, however, it was reported that by using highly
sensitive nested RT-PCR, a high proportion of GCT displays chimeric EWS/FLI1
fusion transcripts, i.e., the molecular genetic feature previously known to be
strongly associated with the Ewing family of tumors. Thus, we decided to perform 
single-step and nested RT-PCR analyses on fresh frozen samples from 10 cases of
GCT, all of which had also been subjected to cytogenetic analysis. After
short-term culturing, none of the samples displayed any t(11;22)(q24;q12), the
translocation characteristically giving rise to the EWS/FLI1 fusion, nor any
other type of rearrangement of 11q24 or 22q12. Furthermore, in none of the cases 
did the RT-PCR analysis, whether single step or nested, result in products
corresponding to a hybrid EWS/FLI1 transcript. On the basis of these results, we 
conclude that translocations leading to fusion of the EWS and FLI1 genes are not 
part of the pathogenesis of GCT.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11519035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cancer Res. 2001 Aug 15;61(16):5992-7.

The EWS protein is dispensable for Ewing tumor growth.

Kovar H(1), Jug G, Hattinger C, Spahn L, Aryee DN, Ambros PF, Zoubek A, Gadner H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Kinderspitalgasse
6, 1090 Vienna, Austria. kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

EWS encodes a ubiquitously expressed RNA binding protein with largely unknown
function. In Ewing sarcoma family tumors (EFT), one allele is rearranged with an 
ETS gene. This is the first description of an EFT with a complete EWS deficiency 
in the presence of two copies of a rearranged chromosome 22 carrying an
interstitial EWS-FLI1 translocation. Absence of EWS protein suggested that it is 
dispensable for EFT growth. By sequencing of EWS cDNA from unrelated EFTs, we
excluded inactivation of EWS as a general mechanism in EFT pathogenesis. Rather, 
EWS was found to be uniformly expressed in two splicing variants of similar
abundancy, EWSalpha and EWSbeta, which differ in a single amino acid. Three EWS
negative cell lines were established, which will serve as valuable models to
study normal and aberrant EWS function upon reintroduction into the tumor cells.

PMID: 11507040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Aug;12(8):435-45.

Inducible expression of the megakaryocyte-specific gene glycoprotein IX is
mediated through an Ets binding site and involves upstream activation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase.

Eisbacher M(1), Khachigian LM, Khin TH, Holmes ML, Chong BH.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, School of Pathology,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2217, Australia.

Glycoprotein IX is a megakaryocyte-specific gene crucial for adequate and
functional expression of the Glycoprotein Ib-IX complex. This study used phorbol 
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and thrombopoietin (TPO)-induced differentiation of
Dami and UT-7 cells, respectively, to investigate the regulation of inducible
Glycoprotein IX expression during megakaryocyte differentiation. PMA and TPO were
able to modulate GPIX expression at mRNA and protein levels. Transient
transfection studies using nested 5'-deletions and mutations of the GPIX promoter
demonstrated the absolute requirement of an inverted Ets site 5'-ACTTCCT-3' for
inducible reporter gene expression. The upstream signaling events associated with
PMA and TPO-inducible expression of GPIX were also investigated. The
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
inhibitor PD98059 inhibited both PMA and TPO-inducible reporter activity in a
dose-dependent manner, whereas inhibition of p38/MAPK had no significant effect. 
The protein kinase C inhibitor GF109203X failed to inhibit TPO-activation of the 
GPIX promoter in UT-7 cells. This study demonstrates that inducible expression in
response to either PMA or TPO is mediated through the Ets site in the proximal
promoter of GPIX and is dependent upon the upstream activation of
MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated kinase.

PMID: 11504709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Int J Hematol. 2001 Jun;73(4):463-8.

Defective megakaryopoiesis and abnormal erythroid development in Fli-1
gene-targeted mice.

Kawada H(1), Ito T, Pharr PN, Spyropoulos DD, Watson DK, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, USA.

Mouse embryos homozygous for a targeted disruption in the Fli-1 gene show
hemorrhage into the neural tube and brain on embryonic day (E)11.0 and die
shortly thereafter. Livers from the mutant embryos contain drastically reduced
numbers of pronormoblasts, basophilic normoblasts, and colony-forming cells. To
determine the nature of impaired hematopoiesis, we carried out cell culture
studies of mutant embryonic stem (ES) cells and cells from the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region of E10.0 mutant embryos. There was a
striking reduction in the number of megakaryocytes in cultures of mutant AGM
cells compared with cultures of AGM cells from wild-type or heterozygous embryos.
Furthermore, Fli-1 mutant ES cells failed to produce megakaryocyte colonies and
multilineage colonies containing megakaryocytes. Consistent with the observed
defect in megakaryopoiesis, we also demonstrated the down-regulation of c-mpl in 
the AGM of mutant embryos. The percentages of pronormoblasts and basophilic
normoblasts were significantly reduced in cultures of mutant AGM embryos, which
contained primarily polychromatophilic and orthochromatic normoblasts. These
results provide further evidence for the role of Fli-1 in the regulation of
hematopoiesis and for c-mpl as a Fli-1 target gene.

PMID: 11503960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Aug;25(8):1061-6.

Expression of Fli-1, a nuclear transcription factor, distinguishes vascular
neoplasms from potential mimics.

Folpe AL(1), Chand EM, Goldblum JR, Weiss SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA. afolpe@bellsouth.net

Fli-1 protein, a member of the ETS family of DNAbinding transcription factors, is
involved in cellular proliferation and tumorigenesis. Approximately 90% of
Ewing's sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNET) have a specific
translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which results in fusion of EWS to Fli-1, and
production of an EWS-Fli-1 fusion protein. We have recently shown that
immunohistochemistry for the carboxy terminal of Fli-1 protein is sensitive and
highly specific for the diagnosis of ES/PNET. In our earlier study we noted that 
among normal tissues only endothelial cells and small lymphocytes expressed
Fli-1. Fli-1 expression in vascular neoplasms has not been previously studied.
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue from 54 vascular tumors and 75
nonvascular tumors were immunostained for Fli-1 (1:120, Sc 356, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), after steam heat-induced epitope retrieval. Only 
cases with >10% of cells showing nuclear staining were accepted as positive.
Cases without positive internal controls (endothelium and small lymphocytes) were
not scored. Positive internal controls were present in 122 of 129 cases (95%).
One vascular tumor (Kaposi's sarcoma) and 7 nonvascular tumors (2 epithelioid
sarcomas and 5 carcinomas) without internal controls were not scored. Fli-1 was
expressed by 50 of 53 vascular tumors scored (94%), including 20 of 22
angiosarcomas, 11 of 12 hemangioendotheliomas, 7 of 7 hemangiomas, and 12 of 12
Kaposi's sarcomas. In contrast, Fli-1 expression was absent in the 68 nonvascular
tumors scored (0 of 68), including 16 sarcomas, 7 melanomas, and 45 carcinomas.
The results of this study strongly suggest a role for Fli-1 as a novel marker of 
both benign and malignant vascular tumors. The sensitivity (94%) and specificity 
(100%) of Fli-1 with regards to the cases evaluated in this study equal or exceed
those of the established vascular markers, CD31, CD34, and von Willebrand factor.
As the first nuclear, rather than cytoplasmic or membranous marker of
endothelium, Fli-1 immunostaining also generally lacks cytoplasmic staining
artifacts that are the result of endogenous peroxidases or biotin.

PMID: 11474291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(1-2):29-35.

Fine-mapping of cytogenetically undetectable EWS/ERG fusions on DNA fibers of
Ewing tumors.

Hattinger CM(1), Rumpler S, Kovar H, Ambros PF.

Author information: 
(1)CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna,
Austria. ClaudiaHattinger@web.de

In contrast to the EWS/FLI1 fusion which is represented by a t(11;22)(q24;q12),
EWS/ERG fusions are frequently cytogenetically not detectable. Three Ewing tumors
(ET), two with apparently normal chromosomes 21 and 22, and one ET with a
t(2;22)(p25;q12), were studied by FISH on interphase nuclei, metaphase
chromosomes and on DNA fibers. EWS/ERG transcripts were detected by RT-PCR in all
cases. FISH, using cosmids located proximally (F10, G9) and distally (F7) to the 
EWS breakpoint region, revealed no detectable separation of these probes in two
cases. In contrast, co-hybridization of probe PT1526 containing the ERG
breakpoint region with G9 revealed the juxtaposition of two signals per
interphase nucleus in all three cases indicating the EWS/ERG fusions. Chromosome 
preparations displayed the juxtaposed signals on the der(22), and hybridization
signals of the probes PT1526 and G9 on the non-rearranged chromosomes 21 and 22
in all cases, respectively. The PT1526 signal on the der(21) was seen only in
cases 1 and 2. These results were confirmed by triple-target FISH on tumor DNA
fibers. In all three cases, the hybridization pattern F10 - G9 - PT1526 indicates
a centromere to telomere orientation. This finding suggests that EWS/ERG fusions 
in ETs may be generated by an inversion of the ERG gene or a part thereof
followed by an insertion into the EWS gene on the der(22). Double-target FISH on 
interphase nuclei using probes flanking the EWS breakpoint region and probe
PT1526 enables the detection of virtually all 22q12 rearrangements in ETs, thus
providing a reliable diagnostic assay.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11474174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Biotechnol. 2001 Jun;18(2):97-104.

A method for accurate detection of translocation junctions in Ewing family of
tumors.

Morishita T(1), Bolander ME, Zhang K, Tamai S, Mii Y, Sarkar G.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, 3-15, Medical Sciences Building, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

The Ewing family of tumors (ET) generally contain translocations involving the
EWS gene and the FLI or ERG genes. Identification of the translocation confirms
the diagnosis of ET. Currently, diagnosis of the translocation is made by several
methods. In general, these methods require different primer sets for amplifying
different translocations and subsequent efforts to identify the amplified
product. The need to employ different sets of primers to amplify different
translocation junctions presents some limitations. We have developed a method
based on PCR with consensus primers followed by direct automated sequencing of
the amplified product. With this method we have correctly determined known as
well as unknown ET-associated EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocations in appropriate
specimens. Use of our consensus primers eliminates the need for separate PCRs to 
amplify EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocation junctions, and because direct
sequencing is used for confirming the identity of the amplification product, the 
accuracy of detection becomes 100%. The method might also accurately diagnose
ET-associated translocations other than EWS-FLI and EWS-ERG translocations.

PMID: 11471459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Int J Surg Pathol. 2001 Jan;9(1):7-17.

Ewing tumor: tumor biology and clinical applications.

de Alava E(1), Pardo J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

The Ewing tumor family includes classical Ewing's sarcoma of bone and soft
tissues, peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNET), Askin tumor, and
other less frequent variants. This group of tumors is defined by the consistent
presence of chromosomal translocations resulting in gene fusions between EWS gene
and a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, mainly FLI1 and ERG.
Analogous fusions are seen in other solid developmental tumors, like desmoplastic
small round cell tumor. These fusions, which are consistently present and
tumor-specific, control transcription of several target genes, largely unknown
but critical to cell proliferation and differentiation. Therefore, gene fusions
are useful to diagnose and classify small round cell tumors, have prognostic
significance, are probably useful to detect micrometastasis and monitor minimal
residual disease, and are potential therapeutic targets. Secondary molecular
alterations, which include mutations of cell cycle regulatory genes, are not
tumor-specific but are related to progression and may have prognostic value. The 
Ewing tumor family represents a paradigm of the application of the knowledge of
biology of neoplasia to the clinical management of patients.

PMID: 11469351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Eur Urol. 2001 May;39(5):613-7.

Metastatic primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney in adults.

Casella R(1), Moch H, Rochlitz C, Meier V, Seifert B, Mihatsch MJ, Gasser TC.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Clinic, University Hospital, Basel, Switzerland.
Rcasella@www.uro.bcm.tm.edu

OBJECTIVE: Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) of the kidney are rare and
highly aggressive malignancies. The purpose of our study was to present
information about the management of patients with metastatic disease.
METHODS: The records of 2 patients (30-year-old female and 32-year-old male) with
metastatic PNET of the kidney were reviewed and our data compared with the
literature.
RESULTS: Neither clinical evaluation nor radiological methods allowed to
distinguish PNET from renal cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry revealed strong 
positivity for CD99 in tumor 1 and weak positivity for NSE and vimentin in both
tumors. In tumor 2, EWS/FLI1 translocation was detected by RT-PCR. Patient 1
underwent nephrectomy, seven cycles of polychemotherapy, two cycles of high-dose 
chemotherapy, autologous bone marrow rescue, radiotherapy of suspicious skeletal 
foci and is without evidence of recurrent disease 28 months after therapy.
Patient 2 underwent six cycles of polychemotherapy, nephrectomy, high-dose
chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and abdominal radiotherapy. Because of relapse
high-dose chemotherapy with stem cell rescue was not performed. He underwent
three further cycles of polychemotherapy and died one year after diagnosis due to
cerebral metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of renal PNET must be considered in young patients
with renal neoplasm, particularly those with advanced disease at presentation.
Achieving exact diagnosis has important clinical consequences because
polychemotherapy and high-dose chemotherapy may lead to dramatic tumor reduction 
or even complete remission.

PMID: 11464048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Onkologie. 2000 Oct;23(5):416-422.

Molecular Cytogenetics in Ewing Tumors: Diagnostic and Prognostic Information.

Hattinger CM(1), Zoubek A, Ambros PF.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsinstitut für krebskranke Kinder im St. Anna Kinderspital, Wien.

Ewing tumors (ETs) are characterized by rearrangements of the EWS gene located in
22q12 and a high MIC2 expression. In 85% of ETs, the t(11;22)(q24;q12) generates 
chimeric fusion transcripts between the EWS and the FLI1 gene, whereas in the
remaining cases the EWS gene is rearranged with different partners of the ETS
oncogene family. Besides classical cytogenetic analysis, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) and RT-PCR can be used to demonstrate these 22q12
rearrangements which are pathognomonic for ETs. To visualize 22q12 rearrangements
in individual cells, DNA probes flanking the EWS-R1 breakpoint region on
chromosome 22 can be hybridized in double-target FISH experiments on tumor cell
preparations. Intact chromosomes 22 are indicated by juxtaposition of the DNA
probes, whereas rearrangements of the EWS gene separate the hybridization
signals. In addition to 22q12 rearrangements, numerical aberrations of
chromosomes 8 and 12 can be observed in about 50% of ETs, deletions at the short 
arm of chromosome 1 and der (16)t(1;16)(q12;q11.2) chromosomes in about 20% of
the cases. Numerical aberrations, deletions at 1p36.3, and the t(1;16) were
detected by using double-target FISH on touch, cytospin, and chromosome
preparations, on frozen and paraffin sections and isolated deparaffinized nuclei.
So far, numerical aberrations of chromosomes 8 and 12 did not show prognostic
impact. However, deletions at 1p36.3 and imbalances between the long and short
arms of chromosome 1 were associated with adverse clinical outcome in a group of 
patients with localized disease. Copyright 2000 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg

PMID: 11441235  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


443. Cancer Res. 2001 Jul 1;61(13):5311-7.

The COOH-terminal domain of FLI-1 is necessary for full tumorigenesis and
transcriptional modulation by EWS/FLI-1.

Arvand A(1), Welford SM, Teitell MA, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, USA.

More than 85% of Ewing's family tumors carry a specific chromosomal translocation
that fuses the NH(2) terminus of the EWS gene to the COOH terminus of the FLI1
transcription factor. It has been shown previously that both the transactivation 
domain encoded by EWS and the DNA binding domain of FLI1 were necessary for
transforming cells to anchorage independence. We now report that a COOH-terminal 
domain in addition to the FLI1 DNA binding domain is necessary to promote
cellular transformation. NIH 3T3 cells expressing a COOH-terminal deletion mutant
(EWS/FLI1 DeltaC) have a greatly reduced capability to form colonies in soft agar
and tumors in severe combined immunodeficient mice. The rate of tumor formation
for NIH 3T3 that express EWS/FLI1 DeltaC is 50 days, whereas EWS/FLI1 forms
tumors within 22 days. In addition, cells expressing the EWS/FLI1 DeltaC mutant
failed to completely demonstrate the round-cell histology that is seen in both
Ewing's tumor cell lines and NIH 3T3 cells expressing full-length EWS/FLI1.
Northern and microarray analyses were performed to assess the effect of loss of
the FLI1 COOH terminus on transcriptional modulation of EWS/FLI1 target genes. We
found that although EWS/FLI1 DeltaC up-regulates smaller numbers of genes (21
genes) compared with EWS/FLI1 (34 genes), 41% of the EWS/FLI1 targets were also
up-regulated by EWS/FLI1 DeltaC. On the other hand, EWS/FLI1 DeltaC is unable to 
down-regulate genes (3 genes) as efficiently as EWS/FLI1 (39 genes) with only one
target gene repressed by both fusion constructs. Our study indicates that the
EWS/FLI1 transcription factor has strong transcriptional activating as well as
repressing properties and suggests that transcriptional activation and repression
of target genes may occur through biochemically different mechanisms.

PMID: 11431376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Oncogene. 2001 May 31;20(25):3258-65.

Analysis of the expression of cell cycle regulators in Ewing cell lines:
EWS-FLI-1 modulates p57KIP2and c-Myc expression.

Dauphinot L(1), De Oliveira C, Melot T, Sevenet N, Thomas V, Weissman BE,
Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U509, Laboratoire de Pathologie Moléculaire des Cancers, Institut
Curie, 26 rue d'Ulm, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Ewing tumour is characterized by specific chromosome translocations which fuse
EWS to a subset of genes encoding ETS transcription factors, most frequently
FLI-1. We report the analysis of the expression of various cell cycle regulators 
both in Ewing tumour derived cell lines and in different cellular models with
either inducible or constitutive EWS-FLI-1 cDNA expression. In Ewing cell lines, 
cyclin D1, CDK4, Rb, p27KIP1 and c-Myc were consistently highly expressed whereas
p57KIP2, p15INK4B and p14ARF demonstrated undetectable or low expression levels. 
The amount of p16INK4A, p21CIP1, p18INKAC and CDK6 was variable from one cell
line to the other. The inducible expression of EWS-FLI-1 led to a strong
upregulation of c-Myc and a considerable downregulation of p57KIP2. Other
proteins did not show evident modification. High c-Myc and very low p57KIP2
expression levels were also observed in neuroblastoma NGP cells constitutively
expressing EWS-FLI-1 as compared to parental cells. Analysis of the p57KIP2
promoter indicated that EWS-FLI-1 downregulates, possibly through an indirect
mechanism, the transcription of this gene. Finally, we show that ectopic
expression of p57KIP2 in Ewing cells blocks proliferation through a complete G1
arrest. These results suggest that the modulation of p57(KIP2) expression by
EWS-FLI-1 is a fundamental step in Ewing tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11423975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Cancer Res. 2001 May 1;61(9):3586-90.

Oncogenic TLS/ERG and EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins inhibit RNA splicing mediated by 
YB-1 protein.

Chansky HA(1), Hu M, Hickstein DD, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The translocation liposarcoma protein TLS has recently been shown to function as 
an adapter molecule coupling gene transcription to RNA splicing. Here we
demonstrate that YB-1, a protein known to play important roles in transcription
and translation, interacts with the COOH-terminal domains of TLS and the
structurally related Ewing's sarcoma protein EWS. Through this interaction, YB-1 
is recruited to RNA polymerase II and promotes splicing of E1A pre-mRNA to the
13S isoform. This splicing function of YB-1 is inhibited by exogenous TLS/ERG or 
EWS/Fli-1 fusion proteins, which bind to RNA polymerase II but fail to recruit
the YB-1 protein. In Ewing's sarcoma cells that express endogenous EWS/Fli-1,
this linkage between YB-1 and RNA Pol II via EWS (or TLS) was found to be
defective. Together, these results suggest that TLS and EWS fusion proteins may
contribute to malignant transformation through disruption of RNA splicing
mediated by TLS- and EWS-binding proteins such as YB-1.

PMID: 11325824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):626-33.

PDGF-C is an EWS/FLI induced transforming growth factor in Ewing family tumors.

Zwerner JP(1), May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.

The aberrant transcription factors associated with many human malignancies
function by deregulation of tumorigenic pathways. However, identification of
these pathways has come slowly. Virtually all cases of Ewing's Sarcoma and
peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal Tumor (PNET) are associated with aberrant
transcription factors which fuse amino-terminal EWS with the DNA binding moiety
of an ETS transcription factor (FLI-1 in 90% of cases). Attempts to identify the 
downstream targets of these chimeras in the Ewing Family Tumors (EFT) on the
basis of differential gene regulation have produced little association with tumor
biology. As an alternative approach, we have used highly efficient retroviral
systems to biologically screen cDNA derived from cells transformed by EWS/FLI-1. 
We have identified the recently described PDGF-C as target of EWS/ETS
transcriptional deregulation. This transcriptional deregulation is specific to
EWS/FLI. PDGF-C possesses substantial biologic activity in vitro and in vivo. It 
is expressed in EFT cell lines and in primary tumors. Within these EFT cell
lines, PDGF-C expression is dependent upon EWS/FLI activity. These results
suggest that PDGF-C may be a significant mediator of EWS/FLI driven oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3860748
PMID: 11313995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 2001 Mar 29;20(14):1756-64.

Phosphorylation of the EWS IQ domain regulates transcriptional activity of the
EWS/ATF1 and EWS/FLI1 fusion proteins.

Olsen RJ(1), Hinrichs SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska, NE 69198-6495, USA.

Specific chromosomal translocations are commonly present in mesenchymal tumors
and frequently involve genes encoding transcription factors. The combination of
different domains from unrelated genes results in chimeric proteins believed to
play a key role in the neoplastic process. The EWS/ATF1 and EWS/FLI1 fusion
proteins associated with Clear Cell Sarcoma and Ewing's Sarcoma, respectively,
were utilized to study the comparative effect of the EWS component on two
different DNA binding partners. A potential regulatory site within the EWS IQ
domain at serine266 was identified, and studies were performed to demonstrate
that EWS is phosphorylated in cells and phosphorylation of serine266 regulates
transcriptional activity. Mutational analysis showed that elimination of
phosphorylation significantly reduced DNA binding activity by EMSA and reporter
activation in luciferase assays, whereas phosphorylation mimicry resulted in a
partial restoration to wild-type levels. Phosphorylation was also observed to
mediate cellular compartmentalization. These studies confirm that IQ domain
phosphorylation regulates the transcriptional activity of exogenous EWS/ATF1 and 
EWS/FLI1 and suggests that post-translational modifications may potentiate the
neoplastic behavior of fusion proteins in general. Since the IQ domain is
incorporated into only a subset of fusion transcripts, these findings may provide
insight into the molecular mechanism underlying clinical heterogeneity observed
in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 11313922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;33(4):391-407.

The Ets family contains transcriptional activators and repressors involved in
angiogenesis.

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Soncin F, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1, rue du Professeur Calmette, BP 447, 59021,
Lille Cedex, France.

The Ets family contains a growing number of transcriptional activators and
inhibitors, which activity is regulated by phosphorylation and protein-protein
interactions. Among these factors, Ets1, Erg1 and Fli1 are expressed in
endothelial cells during angiogenesis in normal and pathological development. The
expression of these transcription factors is regulated by angiogenic factors in
cultured endothelial cells, as well as by various stresses occurring during
angiogenesis. Transfection experiments and transgenic mice analysis revealed that
Ets family members are involved in the transcriptional regulation of endothelial 
specific genes such as those encoding Tie1 and -2, VEGFR1 and -2 and VE-Cadherin.
In vitro studies plead for a role of Ets family members in endothelial cell
adhesion, spreading and motility. Gene inactivation experiments show that Ets1 is
dispensable for embryonic development. The phenotype of knocked-out embryos
indicates that Tel is required for maintenance of the developing vascular network
in the yolk sac. Altogether, we suggest that Ets family members act both
positively and negatively during the different steps of the angiogenic process.
The regulation of the initiation of gene transcription arises from the combined
activity of different transcriptional regulators. Therefore very few
transcription factors are specific for a physiological process, or a given cell
type. The transcriptional network that regulates blood vessel formation involves 
transcription factors which are expressed in a variety of situations. The Lung
Kruppel Like Factor (LKLF) which is required for blood vessel stabilisation
during murine development is also expressed in the primitive vertebrae and in the
lung of the adult (C.T. Kuo, M.L. Veselits, K.P. Barton, M.M. Lu, C. Clendenin,
J.M. Leiden, The LKLF transcription factor is required for normal tunica media
formation and blood vessel stabilisation during murine embryogenesis, Genes Dev. 
11 (22) (1997) 2996-3006). Scl/Tal1 which is essential for angiogenic remodelling
of the yolk sac capillary network (J.E. Visvader, Y. Fujiwara, S.H. Orkin,
Unsuspected role for the T-cell leukemia protein SCL/tal-1 in vascular
development, Genes Dev. 12 (4) (1998) 473-479), is involved in blood cell
development and is also expressed in the developing brain. The EPAS transcription
factor which was thought to be endothelial cell specific in the mouse embryo (H. 
Tian, S.L. McKnight, D.W. Russell, Endothelial PAS domain protein 1 (EPAS1), a
transcription factor selectively expressed in endothelial cells, Genes Dev. 11
(1) (1997) 72-82) is also expressed in the liver, kidney and cells of the
sympathetic nervous system of the chick embryo (J. Favier, H. Kempf, P. Corvol,
J.M. Gasc, Cloning and expression pattern of EPAS1 in the chicken embryo.
Colocalization with tyrosine hydroxylase, FEBS Lett. 462 (1-2) (1999) 19-24).
Ets1, which expression was originally detected in lymphoid cells of adult
tissues, has been the first transcription factor to be identified in endothelial 
cells during angiogenesis in the embryo (B. Vandenbunder, L. Pardanaud, T.
Jaffredo, M.A. Mirabel, D. Stehelin, Complementary patterns of expression of
c-etsl, c-myb and c-myc in the blood-forming system of the chick embryo,
Development 107 (1989) 265-274 [5]) and in tumours (N. Wernert, M.B. Raes, P.
Lassalle, M.P. Dehouck, B. Gosselin, B. Vandenbunder, D. Stehelin, The c-ets 1
proto-oncogene is a transcription factor expressed in endothelial cells during
tumor vascularisation and other forms of angiogenesis in man, Am. J. Path. 140
(1992) 119-127 [6]). Since then, the Ets family has extended and this review will
emphasise the relationships between these factors and angiogenesis.

PMID: 11312108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2001 Apr;33(4):347-55.

Selective expression of erg isoforms in human endothelial cells.

Hewett PW(1), Nishi K, Daft EL, Clifford Murray J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, CRC Department of Clinical Oncology,
University of Nottingham, City Hospital, Hucknall Rd, NG5 1PB, Nottingham, UK.
peter.hewett@nott.ac.uk

Erg and Fli-1 are closely related members of the ets family of transcription
factors. There are at least five human Erg isoforms (Erg-1, Erg-2,
Erg-3/p55(Erg), p49(Erg) and p38(Erg)) produced through differential mRNA
splicing and alternative use of translational start codons. However, relatively
little is known about the expression or function of these isoforms in vitro or
their distribution in vivo. We used RT-PCR to screen a panel of primary and
established human cell lines for erg and fli-1 consensus sequences. Whilst fli-1 
was expressed in several human cell types, erg was detected mainly in endothelial
cells. To identify which erg isoforms are expressed in endothelial cells we used 
RT-PCR, Northern blotting and 5'-RACE. Erg-3/p55(Erg) and p38(Erg)/p38(Erg)-like 
transcripts were detected in both microvascular and large vessel endothelial
cells affinity-purified from different vascular beds. Moreover, these erg
isoforms were present in both freshly isolated, and confluent endothelial cells
following several passages in culture, indicating that endothelial erg expression
in vitro may be broadly representative of that in vivo. The selective expression 
of the Erg-3/p55(Erg) and p38(Erg)/p38(Erg)-like isoforms in endothelial cells
indicates their involvement in the regulation of endothelial-restricted genes.

PMID: 11312105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Neuropathology. 2001 Mar;21(1):40-4.

Alternative EWS-FLI1 fusion gene and MIC2 expression in peripheral and central
primitive neuroectodermal tumors.

Ishii N(1), Hiraga H, Sawamura Y, Shinohe Y, Nagashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) occur either in the central nervous
system (CNS; central PNET, cPNET) or in the peripheral sites (peripheral PNET,
pPNET). Recent molecular approaches have been defining a new concept of PNET,
that is, the pPNET including Ewing's sarcoma (ES) which expresses MIC2
glycoprotein and shows the specific chimeric gene of EWS-FLI1. The expression of 
MIC2 and the genetic rearrangement of EWS-FLI1 are considered to be highly
specific to the pPNET/ES. This study examined the expression of MIC2 and EWS-FLI1
gene by means of immunohistochemistry and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) on various small round cell tumors originating in the CNS or
non-CNS organs. All peripheral PNET tested expressed MIC2 and were positive for
EWS-FLI1 (11/11). In contrast, all cPNET and other blastic CNS tumors were
negative for MIC2: medulloblastoma (0/3), cerebral PNET (0/2), spinal PNET (0/2),
glioblastoma (0/2), retinoblastoma (0/3), and pineoblastoma (0/2). These
MIC2-negative tumors were also negative for the chimeric gene product of
EWS-FLI1. Interestingly, one PNET originating in the intracranial dura mater was 
positive for both MIC2 and EWS-FLI1 fusion gene. The results indicate that cPNET 
lacks any genetic or protein markers, except for a meningeal PNET which falls
into the same phenotypic spectrum of pPNET.

PMID: 11304041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 22;276(25):22317-22. Epub 2001 Apr 11.

EWS/FLI alters 5'-splice site selection.

Knoop LL(1), Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The chimeric gene EWS/FLI is present in at least 85% of Ewing's sarcomas as a
result of chromosomal translocations. The resulting fusion protein contains the N
terminus of the RNA-binding protein EWS and the ETS DNA-binding domain of the
transcription factor FLI-1. Although EWS/FLI binds DNA and activates
transcription, both EWS and EWS/FLI also interact with SF1 and U1C, essential
components of the splicing machinery. Therefore, we tested the ability of EWS and
EWS/FLI to alter 5'-splice site selection using an E1A gene in vivo splicing
assay. We found that EWS/FLI, but not EWS, interfered with heterogeneous nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein A1-dependent splice site selection of E1A. Mutational analysis 
of EWS/FLI revealed that the ability to affect pre-mRNA splicing coincided with
transforming activity. Therefore, EWS/FLI has the ability to influence splicing
as well as transcription.

PMID: 11301318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 15;276(24):20839-48. Epub 2001 Mar 16.

Fli-1 inhibits collagen type I production in dermal fibroblasts via an
Sp1-dependent pathway.

Czuwara-Ladykowska J(1), Shirasaki F, Jackers P, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29401, USA.

Fibrosis is characterized by the excessive deposition of extracellular matrix
(ECM), especially collagen. Because Ets factors are implicated in physiological
and pathological ECM remodeling, the aim of this study was to investigate the
role of Ets factors in collagen production. We demonstrate that the expression of
collagenous proteins and collagen alpha2(I) (COL1A2) mRNA was inhibited following
stable transfection of Fli-1 in dermal fibroblasts. Subsequent analysis of the
COL1A2 promoter identified a critical Ets binding site that mediates Fli-1
inhibition. In contrast, Ets-1 stimulates COL1A2 promoter activity. In vitro
binding assays demonstrate that both Fli-1 and Ets-1 form DNA-protein complexes
with sequences present in COL1A2 promoter. Furthermore, Fli-1 binding to the
COL1A2 is enhanced via Sp1-dependent interaction. Studies using Fli-1 dominant
interference and DNA binding mutants indicate that Fli-1 inhibition is mediated
by both direct (DNA binding) and indirect (via protein-protein interaction)
mechanisms and that Sp1 is an important mediator of the Fli-1 function.
Furthermore, experiments using the Gal4 system in the context of different cell
types as well as experiments with the COL1A2 promoter in different cell lines
demonstrate that the direction and magnitude of the effect of Fli-1 is promoter- 
and cell context-specific. We propose that Fli-1 inhibits COL1A2 promoter
activity by competition with Ets-1. In addition, we postulate that another factor
(co-repressor) may be required for maximal inhibition after recruitment to the
Fli-1-Sp1 complex. We conclude that the ratio of Fli-1 to Ets-1 and the presence 
of co-regulatory proteins ultimately control ECM production in fibroblasts.

PMID: 11278621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2001 Mar;10(1):2-8.

Translocation (10;11;22)(p14;q24;q12) characterized by fluorescence in situ
hybridization in a case of Ewing's tumor.

Noguera R(1), Pellín A, Navarro S, Carda C, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.
Rosa.Noguera@uv.es

It is well recognized that the identification by classic cytogenetics of
t(11;22)(q24;q12) is a useful aid in the accurate diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma
and related tumors. This translocation induces the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript,
which can be detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Recent 
studies have also used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to demonstrate
the translocation. The authors coupled classic cytogenetics and FISH on tumor
cells from the original specimen, the local recurrence, and the pulmonary
metastasis as well as from the xenografted tumors in a case of extraosseous
Ewing's sarcoma. FISH analysis not only confirmed the cytogenetic results but
also allowed the identification of a tumor-specific chromosome change, consistent
with a complex translocation, t(10;11;22), as well as revealed other chromosomal 
rearrangements on both metaphases and interphase nuclei of each material. In
addition this technique served to identify, in the interphase nuclei of the
original tumor, the clone that became dominant, from the cytogenetic point of
view, in the lung metastasis and in the nude mice xenografted tumors. Current
results indicate that the use of FISH on metaphases and interphase nuclei is an
easy and reliable approach to complement or even to substitute classic
cytogenetic studies for the detection of specific chromosomal rearrangements,
especially for determining complex translocations and for describing tumoral
clones with different cytogenetic markers.

PMID: 11277391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Pathol Res Pract. 2001;197(2):113-119; discussion 121-2.

Primary pulmonary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). A case report.

Mikami Y(1), Nakajima M, Hashimoto H, Irei I, Matsushima T, Kawabata S, Manabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kawasaki Medical School Hospital, Kurashiki,
Okayama,. mika@med.kawasaki-m.ac.jp

We describe a rare case of a primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) in
the lung of a 17-year-old girl. Grossly, the tumor, located in the right lower
lobe, was relatively well-circumscribed and whitish to yellowish in color with
scattered hemorrhagic necrosis. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of ovoid 
to polygonal cells with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and relatively scant 
cytoplasm, arranged in solid sheets with intervening fine fibrovascular stroma.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for the MIC2 gene product, whereas 
AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, and a variety of neuroendocrine markers such as chromogranin A, 
synaptophysin, and ProGRP, were negative. Three months after the lobectomy,
recurrent tumors were noted in the mediastinum and right thoracic wall, and she
died despite combined chemotherapy and radiation therapy. In this case
cytogenetic analysis showed a hypertriploid karyotype with multiple numerical and
structural chromosomal aberrations, but failed to disclose distinct evidence of
translocation between chromosome 11 and 22. However, the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) demonstrated EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcripts, confirming the histopathologic diagnosis of PNET. This case
indicates that the primary pulmonary PNET is a highly aggressive neoplasm
occurring at a young age, and should prompt combined systemic chemotherapy, even 
though it is organ-confined.

PMID: 11261815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Br J Cancer. 2001 Mar 23;84(6):768-75.

Downregulation and forced expression of EWS-Fli1 fusion gene results in changes
in the expression of G(1)regulatory genes.

Matsumoto Y(1), Tanaka K, Nakatani F, Matsunobu T, Matsuda S, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24:q12) is detected in approximately 90% of
tumours of the Ewing family (ET). This translocation results in EWS-Fli1 gene
fusion which produces a EWS-Fli1 fusion protein acting as an aberrant
transcriptional activator. We previously reported that the inhibition of EWS-Fli1
expression caused the G(0)/G(1)arrest of ET cells. We, therefore, hypothesized
that EWS-Fli1 may affect the expression of G(1)regulatory genes. Downregulation
of EWS-Fli1 fusion proteins was observed 48 hours after the treatment with
EWS-Fli1 antisense oligonucleotides. The expressions of G(1)cyclins, cyclin D1
and cyclin E, were markedly decreased in parallel with the reduction of EWS-Fli1 
fusion protein. On the other hand, the expression of p21 and p27, which are
important cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs) for G(1)--S transition, was
dramatically increased after the treatment with EWS-Fli1 antisense
oligonucleotides. RT-PCR analysis showed that alteration of the expressions of
the cyclins and CKIs occurred at the mRNA level. Furthermore, transfection of
EWS-Fli1 cDNA to NIH3T3 caused transformation of the cells and induction of the
expression of cyclin D1 and E. Clinical samples of ET also showed a high level of
expression of cyclin D1 mRNA, whereas mRNAs for p21 and p27 were not detected in 
the samples. These findings strongly suggest that the G(1)--S regulatory genes
may be involved in downstream of EWS-Fli1 transcription factor, and that the
unbalanced expression of G(1)--S regulatory factors caused by EWS-Fli1 may lead
to the tumorigenesis of ET.

Copyright 2001 Cancer Research Campaign.

PMCID: PMC2363806
PMID: 11259090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Bull Cancer. 2001 Feb;88(2):137-42.

[Role of the ETS transcription factors in the control of endothelial-specific
gene expression and in angiogenesis].

[Article in French]

Lelièvre E(1), Lionneton F, Soncin F.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR8526, Institut de biologie, 1, rue Calmette, 59021 Lille Cedex.

The transcription factors of the ETS family are involved in the control of the
endothelial-specific expression of genes that are important for the formation of 
new blood vessels. The analysis of the expression pattern of ets1, the gene
inactivation of tel and fli1, the in vitro analysis of potential target genes of 
ETS factors in endothelial cells, the in vivo studies of the promoter regions of 
endothelial-specific genes all demonstrate a role for ETS factors in this
specificity. However, the precise role of individual ETS factors in the
endothelial identity and in angiogenesis in general remains difficult to
understand in vivo.

PMID: 11257588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2001 Feb;23(2):99-104.

Use of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for diagnosis and staging 
of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma family of tumors, and desmoplastic
small round cell tumor.

Athale UH(1), Shurtleff SA, Jenkins JJ, Poquette CA, Tan M, Downing JR, Pappo AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-2794, USA.

PURPOSE: To compare the use of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) with that of morphology-based methods for diagnosis, staging, and
detection of metastatic disease in pediatric alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS),
Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT), and desmoplastic small round cell tumors
(DSRCT).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RT-PCR assays for the EWS-FLII, EWS-ERG, PAX3-FKHR,
PAX7-FKHR, and EWS-WTI fusion transcripts were performed on RNA extracted from
the primary tumor tissue, bone marrow, and body fluids obtained at initial
presentation and relapse. Molecular findings were compared with original
histologic diagnoses and results of staging procedures.
RESULTS: Eighty-eight samples from 47 patients with ARMS (n = 13), ESFT (n = 31),
or DSRCT (n = 3) were analyzed. The detection rate of metastatic disease was
significantly higher with RT-PCR (95%) as compared with the morphologic methods
(70%) for the three pediatric sarcomas studied. In primary tumors with
characteristic fusion transcript, RT-PCR was positive in all cases with
morphologic evidence of metastatic disease. Moreover, in six patients (3 with
ARMS, 2 with DSRCT, and 1 with ESFT) with metastatic disease, micrometastases in 
bone marrow (4) and other sites (2) were detected by RT-PCR alone. Importantly,
none of the patients with localized disease diagnosed had micrometastases
detected by RT-PCR in bone marrow.
CONCLUSIONS: The high sensitivity and specificity of RT-PCR for the
characteristic fusion transcripts of pediatric sarcomas make it an ideal method
to aid in the routine staging of these patients. In addition, the 100%
sensitivity of RT-PCR in detection of micrometastasis makes it useful for
follow-up and detection of minimal residual disease. However, the clinical
significance of molecularly-detectable disease remains unknown. Further studies
should aim to elucidate the therapeutic and prognostic implications of
micrometastases detected by RT-PCR alone.

PMID: 11216714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2001 Feb;46(2):111-6.

[Molecular mechanism of inactivation of TGF-beta receptors during
carcinogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kim SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute.
kims@dce41.nci.nih.gov

PMID: 11211784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Gene. 2001 Jan 10;262(1-2):23-33.

Architecture and anatomy of the genomic locus encoding the human
leukemia-associated transcription factor RUNX1/AML1.

Levanon D(1), Glusman G, Bangsow T, Ben-Asher E, Male DA, Avidan N, Bangsow C,
Hattori M, Taylor TD, Taudien S, Blechschmidt K, Shimizu N, Rosenthal A, Sakaki
Y, Lancet D, Groner Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Molecular Genetics and Human Genome Center, The Weizmann Institute of 
Science, 76100, Rehovot, Israel

The RUNX1 gene on human chromosome 21q22.12 belongs to the 'runt domain' gene
family of transcription factors (also known as AML/CBFA/PEBP2alpha). RUNX1 is a
key regulator of hematopoiesis and a frequent target of leukemia associated
chromosomal translocations. Here we present a detailed analysis of the RUNX1
locus based on its complete genomic sequence. RUNX1 spans 260 kb and its
expression is regulated through two distinct promoter regions, that are 160 kb
apart. A very large CpG island complex marks the proximal promoter (promoter-2), 
and an additional CpG island is located at the 3' end of the gene. Hitherto, 12
different alternatively spliced RUNX1 cDNAs have been identified. Genomic
sequence analysis of intron/exon boundaries of these cDNAs has shown that all
consist of properly spliced authentic coding regions. This indicates that the
large repertoire of RUNX1 proteins, ranging in size between 20-52 kDa, are
generated through usage of alternatively spliced exons some of which contain in
frame stop codons. The gene's introns are largely depleted of repetitive
sequences, especially of the LINE1 family. The RUNX1 locus marks the transition
from a ~1 Mb of gene-poor region containing only pseudogenes, to a gene-rich
region containing several functional genes. A search for RUNX1 sequences that may
be involved in the high frequency of chromosomal translocations revealed that a
555 bp long segment originating in chromosome 11 FLI1 gene was transposed into
RUNX1 intron 4.1. This intron harbors the t(8;21) and t(3;21) chromosomal
breakpoints involved in acute myeloid leukemia. Interestingly, the FLI1
homologous sequence contains a breakpoint of the t(11;22) translocation
associated with Ewing's tumors, and may have a similar function in RUNX1.

PMID: 11179664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2001 Mar-Apr;4(2):185-91.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the biliary and gastrointestinal tracts:
clinicopathologic and molecular diagnostic study of two cases.

Sarangarajan R(1), Hill DA, Humphrey PA, Hitchcock MG, Dehner LP, Pfeifer JD.

Author information: 
(1)Lauren V. Ackerman Laboratory of Surgical Pathology, Washington University
Medical Center, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a prototypic malignant small round cell
tumor of childhood that is characterized in most cases by t(11;22) resulting in
an EWS-FLI1 gene fusion. Once thought to be uncommon, PNET now accounts for
almost 20% of malignant soft tissue tumors in children. Increased recognition of 
PNET is partly due to advances in immunohistochemistry and molecular diagnostics,
which have led to the identification of the tumor in non-classical sites. We
report the clinical, histologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular findings of
two visceral PNETs of the digestive system--one involving the small intestine and
the other involving the hepatic duct. Histologically, each tumor was composed of 
malignant small cells growing in sheets, nests, and lobules; the tumor cells of
both cases showed characteristic immunoreactivity for vimentin and O13 (CD99).
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis for t(11;22)
using nested primers was performed with RNA extracted from paraffin-embedded,
formalin-fixed tissue and demonstrated an EWS exon 7 to FLI1 exon 5 fusion in
both cases, confirmed by Southern blot hybridization and DNA sequence analysis.
These results illustrate the expanded clinicopathologic profile of PNET, and
demonstrate that visceral PNETs, despite their unusual sites of presentation,
maintain the characteristic immunohistochemical and genetic features of PNETs at 
more conventional sites.

PMID: 11178636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Feb;25(2):273-4.

Cytokeratin immunoreactivity in 41 cases of ES/PNET confirmed by molecular
diagnostic studies.

Collini P, Sampietro G, Bertulli R, Casali PG, Luksch R, Mezzelani A, Sozzi G,
Pilotti S.

PMID: 11176079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Am J Surg Pathol. 2001 Feb;25(2):133-46.

Primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney: a clinicopathologic
analysis of 146 adult and pediatric cases from the National Wilms' Tumor Study
Group Pathology Center.

Parham DM(1), Roloson GJ, Feely M, Green DM, Bridge JA, Beckwith JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Arkansas Children's Hospital, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72202, USA.

Primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the kidney (NETKs) comprise a group
of primitive, highly malignant neoplasms that histologically and clinically are
not well characterized. A large cohort of 146 of these tumors, occurring in
adults and children, has been collected at a single depository site, the National
Wilms' Tumor Study Group (NWTSG) Pathology Center. The authors undertook a
systematic retrospective review of the histologic, ultrastructural, and clinical 
features of these tumors, based on materials collected by the NWTSG and the
consultation files of one of the authors (J.B.B.). Histologic features were
generally those of primitive neural tumors with varying amounts of rosettes and
neuropil; however, a large proportion of cases displayed unusual features such as
spindle cells, ganglion cells, clear cell sarcoma-like foci, rhabdoid cells,
epithelioid cells, and organoid foci. CD99 staining had been performed on 69
cases and showed membranous staining in 65. The NETKs were present in patients
with a wide age spectrum, ranging from 1 month to 72 years (median, 18 years).
EWS/FLI1 fusion analysis using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
and immunohistochemical stains for cytokeratin, chromogranin, and epithelial
membrane antigen were performed successfully on a subset of 45 cases with
available paraffin blocks. Only 13 of the 45 were fusion-positive, and there was 
no correlation between fusion status and histology, presence of rosettes,
ultrastructural features, or cytokeratin positivity. CD99-negative cases were
usually fusion-negative (six of seven cases), and all three chromogranin-positive
cases were fusion-negative. Tumor staging, performed on 72 clearly defined and
quantifiable cases by using NWTSG criteria, indicated that these are aggressive
tumors, because only six were Stage 1, compared with 16 Stage 2, 31 Stage 3, and 
19 Stage 4 lesions. The authors conclude that NETKs are a somewhat diverse group 
of generally aggressive, high-grade lesions that may present in a wide age range 
and are difficult to characterize without immunohistochemistry and
cytogenetics/molecular biology.

PMID: 11176062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6482-9.

The role of Fli-1 in normal cell function and malignant transformation.

Truong AH(1), Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology Research, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre & Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre (TSRCC), 2075 Bayview
Avenue, S-Wing, Room S216, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4N 3M5.

Aberrant expression of the Fli-1 transcription factor following genetic mutation 
has been recognized as a seminal event in the initiation of certain types of
malignant transformation. Indeed, the etiology of a number of virally induced
leukemias, including Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia, has been associated
with Fli-1 overexpression. The clinical relevance of Fli-1 becomes apparent in
human Ewing's sarcoma in which Fli-1 is the target of a characteristic
chromosomal translocation. As such, Fli-1 has generated considerable interest
over the past several years for its role in malignant transformation and tumor
progression. This review will present a synopsis of the current research on Fli-1
with emphasis on its function in malignant transformation. Moreover, the possible
role of Fli-1 in cellular proliferation, differentiation and survival, as well as
the recent development of transgenic and knock-out mice to investigate the
function of Fli-1 will be discussed. Finally, the significance of identifying
target genes that are regulated by Fli-1 and their role in cellular function will
be reviewed.

PMID: 11175364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6472-81.

Ets and retroviruses - transduction and activation of members of the Ets oncogene
family in viral oncogenesis.

Blair DG(1), Athanasiou M.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Institute, Division of Basic Science, Basic Research
Laboratory, Oncogene Mechanisms Section, Frederick, Maryland, MD 21702-1207, USA.

Studies of retroviral-induced oncogenesis in animal systems led to the initial
discovery of viral oncogenes and their cellular homologs, and provided critical
insights into their role in the neoplastic process. V-ets, the founding member of
the ETS oncogene family, was originally identified as part of the fusion oncogene
encoded by the avian acute leukemia virus E26 and subsequent analysis of virus
induced leukemias led to the initial isolation of two other members of the ETS
gene family. PU.1 was identified as a target of insertional activation in the
majority of tumors induced by the murine Spleen Focus Forming virus (SFFV), while
fli-1 proved to be the target of Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV) in F-MuLV 
induced erythroleukemia, as well as that of the 10A1 and Graffi viruses. The
common features of the erythroid and myeloid diseases induced by these viruses
provided the initial demonstration that these and other members of the ETS family
play important roles in hematopoietic development as well as disease. This review
provides an overview of the role of ETS genes in retrovirally induced neoplasia, 
their possible mechanisms of action, and how these viral studies relate to
current knowledge of the functions of these genes in hematopoiesis.

PMID: 11175363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6443-54.

Mouse models in the study of the Ets family of transcription factors.

Bartel FO(1), Higuchi T, Spyropoulos DD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors is one of a growing number of master
regulators of development. This family was originally defined by the presence of 
a conserved DNA binding domain, the Ets domain. To date, nearly 30 members of
this family have been identified and implicated in a wide range of physiological 
and pathological processes. Despite the likely importance of Ets-family members, 
each of their precise roles has not been delineated. Herein, we describe the
elucidation of essential functions of a few of these family members in vivo using
knockout mouse models. Of the knockouts generated to date, the majority shows
important functions in hematopoiesis, ranging from PU.1, a principle regulator of
myelo-lymphopoiesis, to Spi-B which regulates the proper function of terminally
differentiated cells. Ets1 was shown to be of intermediate importance as a
regulator of pan-lymphoid development. Other Ets family members such as Fli1 and 
TEL1 display distinct and/or overlapping functions in vasculo/angiogenesis,
hemostasis and hematopoiesis. The remaining knockouts generated, Ets2 and Er81,
show non-hematopoietic defects related to extraembryonic development and
neurogenesis, respectively. The pioneering group of knockout models described
reveals only the most distinct functions of each of these Ets family members. A
better understanding of the roles and hierarchies of Ets family members in
cellular differentiation will come with the generation of new null alleles in
previously untargeted family members, more mutant alleles in members already
disrupted, double knockouts, ES cell differentiation and chimera rescue
experiments, and tissue-specific inducible knockouts.

PMID: 11175360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6417-31.

The Ets-transcription factor family in embryonic development: lessons from the
amphibian and bird.

Remy P(1), Baltzinger M.

Author information: 
(1)FRE 2168 du CNRS, IPCB, 21 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg cedex, France.

This chapter reviews the expression and role of Ets-genes during embryogenesis of
amphibians and birds. In addition to overlapping expression domains, some of them
exhibit cell type-specific expression. Many of them are expressed in migratory
cells: neural crest, endothelial, and pronephric duct cells for instance. They
are also transcribed in embryonic areas affected by epithelio-mesenchymal
transitions. Both processes involve modifications of cellular adhesion.
Ets-family genes appear to coordinate changes in the expression of adhesion
molecules and degradation of the extracellular matrix upon regulation of matrix
metalloproteinases and their specific inhibitors. These functions are essential
for physiological processes like tissue remodelling during embryogenesis or wound
healing. Unfortunately they also play a harmful role in metastasis. Recent
studies in the nervous system showed that Ets-genes contribute to the
establishment of a cellular identity. This identity could rely on definite
cell-surface determinants, among which cadherins could play an important role. In
addition to cell-type specific expression, other factors contribute to the
specificity of function of Ets-genes. These genes have a broad specificity of
recognition of target sequences in gene promoters, insufficient for accurate
control of gene expression. A fine tuning could arise from combinatorial
interactions with other Ets- or accessory proteins.

PMID: 11175358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Oncogene. 2000 Dec 18;19(55):6400-8.

Genetic analysis of ETS genes in C. elegans.

Hart AH(1), Reventar R, Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5.

The recent completion of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome has revealed that this
nematode worm has 10 members of the ETS gene family. Isolation and analysis of C.
elegans mutants and subsequent screens to identify interacting genes can proceed 
very quickly in this model organism. Molecular genetic analysis of the receptor
tyrosine kinase-Ras-MAP kinase signaling pathway in C. elegans identified the ETS
family transcription factor Lin-1 as a nuclear effector of this evolutionarily
conserved signal transduction pathway. Here we review classical genetic
approaches used to discover the role of Lin-1 in the Ras-MAP kinase signaling
pathway and describe new technologies that can be applied to the analyses of
signaling pathways and transcription factor regulatory networks in C. elegans.

PMID: 11175356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Lab Invest. 2000 Dec;80(12):1833-44.

Variability in gene expression patterns of Ewing tumor cell lines differing in
EWS-FLI1 fusion type.

Aryee DN(1), Sommergruber W, Muehlbacher K, Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Zoubek A,
Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

Type 1 and type 2 EWS-FLI1 fusion products result from variation in breakpoint
locations arising from the t(11;22)(q24;q12) recurrent chromosomal translocation 
in Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (EFT). Previously, studies from our institution 
(updated in the present communication at a median follow-up of more than 6 years)
and others suggested a prognostic difference for EFT patients with localized
disease depending on the type of EWS-FLI1 fusion present in the tumor. It has
been suggested that the observed clinical discrepancies result from different
transactivation potentials of the various EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins. In an attempt
to identify genes whose expression levels are differentially modulated by
structurally different EWS-FLI1 transcription factors, we have used two related
PCR-based subtractive approaches, cDNA representational difference analysis
(cDNA-RDA) and linker-capture subtraction (LCS) to compare transcript
representations in cDNA pools of type 1 versus type 2 EFT cell lines. About 800
clones obtained by the two approaches were analyzed by dot blot hybridization to 
cDNA pools. Eighty-six clones showing the highest variability in signal
intensities on the dot blots were further hybridized to individual EFT cell line 
RNAs on Northern blots, and four of them were additionally studied by real-time
quantitative PCR (RTQ-PCR). Although interindividual variations in gene
expression patterns in the range of one- to several-fold were observed, no
correlation to specific EWS-FLI1 fusion types could be identified. Among the
genes differentially expressed in individual EFT cell lines are several
previously implicated in tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis. Although our
data may have revealed candidate genes whose composite expression pattern may be 
relevant for the biology of individual EFT, they do not support a role of
distinct EWS-FLI1 fusion types for EFT prognosis based on different
transactivation potentials.

PMID: 11140696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Pathol Int. 2000 Dec;50(12):967-72.

Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney.

Kuroda M(1), Urano M, Abe M, Mizoguchi Y, Horibe Y, Murakami M, Tashiro K,
Kasahara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fujita Health University, School of Medicine, Aichi, 
Japan. mkuro@fujita-hu.ac.jp

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a small round cell sarcoma that mainly 
develops in the central nervous system and soft tissues of childhood; however
recently, primary occurrence of this tumor in the kidney has been reported. We
experienced one case of PNET primarily arose in the kidney without metastasis.
The patient was a 28-year-old man whose chief complaint was abdominal pain,
especially on exercise. On computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance
imaging, a solid lesion was found in the left kidney, and a left nephrectomy was 
performed based on the diagnosis of a tumor in the left kidney. The tumor was
within the parenchyma of lower end of left kidney protruding into the abdominal
cavity. Histologically, diffuse proliferation of primitive small round cells with
rosette formation was found. Immunohistochemically, MIC2 gene product,
neuron-specific enolase and S-100 protein were positive. No metastasis to the
regional lymph nodes was found. From these observations, the tumor was diagnosed 
as PNET primarily arising in the left kidney. Although chromosome analysis was
not performed, EWS-FLI1 chimera gene was identified by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction on the freshly frozen specimen and
fluorescence in situ hybridization on paraffin sections.

PMID: 11123763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Yeast. 2000 Dec;17(4):294-301.

Distinct requirements for zebrafish angiogenesis revealed by a VEGF-A morphant.

Nasevicius A(1), Larson J, Ekker SC.

Author information: 
(1)Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center for Transposon Research, Department of
Genetics, University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321 Church Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Angiogenesis is a fundamental vertebrate developmental process that requires
signalling by the secreted protein vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A).
VEGF-A functions in the development of embryonic structures, during tissue
remodelling and for the growth of tumour-induced vasculature. The study of the
role of VEGF-A during normal development has been significantly complicated by
the dominant, haplo-insufficient nature of VEGF-A-targeted mutations in mice. We 
have used morpholino-based targeted gene knock-down technology to generate a
zebrafish VEGF-A morphant loss of function model. Zebrafish VEGF-A morphant
embryos develop with an enlarged pericardium and with major blood vessel
deficiencies. Morphological assessment at 2 days of development indicates a
nearly complete absence of both axial and intersegmental vasculature, with no or 
reduced numbers of circulating red blood cells. Molecular analysis using the
endothelial markers fli-1 and flk-1 at 1 day of development demonstrates a
fundamental distinction between VEGF-A requirements for axial and intersegmental 
vascular structure specification. VEGF-A is not required for the initial
establishment of axial vasculature patterning, whereas all development of
intersegmental vasculature is dependent on VEGF-A signalling. The zebrafish thus 
serves as a quality model for the study of conserved vertebrate angiogenesis
processes during embryonic development.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC2448381
PMID: 11119306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):164-70.

Presence of new alternative exons in human and mouse Fli-1 genes.

Barat C(1), Barbeau B, Delattre O, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Sciences Biologiques, Universite à Québec à Montréal, Canada.

The mouse Fli-1 proto-oncogene is activated by proviral integration of four
murine leukemia retroviruses and its human counterpart is translocated (11,22) in
Ewing tumors. We have identified two alternative exons 1 by RACE analysis from a 
human neuroectodermal tumor. Exons 1a and 1b are located respectively 1.3 and 2.5
kb upstream from the published exon 1. Translation of these alternative
messengers is predicted to generate very similar proteins. The sequence upstream 
from exon 1b showed functional promoter activity. Exon 1b was not conserved in
the mouse but was detected in every analyzed human cell, whereas exon 1a was
present only in a subset of them and also in various mouse cell lines. These
results suggest that both mouse and human Fli-1 gene expression might be under
the control of several independent promoter regions.

PMID: 11118632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 20;279(2):401-6.

EWS fli-1 antisense nanocapsules inhibits ewing sarcoma-related tumor in mice.

Lambert G(1), Bertrand JR, Fattal E, Subra F, Pinto-Alphandary H, Malvy C,
Auclair C, Couvreur P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de physico-chimie, UMR CNRS 8612, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

EWS Fli-1, a fusion gene resulting from a t(11;22) translocation is found in 90% 
of both Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET). In the
present study, we show that recently developed polyisobutylcyanoacrylate
nanocapsules with an aqueous core were able to encapsulate efficiently high
amounts of phosphorothioate oligonucleotides (ODN) directed against EWS Fli-1
chimeric RNA. Release of these ODN in serum medium was shown to be biphasic which
was explained by the presence of two types of nanocapsules able to release ODN
with different kinetics. In addition, nanocapsules were found to provide
protection of these oligonucleotides from the degradation in serum. These ODN
nanocapsules permitted to obtain inhibition of Ewing sarcoma-related tumor in
mice after intratumoral injection of a cumulative dose as low as 14.4 nanomoles. 
This new type of non viral vector shows great potential for in vivo
administration of oligonucleotides.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11118299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Dec;24(12):1657-62.

Immunohistochemical detection of FLI-1 protein expression: a study of 132 round
cell tumors with emphasis on CD99-positive mimics of Ewing's sarcoma/primitive
neuroectodermal tumor.

Folpe AL(1), Hill CE, Parham DM, O'Shea PA, Weiss SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA. afolpe@emory.edu

The histologic and immunohistochemical differentiation of Ewing' s
sarcoma/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET) from other small, blue, round
cell tumors may be difficult. Despite initial promise, CD99 (MIC2) has not proven
to be a specific marker. Approximately 90% of ES/PNET have a specific t(11;
22)(q24;q12) that results in fusion of the EWS and FLI-1 genes, and
overexpression of FLI-1 protein. A recent study has shown immunohistochemical
FLI-1 expression in five of seven of the ES/PNET cases tested. We evaluated FLI-1
expression in 132 well-characterized small, blue, round cell tumors. All tumors
were immunostained for FLI-1 (1:40, Sc 356 polyclonal, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) 
using steam heat for epitope retrieval. Only nuclear staining was accepted as
positive. Endothelial cells were strongly positive in all cases and served as an 
internal control. In many cases, a subset of lymphocytes also stained positive.
No staining was seen in any other normal tissue. FLI-1 expression was seen in 29 
of 41 (71%) ES/PNET, 7 of 8 (88%) lymphoblastic lymphomas, 0 of 8 poorly
differentiated synovial sarcomas (PDSS), 0 of 32 rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), 0 of 30 
neuroblastomas, 0 of 8 esthesioneuroblastomas, 0 of 3 Wilms' tumors, 0 of 1
mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, and in 1 of 1 desmoplastic round cell tumor. This
last case was known to have an EWS/WT-1 fusion. Although the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
gene is specific for ES/PNET, FLI-1 protein expression is not. Significantly, the
great majority of lymphoblastic lymphomas (also CD99-positive) are strongly
FLI-1-positive. Immunohistochemical detection of FLI-1 may be valuable in
confirming the diagnosis of ES/ PNET in cases in which molecular genetic
evaluation is not feasible. FLI-1 protein expression is also helpful in
distinguishing ES/PNET from other tumors that may be CD99-positive, such as PDSS 
and RMS. It is not surprising that some ES/ PNET are FLI-1-negative, because not 
all ES/PNET have the classic EWS/FLI-1, and some cases of ES/PNET may produce
either low levels of protein or idiotypically different protein.

PMID: 11117787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 9;279(1):172-80.

bFGF induces differentiation and death of olfactory neuroblastoma cells.

Nibu K(1), Li G, Kaga K, Rothstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kimmel Cancer Institute,
Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Olfactory neuroblastoma (ONB) is a highly vascularized and malignant tumor
arising in olfactory neuronal precursors from the paranasal sinuses. Previously, 
we showed that treatment of JFEN cells with transforming growth factor
(TGF)-alpha caused them to differentiate and respond to chemical odorants,
whereas basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) treated cells differentiated and
died. In the present study we show that established ONB tumors treated with bFGF 
upregulate the bFGF receptor (FGFR1) prior to differentiation. This cellular
differentiation was evidenced by bFGF-induced expression of the human runt
homologue AML1 (PEBP2 alpha B, CBFA-2) that is highly expressed in developing
olfactory neuroepithelium and TrkA, a preferred nerve growth factor receptor.
Since TrkA is expressed in supporting cells, but not in mature olfactory neurons,
we hypothesize that the expression of AML1 and TrkA in bFGF-treated JFEN cells
induced supporting cell differentiation. Collectively, these results have
implications for the treatment of patients afflicted with ONB.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11112435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Jan;30(1):91-5.

Contiguous arrangement of p45 NFE2, HnRNP A1, and HP1 alpha on mouse chromosome
15 and human chromosome 12: evidence for suppression of these genes due to
retroviral integration within the Fli-2 locus.

Li YJ(1), Pak BJ, Higgins RR, Lu SJ, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences Centre, Division of Cancer
Biology Research, Toronto, Canada.

Fli-2 is a common site of proviral integration in multistage erythroleukemia
cells induced by Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV) or the polycythemia strain
of Friend leukemia virus (FV-P). Previously, we reported that integration of
Friend virus into the Fli-2 locus in CB3, an erythroleukemia cell line that
harbors a homozygous inactivation of the Fli-2 locus, results in the loss of
expression of two genes encoding the 45-kDa subunit of the erythroid-specific
nuclear factor p45 NFE2 and the splicing factor HnRNP A1. Here, we report the
identification of a third gene, Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1alpha, also known
as CBX5), which is located downstream of HnRNP A1, and p45 NFE2. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the expression of HP1alpha, along with p45 NFE2 and HnRNP 
A1, is either undetectable or substantially reduced in CB3 cells, suggesting that
HP1alpha expression is also regulated by proviral insertion within the Fli-2
locus in CB3 cells. Because p45 NFE2 was previously mapped to mouse chromosome
15, our results demonstrate that HP1alpha and HnRNP A1 are also located on mouse 
chromosome 15 and that the p45 NFE2, HnRNP A1, and HP1alpha genes are arranged
contiguously. Contiguous arrangement of these three genes was also detected in
man; this consequently localizes HP1alpha to human chromosome band 12q13.

PMID: 11107181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cancer. 2000 Nov 1;89(9):1992-8.

A reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay in the diagnosis of soft 
tissue sarcomas.

Naito N(1), Kawai A, Ouchida M, Dan'ura T, Morimoto Y, Ozaki T, Shimizu K, Inoue 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Faculty 
of Medicine, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal
translocations that result in the production of novel chimeric genes. Detection
of these fusion genes could be a sensitive molecular diagnostic assay. However,
to the authors' knowledge there have been few systemic comparisons between the
current histopathologic diagnosis and the presence or absence of particular
fusion genes in patients with adult soft tissue sarcomas (STSs).
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from 75 cases of STS and analyzed by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for the detection of a
variety of fusion transcripts. The results of the molecular assay were compared
with standard histopathologic diagnoses.
RESULTS: Of the 18 tumors diagnosed as synovial sarcoma, 17 (94%) expressed
SYT-SSX chimeric transcripts. All nine myxoid liposarcomas were positive for
FUS-CHOP fusion transcripts. Of the four cases of Ewing sarcoma, two had an
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript and one had an EWS-ERG fusion transcript. A clear cell
sarcoma had a EWS-ATF1 fusion transcript. None of 19 cases of malignant fibrous
histiocytoma nor 3 leiomyosarcomas contained a fusion transcript. Three cases
with an initial diagnosis other than synovial sarcoma expressed a SYT-SSX fusion 
transcript. A review of the slides and additional examination showed that a
diagnosis of synovial sarcoma was appropriate for these cases. There was a trend 
for biphasic synovial sarcoma to contain the SYT-SSX1 fusion.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors believe RT-PCR assay for the detection of a specific
fusion gene provides a useful tool for confirmation of the diagnosis of adult STS
in diagnostically difficult cases and in retrospective studies.

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 11064357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Oct;6(10):3832-6.

Adenovirus 5 early region 1A does not induce expression of the ewing sarcoma
fusion product EWS-FLI1 in breast and ovarian cancer cell lines.

Meric F(1), Liao Y, Lee WP, Pollock RE, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, 77030, USA.

The adenovirus 5 early region 1A (E1A) can function as a tumor suppressor gene
and is being used in clinical trials as a therapeutic agent for advanced breast, 
ovarian, and head and neck cancer. Recently, there has been a dispute regarding
whether transfection with the E1A gene can induce expression of the Ewing sarcoma
oncogenic fusion transcript EWS-FLI1 (Sanchez-Prieto et al., Nat. Med., 5:
1076-1079, 1999; Melot and Delattre, Nat. Med., 5: 1331, 1999; Kovar et al.,
Cancer Res., 60: 1557-1560, 2000). In an effort to settle the controversy, we
tested several stable E1A transfectants of cell lines MDA-MB-231, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-435 (breast cancer), SKOV3-ipl (ovarian cancer), and PC-3 (prostate
cancer), as well as parental and vector-transfected controls, HEK 293 cells, and 
RD-ES (Ewing sarcoma) cells, for the EWS-FLI1 fusion product. The EWS-FLI1
transcript could not be identified with reverse transcription-PCR in any of the
13 E1A-transfected cell lines analyzed. Furthermore, the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein 
could not be detected by Western blot analysis in E1A-transfected cell lines.
These results suggest that E1A transfection does not necessarily lead to
expression of the oncogenic EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript. Thus, the potential
induction of this gene rearrangement by E1A gene therapy is unlikely to be
clinically significant in the treatment of advanced malignant disease.

PMID: 11051226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Virchows Arch. 2000 Sep;437(3):234-40.

In situ reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction demonstration of the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript in Ewing's sarcomas and peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors.

Krams M(1), Peters J, Boeckel F, Raether A, Ambros PF, Parwaresch R, Harms D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pathology, University of Kiel, Germany.
mkrams@path.uni-kiel.de

It is now widely accepted that the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript is associated with
tumors of the Ewing family. To test whether it is possible to detect the fusion
transcript by means of combining polymerase chain reaction (PCR) methodology and 
immunohistochemistry, we investigated tumors of the Ewing family using in situ
reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. We were able to demonstrate the t(11;22) fusion
transcript in five of six cases of Ewing's sarcoma and four of four peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumors. These results were confirmed using fluorescence
in situ hybridization in seven tumor samples. In situ RT-PCR-labeled fusion
transcripts were found in virtually all tumor cells within a given sample,
indicating that each cell possessed the t(11;22) transcript. We conclude from
these results that in situ RT-PCR can be used for the rapid detection of
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts in biopsy material. The findings also suggest that
all cells of the tumors of the Ewing family carry the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcript.

PMID: 11037342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Nov 1;260(2):233-47.

Heterotopic expression of the Xl-Fli transcription factor during Xenopus
embryogenesis: modification of cell adhesion and engagement in the apoptotic
pathway.

Goltzené F(1), Skalski M, Wolff CM, Meyer D, Mager-Heckel AM, Darribère T, Remy
P.

Author information: 
(1)FRE 2168 du CNRS "MMDCD,", Institut de Physiologie et Chimie Biologique, 21
rue René Descartes, Strasbourg-cedex, 67084, France.

In the Xenopus laevis embryo, the overexpression of the Xl-FLI protein, a
transcription factor of the ETS family, provokes severe developmental anomalies, 
which affect anteroposterior and dorsoventral polarities, optic cup formation,
head cartilage morphogenesis, and erythrocyte differentiation. It has been
proposed that these effects could be correlated to modifications of cell adhesion
properties and/or to an increased engagement of cells in the apoptotic pathway
during early development (Remy et al., Int. J. Dev. Biol. 40, 577-589, 1996). To 
address these questions, we have first analyzed the behavior of cells
overexpressing the protein in both aggregation and adhesion assays. We observe
perturbations of cell-cell interactions as well as perturbations of cell adhesion
and spreading on fibronectin and extracellular matrix (ECM). Second, we have
analyzed apoptosis of cells overexpressing the Xl-FLI protein, by testing DNA
fragmentation, caspase-3 activity and by performing TUNEL assay. We show that
Xl-Fli overexpression results in the appearance of hallmarks of apoptosis,
including exclusion of cells from the interior of the embryo, internucleosomal
fragmentation of DNA and dose-dependent induction of caspase-3, resulting in the 
hydrolysis of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. In addition, a dominant-negative
mutation of BMPs receptors decreases the effects of Xl-Fli overexpression,
suggesting that a modification of the BMP signalling could be responsible for
increased apoptosis. The latter appears to affect predominantly ventral and
ventrolateral regions of the embryo.

PMID: 11035918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Physiol Genomics. 1999 Nov 11;1(3):127-38.

Molecular genetics of chromosome translocations involving EWS and related family 
members.

Kim J(1), Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Oncology, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3G 1Y6.

Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations
that appear to result in the production of novel, tumor-specific chimeric
transcription factors. Many of these show striking similarities: the emerging
picture is that the amino-terminal domain of the fusion product is donated by the
Ewing's sarcoma gene (EWS) or a related member from the same gene family, whereas
the carboxy-terminal domain often consists of a DNA-binding domain derived from
one of a number of transcription factors. Given the observation that the
different translocation partners of the EWS protooncogene are associated with
distinct types of sarcomas, the functional consequence of fusing EWS (or a
related family member) to a different DNA-binding domain can only be understood
in the context of functional studies that define the specificity of action of the
different fusion products. An understanding of the molecular structure and
function of these translocations provides new methods for diagnosis and novel
targets for therapeutics.

PMID: 11015571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Development. 2000 Oct;127(20):4303-13.

Hhex and scl function in parallel to regulate early endothelial and blood
differentiation in zebrafish.

Liao W(1), Ho CY, Yan YL, Postlethwait J, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

During embryogenesis, endothelial and blood precursors are hypothesized to arise 
from a common progenitor, the hemangioblast. Several genes that affect the
differentiation of, or are expressed early in, both the endothelial and blood
lineages may in fact function at the level of the hemangioblast. For example, the
zebrafish cloche mutation disrupts the differentiation of both endothelial and
blood cells. The transcription factor gene scl is expressed in both endothelial
and blood lineages from an early stage and can regulate their differentiation.
Here we report that in zebrafish the homeobox gene hhex (previously called hex)
is also expressed in endothelial and blood lineages from an early stage. We find 
that hhex expression in these lineages is significantly reduced in cloche mutant 
embryos, indicating that hhex functions downstream of cloche to regulate
endothelial and blood differentiation. Ectopic expression of hhex through
injection of a DNA construct leads to the premature and ectopic expression of
early endothelial and blood differentiation genes such as fli1, flk1 and gata1,
indicating that Hhex can positively regulate endothelial and blood
differentiation. However, analysis of a hhex deficiency allele shows that hhex is
not essential for early endothelial and blood differentiation, suggesting that
another gene, perhaps scl, compensates for the absence of Hhex function.
Furthermore, we find that hhex and scl can induce each other's expression,
suggesting that these two genes cross-regulate each other during early
endothelial and blood differentiation. Together, these data provide the initial
framework of a pathway that can be used to further integrate the molecular events
regulating hemangioblast differentiation.

PMID: 11003831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Oncogene. 2000 Sep 14;19(39):4523-30.

Interference with the constitutive activation of ERK1 and ERK2 impairs
EWS/FLI-1-dependent transformation.

Silvany RE(1), Eliazer S, Wolff NC, Ilaria RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Simmons Cancer Center
and the Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

The chimeric gene EWS/FLI-1, the hallmark of the Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor family, encodes a fusion protein with enhanced
transcriptional activation properties and preserved recognition of canonical ETS 
binding sites. Although EWS/FLI-1 alters the expression of various genes, the
precise mechanism by which EWS/FLI-1 acts as an oncogene remains to be defined.
In this study we report that members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling pathway, ERK1 and ERK2, are constitutively activated in NIH 3T3 
cells expressing EWS/FLI-1. Interference with ERK activation by either highly
specific inhibitors of MEK1 or a dominant negative ras mutant profoundly impaired
the ability of EWS/FLI-1 to transform NIH3T3 cells to growth in semi-solid
medium. An EWS/FLI-1 mutant defective in DNA-binding and transcriptional
activation failed to activate ERK and was also defective in 3T3 cell
transformation. Constitutive ERK activation was also evident in several human
Ewing's sarcoma tumor-derived cell lines. Interestingly, cells expressing the
type II EWS/FLI-1 fusion, recently demonstrated more potent in transcriptional
activation, showed even greater MAPK activation than cells expressing the more
common type I fusion. These results implicate ERK activation in EWS/FLI-1
transformation and suggest that this signaling pathway may be important in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4523 - 4530.

PMID: 11002425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2000 Nov-Dec;3(6):603-5.

Detection of t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation and EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript in a
case of solid pseudopapillary tumor of the pancreas.

Maitra A, Weinberg AG, Schneider N, Patterson K.

PMID: 11000339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 1;275(48):37612-8.

EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein interacts with hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II and
interferes with serine-arginine protein-mediated RNA splicing.

Yang L(1), Chansky HA, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System,
Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

Ewing's sarcoma displays a characteristic chromosomal translocation that results 
in fusion of the N-terminal domain of the Ewing's sarcoma protein (EWS) to the
C-terminal DNA-binding domain of the ETS family transcription factor Fli-1
(Friend leukemia integration-1). EWS possesses structural motifs suggesting a
role in transactivation as well as RNA binding. We demonstrate that wild-type EWS
protein functions as an adapter molecule coupling transcription to RNA splicing
by binding to hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II through the N-terminal domain
of EWS and recruiting serine-arginine (SR) splicing factors through the
C-terminal domain of EWS. The oncogenic EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein retains the
ability to bind to hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II but lacks the ability to
recruit SR proteins because of replacement of the C-terminal domain of EWS by
Fli-1. In an in vivo splicing assay, the EWS.Fli-1 fusion protein inhibits SR
protein-mediated E1A pre-mRNA splicing in a dominant-negative manner. These
results indicate that EWS.Fli-1 interferes with the normal function of EWS and
implicate uncoupling of gene transcription from RNA splicing in the pathogenesis 
of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 10982800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Orthop Sci. 2000;5(4):418-23.

Molecular diagnosis and gene therapy in musculoskeletal tumors.

Uchida A(1), Seto M, Hashimoto N, Araki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Mie University Medical School, 2-174
Edobashi, Tsu, Mie 514-8507, Japan.

Significant progress has occurred in the molecular analyses of bone and
soft-tissue tumors, and genetic studies have led to the development of important 
new diagnostic tools for the clinical management of patients with sarcomas. The
detection of fusion genes induced by tumor-specific translocations, such as
EWS-FLI1 in Ewing's sarcoma, SYT-SSX in synovial sarcoma, and CHOP-FUS in myxoid 
liposarcoma, is becoming significant for clinical diagnosis, because these
sarcomas are often indistinguishable from other bone and soft-tissue tumors. Gene
therapies with several gene transfer systems have been employed for some
incurable cancers. It has been demonstrated that a Herpes simplex virus thymidine
kinase (HSV-tk) gene can convert certain nucleoside analogs, such as ganciclovir,
which disrupt DNA synthesis and are toxic to nucleosides. Human chondrosarcoma
cells transduced with the HSV-tk gene were more sensitive to the cytotoxity of
ganciclovir than non-transduced cells. Coculture of chondrosarcoma cells with and
without the HSV-tk gene showed a bystander effect. The local injection of gene
transduced cells into the chondrosarcoma implanted in nude mice markedly reduced 
tumor size after the administration of ganciclovir. These results suggested the
possibility of gene therapy for chondrosarcoma.

PMID: 10982695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Immunity. 2000 Aug;13(2):167-77.

Fli-1 is required for murine vascular and megakaryocytic development and is
hemizygously deleted in patients with thrombocytopenia.

Hart A(1), Melet F, Grossfeld P, Chien K, Jones C, Tunnacliffe A, Favier R,
Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. hart@mshri.on.ca

The ETS gene Fli-1 is involved in the induction of erythroleukemia in mice by
Friend murine leukemia virus and Ewings sarcoma in children. Mice with a targeted
null mutation in the Fli-1 locus die at day 11.5 of embryogenesis with loss of
vascular integrity leading to bleeding within the vascular plexus of the cerebral
meninges and specific downregulation of Tek/Tie-2, the receptor for
angiopoietin-1. We also show that dysmegakaryopoiesis in Fli-1 null embryos
resembles that frequently seen in patients with terminal deletions of 11q
(Jacobsen or Paris-Trousseau Syndrome). We map the megakaryocytic defects in 14
Jacobsen patients to a minimal region on 11q that includes the Fli-1 gene and
suggest that dysmegakaryopoiesis in these patients may be caused by hemizygous
loss of Fli-1.

PMID: 10981960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 31;19(37):4298-301.

A link between basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and EWS/FLI-1 in Ewing's
sarcoma cells.

Girnita L(1), Girnita A, Wang M, Meis-Kindblom JM, Kindblom LG, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Pathology, Cellular and Molecular Tumor Pathology, 
CCK, R8:04, Karolinska Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene is characteristic of most cases of Ewing's sarcoma and 
has been shown to be crucial for tumor transformation and cell growth. In this
study we demonstrate a drastic down-regulation of the EWS/FLI-1 protein, and a
growth arrest, following serum depletion of Ewing's sarcoma cells. This indicates
that growth factor circuits may be involved in regulation of the fusion gene
product. Of four different growth factors tested, basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF) was found to be of particular significance. In fact, upon treatment of
serum-depleted cells with bFGF, expression of the EWS/FLI-1 protein and growth of
the Ewing's sarcoma cells were restored. In addition, a bFGF-neutralizing
antibody, which was confirmed to inhibit FGF receptor (FGFR) phosphorylation,
caused down-regulation of EWS/FLI-1. Experiments using specific cell cycle
blockers (thymidine and colcemide) suggest that EWS/FLI-1 is directly linked to
bFGF stimulation, and not indirectly to cell proliferation. We also demonstrated 
expression of FGFRs in several tumor samples of Ewing's sarcoma. Taken together, 
our data suggest that expression of FGFR is a common feature of Ewing's sarcoma
and, in particular, that the bFGF pathway may be important for the maintenance of
a malignant phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma cells through up-regulating the
EWS/FLI-1 protein. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4298 - 4301

PMID: 10980604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cancer Gene Ther. 2000 Aug;7(8):1188-95.

Suppression of the Ewing's sarcoma phenotype by FLI1/ERF repressor hybrids.

Athanasiou M(1), LeGallic L, Watson DK, Blair DG, Mavrothalassitis G.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, Science Applications International
Corporation, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

Fusion of the 5' half of the Ewing's sarcoma (ES) gene EWS with the DNA-binding
domain of several transcription factors has been detected in many human tumors.
The t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation is specifically linked to ES and 
primitive neuroectodermal tumors and results, in the majority of cases, in the
fusion of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal DNA-binding
domain of the FLI1 gene. The chimeric protein has been shown to be oncogenic, a
potent transcriptional activator, and necessary for the maintenance of the
Ewing's phenotype, making it an attractive target for gene therapy. In this
study, we demonstrate that the ES transformed phenotype can be suppressed by
chimeric transcriptional repressors containing the DNA-binding domain of FLI1 and
the regulatory and repressor domain of ERF, a transcription suppressor and member
of the ets gene family. The hybrid repressor is expressed at levels comparable
with EWS/FLI1, does not affect EWS/FLI1 expression, and exhibits similar
DNA-binding specificity but suppresses transcriptional activity. The FLI1/ERF
repressor, like the wild-type ERF, is regulated by mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent subcellular localization. Our data suggest that transformation
by EWS/FLI1 may partially be due to activation of specific EWS/FLI1-regulated
genes involved in cell proliferation.

PMID: 10975680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer. 2000 Aug 15;89(4):793-9.

Prognostic impact of INK4A deletion in Ewing sarcoma.

Wei G(1), Antonescu CR, de Alava E, Leung D, Huvos AG, Meyers PA, Healey JH,
Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, People's Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The primary genetic alteration in > 95% of Ewing sarcomas (ES) is a
specific fusion of EWS with FLI1 or ERG. Secondary genetic alterations possibly
involved in progression of ES are not well understood. A recent study found loss 
of the negative cell cycle regulator gene INK4A in 8 of 27 ES samples (30%). To
confirm these findings and evaluate their prognostic significance, the authors
studied INK4A deletion in 41 ES samples from 39 patients.
METHODS: Using Southern blot analysis with an INK4A p16 cDNA probe, the intensity
of the INK4A bands in ES DNA samples was normalized to that of a control probe
and compared with nondeleted control DNA; > 50% signal reduction was scored as
evidence of deletion. All ES tumor DNA samples previously were confirmed to have 
EWS rearrangements on the same Southern blots, using a cDNA probe spanning the
EWS breakpoint region.
RESULTS: Tumors from 7 patients (18%) showed INK4A deletion independent of
disease stage (localized or metastatic) or sample source (primary tumor or
metastasis). INK4A was a strong negative factor for disease specific survival in 
univariate analysis (P = 0.001) and in multivariate analysis including stage
(relative risk = 6; P = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: INK4A deletions appear to be the most frequent secondary molecular
genetic alteration found to date in ES. Their possible clinical usefulness in
identifying a subset of ES patients with poor prognosis merits systematic
prospective analysis. [See related article on pages 783-92.]

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 10951342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cancer. 2000 Aug 15;89(4):783-92.

Prognostic impact of P53 status in Ewing sarcoma.

de Alava E(1), Antonescu CR, Panizo A, Leung D, Meyers PA, Huvos AG, Pardo-Mindán
FJ, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Disease stage at the time of diagnosis and response to therapy are
the main prognostic factors for patients with Ewing sarcoma or peripheral
neuroectodermal tumor (ES/PNET). The primary genetic alteration in ES/PNET, the
fusion of the EWS gene with FLI1 or ERG, is diagnostically highly specific for
these tumors, and molecular variation in the structure of the EWS-FLI1 fusion
gene also is of prognostic significance. In contrast, secondary genetic
alterations, such as P53 alterations, are relatively uncommon in ES/PNET, and
their prognostic impact has not been extensively studied.
METHODS: Prechemotherapy, paraffin embedded, nondecalcified, primary tumor
material in a well-characterized series of 55 patients with ES/PNET with defined 
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts (32 patients with type 1 and 23 patients with other
types) was studied retrospectively by immunohistochemical techniques for cell
cycle regulators and proliferative markers, such as P53, P21(WAF1), and Ki-67, as
well as by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end
labeling (TUNEL) technique for apoptosis. Nuclear P53 expression in > 20% of
tumor cells was scored as aberrant overexpression. Histologic response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy was assessed.
RESULTS: Aberrant P53 expression (in > 20% of tumor cells) was present in 6
patients (11%) but showed no statistically significant correlation with disease
stage, tumor size, proliferation rate (Ki-67), apoptotic rate (TUNEL), or
EWS-FLI1 fusion type. By univariate analysis, the P53 > 20% group showed a
significantly poorer overall survival among patients with localized disease (n = 
43 patients) (P = 0.001) and in the entire study group (P = 0.01). In
multivariate Cox analyses of overall survival, P53 > 20% was the strongest
negative factor among prognostic factors available at the time of diagnosis (P = 
0.001; relative risk [RR] = 9) and when chemotherapy response was included in the
analysis (P53 > 20%: P = 0.01; RR = 10).
CONCLUSIONS: P53 alteration appears to define a small clinical subset of patients
with ES/PNET with a markedly poor outcome. The current observations warrant a
systematic prospective study with comprehensive P53 mutation analysis. [See
related article on pages 793-9, this issue.]

Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 10951341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Biochemistry. 2000 Aug 1;39(30):8917-28.

Ets domain transcription factor PE1 suppresses human interstitial collagenase
promoter activity by antagonizing protein-DNA interactions at a critical AP1
element.

Bidder M(1), Loewy AP, Latifi T, Newberry EP, Ferguson G, Willis DM, Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

In MC3T3E1 calvarial osteoblasts, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
signaling elicits multiple transcriptional responses, including upregulation of
the interstitial collagenase/matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) promoter. FGF
responsiveness maps to a bipartite Ets/AP1 element at base pairs -123 to -61 in
the human MMP1 promoter. Under basal conditions, the MMP1 promoter is repressed
in part via protein-DNA interactions at the Ets cognate, and minimally two
mechanisms convey MMP1 promoter upregulation by FGF2: (a) transcriptional
activation via Fra1/c-Jun containing DNA-protein interactions at the AP1 cognate 
and (b) derepression of promoter activity regulated by the Ets cognate. To
identify osteoblast Ets repressors that potentially participate in gene
expression in the osteoblast, we performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of mRNA isolated from MC3T3E1 cells, using
degenerative amplimers to the conserved Ets DNA binding domain to survey the Ets 
genes expressed by these cells. Six distinct Ets mRNAs were identified: Ets2,
Fli1, GABPalpha, SAP1, Elk1, and PE1. Of these, only PE1 has extensive homology
to the known Ras-regulated Ets transcriptional repressor, ERF. Therefore, we
cloned and characterized PE1 cDNA from a mouse brain library and performed
functional analysis of this particular Ets family member. A 2 kb transcript was
isolated from brain that encodes a approximately 57 kDa protein; the predicted
protein contains the known N-terminal Ets domain of PE1 and a novel C-terminal
domain with signficant homology to murine ERF. The murine PE1 open reading frame 
(ORF) is much larger than the previously reported human PE1 ORF. Consistent with 
this, affinity-purified rabbit anti-mouse PE1 antibody specifically recognizes an
approximately 66 kDa protein present only in the nuclear fraction of MC3T3E1
osteoblasts. Recombinant PE1 binds authentic AGGAWG Ets DNA cognates, and
transient transfection studies demonstrate that PE1 represses MMP1 promoter
activity. Surprisingly, although deletion of the MMP1 Ets cognate at nucleotides 
-88 to -83 abrogates FGF2 induction, it does not prevent suppression of the
AP1-dependent MMP1 promoter by PE1. PE1 regulation maps to the MMP1 promoter
region -75 to -61, suggesting that PE1 suppresses transcription via
protein-protein interactions with AP1. Consistent with this, recombinant GST-PE1 
specifically inhibits the formation of protein-DNA interactions on the MMP1 AP1
site (-72 to -66) when present in an admixture with MC3T3E1 crude nuclear
extract. In toto, these data indicate that PE1 participates in the
transcriptional regulation of the MMP1 promoter in osteoblasts. As observed with 
other transcriptional repressors of MMP1 gene expression, transcriptional
suppression by PE1 occurs via inhibition of AP1-dependent promoter activity.

PMID: 10913304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Int J Cancer. 2000 Aug 1;87(3):328-35.

Identification of EWS/FLI-1 transcripts in giant-cell tumor of bone.

Scotlandi K(1), Chano T, Benini S, Serra M, Manara MC, Cerisano V, Picci P,
Baldini N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Ricerca Oncologica, Dipartimento Goidanich, Istituti Ortopedici
Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy. katia.scotland@ior.it

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene, resulting from a t(11;22) translocation, plays a key
role in the pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma. We demonstrate the presence of
EWS/FLI-1 hybrid transcripts also in giant-cell tumor, a bone neoplasm featuring 
intermediate characteristics between benign and malignant lesions. Chimeric
products were detected by semi-nested PCR after 2 cycles of amplification in
13/15 cases of giant-cell tumor, and their presence was confirmed by Southern and
Western blots and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Moreover, 3/8 primary
cultures of giant-cell tumor showed the same type of hybrid transcript observed
in the original tumor sample. Sequencing of PCR products confirmed the presence
of EWS and FLI-1 sequences in these products. Detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcripts in giant-cell tumor of bone provides a model for the study of the
transforming mechanisms of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene in mesenchymal tumors.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10897036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(15):5643-52.

Hemorrhage, impaired hematopoiesis, and lethality in mouse embryos carrying a
targeted disruption of the Fli1 transcription factor.

Spyropoulos DD(1), Pharr PN, Lavenburg KR, Jackers P, Papas TS, Ogawa M, Watson
DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, USA.

The Ets family of transcription factors have been suggested to function as key
regulators of hematopoeisis. Here we describe aberrant hematopoeisis and
hemorrhaging in mouse embryos homozygous for a targeted disruption in the Ets
family member, Fli1. Mutant embryos are found to hemorrhage from the dorsal aorta
to the lumen of the neural tube and ventricles of the brain (hematorrhachis) on
embryonic day 11.0 (E11.0) and are dead by E12.5. Histological examinations and
in situ hybridization reveal disorganization of columnar epithelium and the
presence of hematomas within the neuroepithelium and disruption of the basement
membrane lying between this and mesenchymal tissues, both of which express Fli1
at the time of hemorrhaging. Livers from mutant embryos contain few
pronormoblasts and basophilic normoblasts and have drastically reduced numbers of
colony forming cells. These defects occur with complete penetrance of phenotype
regardless of the genetic background (inbred B6, hybrid 129/B6, or outbred CD1)
or the targeted embryonic stem cell line used for the generation of knockout
lines. Taken together, these results provide in vivo evidence for the role of
Fli1 in the regulation of hematopoiesis and hemostasis.

PMCID: PMC86032
PMID: 10891501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Curr Opin Oncol. 2000 Jul;12(4):323-9.

Ewing sarcoma family of tumors.

West DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, Sacramento 95817, USA. dcwest@ucdavis.edu

The Ewing sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT) shares a common neural histogenesis,
tumor genetics, and a fascinating biology, all of which hold the promise of
identifying new therapeutic targets. The genetic hallmark of ESFT is the presence
of the t(11;22)(q24;q12), which creates the EWS/FLI1 fusion gene and results in
the expression of a chimeric protein. This article reviews much of the important 
work that has been reported over the past year regarding the biology and therapy 
of ESFT. Major studies include the observation that the early region (E1A) of
human adenovirus type 5 is directly linked to and may initiate production of the 
EWS/FLI1 fusion transcript in normal human fibroblasts and keratinocytes. In
addition, there is new information regarding the function of EWS/FLI1 and
downstream signals by which it acts. New clinical information continues to
support the addition of ifosfamide to standard chemotherapy regimens and help
further refine prognostic features, including biologic features that may someday 
allow better risk stratification and therapy design.

PMID: 10888417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Med Pediatr Oncol. 2000 Jun;34(6):407-12.

Biphenotypic sarcoma with characteristics of both a Ewing sarcoma and a
desmoplastic small round cell tumor.

Rosoff PM(1), Hatcher S, West DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. rosof001@mc.duke.edu

BACKGROUND: The EWS gene, a transcription factor of unknown function, is involved
in chromosomal translocations associated with a wide variety of tumors,
particularly small round blue cell tumors such as Ewing sarcoma. It has
previously been reported that desmoplastic small round blue cell tumor (DSRBCT)
frequently has an associated t(11;22) abnormality resulting from fusion of the
EWS and WT-1 genes.
PROCEDURE: We report a case of a small round blue cell tumor with characteristics
of both Ewing sarcoma and DSRBCT with a t(11;22) translocation leading to fusion 
of the EWS and FLI1genes.
RESULTS: The translocation point and fusion products were confirmed by polymerase
chain reaction amplification and restriction fragment mapping of the products.
CONCLUSIONS: The biphenotypic nature of this case and the apparent promiscuity of
the EWS gene in tumor-associated translocations coupled with other reports of
biphenotypic childhood sarcomas has potential implications for the relationship
between small round blue cell tumors and the mechanism of EWS/FLI1 oncogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10842247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 11;275(32):24865-71.

The splicing factor U1C represses EWS/FLI-mediated transactivation.

Knoop LL(1), Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

EWS is an RNA-binding protein involved in human tumor-specific chromosomal
translocations. In approximately 85% of Ewing's sarcomas, such translocations
give rise to the chimeric gene EWS/FLI. In the resulting fusion protein, the RNA 
binding domains from the C terminus of EWS are replaced by the DNA-binding domain
of the ETS protein FLI-1. EWS/FLI can function as a transcription factor with the
same DNA binding specificity as FLI-1. EWS and EWS/FLI can associate with the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme as well as with SF1, an essential splicing factor. Here 
we report that U1C, one of three human U1 small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein-specific proteins, interacts in vitro and in vivo with both EWS
and EWS/FLI. U1C interacts with other splicing factors and is important in the
early stages of spliceosome formation. Importantly, co-expression of U1C
represses EWS/FLI-mediated transactivation, demonstrating that this interaction
can have functional ramifications. Our findings demonstrate that U1C, a well
characterized splicing protein, can also function in transcriptional regulation. 
Furthermore, they suggest that EWS and EWS/FLI may function both in
transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes.

PMID: 10827180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Oncogene. 2000 May 4;19(19):2296-304.

Epo regulates erythroid proliferation and differentiation through distinct
signaling pathways: implication for erythropoiesis and Friend virus-induced
erythroleukemia.

Zochodne B(1), Truong AH, Stetler K, Higgins RR, Howard J, Dumont D, Berger SA,
Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Sunnybrook and
Women's College Health Sciences Centre, Ontario, Canada.

We have recently isolated the erythroleukemic cell line, HB60-5, that
proliferates in the presence of erythropoietin (Epo) and stem cell factor (SCF), 
but undergoes terminal differentiation in the presence of Epo alone. Ectopic
expression of the ets related transcription factor Fli-1 in these cells resulted 
in the establishment of the Epo-dependent cell line HB60-ED that proliferates in 
the presence of Epo. In this study, we utilized these two cell lines to examine
the signal transduction pathways that are activated in response to Epo and SCF
stimulation. We demonstrate that Epo, but not SCF, phosphorylates STAT-5 in both 
HB60-5 and HB60-ED cells. Interestingly, SCF activates the Shc/ras pathway in
HB60-5 cells while Epo does not. However, both Epo and SCF are capable of
activating the Shc/ras pathway in HB60ED cells. Furthermore, enforced expression 
of gp55 in HB60-5 cells by means of infection with the Spleen Focus Forming
virus-P (SFFV-P), confers Epo independent growth, which is associated with the
up-regulation of Fli-1. Activation of the Shc/ras pathway is readily detected in 
gp55 expressing cells in response to both Epo and SCF, and is associated with a
block in STAT-5B tyrosine phosphorylation. These results suggest that STAT-5
activation, in the absence of Shc/ras activation, plays a role in erythroid
differentiation. Moreover, Fli-1 is capable of switching Epo-induced
differentiation to Epo-induced proliferation, suggesting that this ets factor
regulated genes whose products modulate the Epo-Epo-R signal transduction
pathway.

PMID: 10822380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2000 Feb;61(1):61-9.

[Experimental angiogenesis : strategy for the functional study of the
transcription factors of the Ets family during morphogenesis of the vascular
tree].

[Article in French]

Mattot V(1), Pourtier-Manzanedo A, Vercamer C, Soncin F, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP560, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, 1, rue
Calmette, 59021 Lille, France.

During morphogenesis of the vascular tree, the massive outgrowth of primitive
capillaries is followed by the development and the maturation of some capillary
branches whereas others regress. The direct observation and the manipulation of
in vivo models, including a series of recent knock-out experiments, allow to
delineate the mechanisms controlling this process, and to identify factors
involved in the formation of a mature capillary, surrounded with a basal lamina
and pericytes. The expression of several members of the Ets family of
transcription factors, Ets1, Erg and Fli, correlates with the occurrence of
invasive processes, such as angiogenesis during normal and pathological
development. The description of the phenotype of cultured endothelial cells
expressing the DNA binding domain of Ets1 suggests that members of the Ets family
take part in the morphogenesis of the -vascular tree. Although transient
transfection experiments allowed the identification of putative targets genes for
Ets1 during angiogenesis, deciphering the Ets1 regulation networks remains a
major goal for the future.

PMID: 10790594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2000 Apr;19(2):127-32.

Endometrial endometrioid carcinomas associated with Ewing sarcoma/peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor.

Sinkre P(1), Albores-Saavedra J, Miller DS, Copeland LJ, Hameed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235-9073, USA.

Three uterine tumors, each consisting of endometrioid carcinoma and Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (ES/pPNET) are described. The 
diagnosis of ES/pPNET in each case was first established in the hysterectomy
specimen because each ES/pPNET was misinterpreted on the endometrial biopsy
specimens as a high-grade homologous sarcoma. The ES/pPNET element in each case
consisted of solid masses of small- to medium-sized round cells without
Homer-Wright pseudorosettes, glial or ganglion cells, true rosettes with central 
lumens, or medulloepithelial tubules. Each ES/pPNET exhibited focal positive
immunostaining for neuron-specific enolase, diffuse staining for vimentin, and
strong cell membrane immunoreactivity for O13 (CD99), the last finding providing 
the first clue to the diagnosis of ES/pPNET in each case. The diagnosis in each
case was confirmed by detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript through reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. We also examined O13 immunoreactivity
retrospectively in 40 cases of malignant mixed mullerian tumors (MMMT) with
homologous or heterologous elements. O13 immunoreactivity was not observed in the
malignant epithelium or in the homologous or heterologous sarcomas. The
immunoreactivity of O13 in round cell endometrial sarcomas provides a clue to the
diagnosis of ES/pPNET.

PMID: 10782408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2000 Feb;26(1):84-90.

The ETS family member Tel antagonizes the Fli-1 phenotype in hematopoietic cells.

Kwiatkowski BA(1), Zielinska-Kwiatkowska AG, Bauer TR Jr, Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle,
Washington 98108, USA.

The ETS family member Tel is rearranged in human leukemia of both myeloid and
lymphoid origin while the ETS member Fli-1 is insertionally activated in Friend
erythroleukemia in mice and is translocated to the EWS locus in Ewing's sarcoma. 
In previous studies we demonstrated that Tel binds to Fli-1 and blocks
transactivation of megakaryocytic promoters by Fli-1. In this study we
demonstrate that expression of Fli-1 in the leukemia cell line K562 induces a
megakaryocytic phenotype and the expression of the platelet markers GPIX,
GP1balpha, and GPIIb. Introduction of Tel blocked the megakaryocytic phenotype
induced by Fli-1, suggesting a biological correlation to the biochemical
interaction of Tel and Fli-1 reported previously.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10772879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 6;19(15):1969-74.

The Ets1 proto-oncogene is upregulated by retinoic acid: characterization of a
functional retinoic acid response element in the Ets1 promoter.

Raouf A(1), Li V, Kola I, Watson DK, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, MRC group in Periodontal
Physiology, University of Toronto, and Sunnybrook and Women's College Health
Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The v-ets oncoprotein and its progenitor Ets1 belong to a family of transcription
factors that are related by an 85 amino acid conserved DNA binding domain, the
ets domain. Ets1 plays important role(s) in control of cell proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. Abnormal expression of Ets1 could lead to
disruption of these processes and contribute to development of malignancy.
Retinoic acid (RA) inhibits proliferation, induces differentiation and regulates 
apoptosis in many different cell types. Here, we demonstrate that RA treatment
increases the expression of Ets1 mRNA, but not that of Ets2, Elk1 or Fli1 in
MC3T3-E1 cells. Ets1 induction is detectable after 4 h, can be maintained for at 
least 14 days, and is inhibited by Actinomycin D, which suggests that RA
regulation of Ets1 occurs at the transcriptional level. The promoter region of
Ets1 contains four retinoic acid response element (RARE) half sites located at
-94, -152, -1765 and -2252 from the translation start site. We show that RARbeta 
is expressed by MC3T3-E1 cells in the presence of RA and demonstrate that it
binds to the -94 RARE half site. Furthermore, RA induces transcription of Ets1
promoter-reporter constructs containing this RARE half site.

PMID: 10773887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):2959-69.

Negative and translation termination-dependent positive control of FLI-1 protein 
synthesis by conserved overlapping 5' upstream open reading frames in Fli-1 mRNA.

Sarrazin S(1), Starck J, Gonnet C, Doubeikovski A, Melet F, Morle F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, 69622
Villeurbanne, France.

The proto-oncogene Fli-1 encodes a transcription factor of the ets family whose
overexpression is associated with multiple virally induced leukemias in mouse,
inhibits murine and avian erythroid cell differentiation, and induces drastic
perturbations of early development in Xenopus. This study demonstrates the
surprisingly sophisticated regulation of Fli-1 mRNA translation. We establish
that two FLI-1 protein isoforms (of 51 and 48 kDa) detected by Western blotting
in vivo are synthesized by alternative translation initiation through the use of 
two highly conserved in-frame initiation codons, AUG +1 and AUG +100.
Furthermore, we show that the synthesis of these two FLI-1 isoforms is regulated 
by two short overlapping 5' upstream open reading frames (uORF) beginning at two 
highly conserved upstream initiation codons, AUG -41 and GUG -37, and terminating
at two highly conserved stop codons, UGA +35 and UAA +15. The mutational analysis
of these two 5' uORF revealed that each of them negatively regulates FLI-1
protein synthesis by precluding cap-dependent scanning to the 48- and 51-kDa AUG 
codons. Simultaneously, the translation termination of the two 5' uORF appears to
enhance 48-kDa protein synthesis, by allowing downstream reinitiation at the
48-kDa AUG codon, and 51-kDa protein synthesis, by allowing scanning ribosomes to
pile up and consequently allowing upstream initiation at the 51-kDa AUG codon. To
our knowledge, this is the first example of a cellular mRNA displaying
overlapping 5' uORF whose translation termination appears to be involved in the
positive control of translation initiation at both downstream and upstream
initiation codons.

PMCID: PMC85554
PMID: 10757781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1557-60.

Adenovirus E1A does not induce the Ewing tumor-associated gene fusion EWS-FLI1.

Kovar H(1), Fallaux FJ, Pribill I, Jugovic D, Bartl S, Ambros PF, Aryee DN,
Wiegant JC, Hoeben RC.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria. 
kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

Rearrangement of the EWS gene with FLI1 is thought to occur early in the
pathogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma family tumors (EFTs) because the chromosomal
aberration is pathognomonic for this disease. Recently, adenovirus (Ad) 5 E1A
protein has been reported to induce this gene rearrangement in a variety of cell 
types. This finding, if generally substantiated, not only suggests an etiological
role for viral agents in the generation of oncogenic chromosomal aberrations but 
would also significantly impact the use of adenoviral vectors for gene therapy.
In contrast, we now report on the absence of EWS-FLI1 chimeric products from
short- and long-term cultures of stably Ad-transformed cells lines and from
transiently E1A-expressing cell lines. In addition, we demonstrate the absence of
E1A from EFTs. We conclude that there is no role for Ads in EFT pathogenesis.
Consequently, evidence for a viral genesis of tumor-specific gene rearrangements 
is not available.

PMID: 10749123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 15;60(6):1536-40.

EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, and EWS-ETV1 oncoproteins of Ewing tumor family all suppress
transcription of transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene.

Im YH(1), Kim HT, Lee C, Poulin D, Welford S, Sorensen PH, Denny CT, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation and Carcinogenesis, DBS, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Ewing sarcoma-specific chromosomal translocations fuse the EWS gene to a subset
of ets transcription factor family members, most commonly the FLI1 gene and less 
frequently ERG, ETV1, E1A-F, or FEV. These fusion proteins are thought to act as 
aberrant transcription factors that bind DNA through their ets DNA binding
domain. Recently, we have shown (K-B. Hahm et al., Nat. Genet., 23: 222-227,
1999) that the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) type II receptor
(TGF-beta RII), a putative tumor suppressor gene, is a target of the EWS-FLI1
fusion protein. Here, we also examined effects of EWS-ETV1 and EWS-ERG on
expression of the TGF-beta RII gene. We show that relative to the control,
NIH-3T3 cell lines stably transfected with the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1
gene fusion express reduced levels of TGF-beta RII mRNA and protein, and that
these cell lines have reduced TGF-beta sensitivity. Cotransfection of these
fusion genes and the TGF-beta RII promoter suppresses TGF-beta RII promoter
activity and also FLI1-, ERG-, or ETV1-induced promoter activity. These results
indicate that transcriptional repression of TGF-beta RII is an important target
of the EWS-FLI1, EWS-ERG, or EWS-ETV1 oncogene, and that EWS-ets fusion proteins 
may function as dominant negative forms of ets transcription factors.

PMID: 10749119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Leukemia. 2000 Mar;14(3):439-45.

FLI-1 is a suppressor of erythroid differentiation in human hematopoietic cells.

Athanasiou M(1), Mavrothalassitis G, Sun-Hoffman L, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, MD, USA.

The FLI-1 oncogene, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors, is
associated with both normal and abnormal hematopoietic cell growth and
lineage-specific differentiation. We have previously shown that overexpression of
FLI-1 in pluripotent human hematopoietic cells leads to the induction of a
megakaryocytic phenotype. In this report we show that FLI-1 also acts as an
inhibitor of erythroid differentiation. Following the induction of erythroid
differentiation, pluripotent cells express reduced levels of FLI-1. In contrast, 
when FLI-1 is overexpressed in these cells, the levels of erythroid markers are
reduced. The ability of FLI-1 overexpressing cells to respond to
erythroid-specific inducers such as hemin and Ara-C is also inhibited, and the
uninduced cells show a reduced level of the erythroid-associated GATA-1
transcription factor mRNA. Furthermore, expression of a GATA-1 promoter-driven
reporter construct in K562 cells is inhibited by co-transfection with a construct
expressing FLI-1. Our results support the hypothesis that FLI-1 can act both
positively and negatively in the regulation of hematopoietic cell
differentiation, and that inhibition of GATA-1 expression may contribute to
FLI-1-mediated inhibition of erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 10720139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):331-5.

The Ets family member Erg gene is expressed in mesodermal tissues and neural
crests at fundamental steps during mouse embryogenesis.

Vlaeminck-Guillem V(1), Carrere S, Dewitte F, Stehelin D, Desbiens X,
Duterque-Coquillaud M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 319, Institut de Biologie de Lille, BP447, 1 rue Calmette, 59021
Lille, cedex, France.

The Erg gene belongs to the Ets family encoding a class of transcription factors.
To gain new insight on the in vivo functional specificity of the Erg gene within 
the wide Ets family, we used in situ hybridization to determine its expression
pattern during murine embryogenesis. We found that the Erg gene expression
predominates in mesodermal tissues, including the endothelial, precartilaginous
and urogenital areas. A specific Erg gene expression was also identified in
migrating neural crest cells. A comparison with Fli-1, the most closely
Erg-related gene, revealed that both gene expressions partially overlap,
suggesting that they may contribute to related functions in these tissues. Like
other Ets family genes, Erg seems involved in several fundamental developmental
steps in murine embryogenesis, including epithelio-mesenchymal transition, cell
migration, settlement and differentiation.

PMID: 10704859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Virology. 2000 Mar 15;268(2):308-18.

Phenotyping of Evi1, Evi11/Cb2, and Evi12 transformed leukemias isolated from a
novel panel of cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus-infected mice.

Joosten M(1), Valk PJ, Vankan Y, de Both N, Löwenberg B, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, 3000 DR, The
Netherlands.

Cas-Br-M murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is a slow-transforming retrovirus that
potently induces leukemias in mice and therefore is well suited for retroviral
insertional mutagenesis. We used Cas-Br-M MuLV in NIH/Swiss mice to establish a
new panel of mainly myeloid leukemias. All tumors found in leukemic animals were 
classified by gross pathology, morphology, and immunophenotype, as well as the
incidence of known common virus integration sites (VISs) in MuLV-induced myeloid 
malignancies (i.e., Evi1, Evi11/Cb2, Evi12, Fli1, and c-Myb). Interestingly, male
mice were more susceptible than females to the induction of leukemia by Cas-Br-M 
MuLV. Seventy-four of the Cas-Br-M MuLV-inoculated mice developed a severe
splenomegaly, sometimes in association with a thymoma. Although most of the
immunophenotyped Cas-Br-M MuLV tumors were of myeloid origin (58%), numerous
T-cell leukemias (21%) and mixed myeloid/T-cell leukemias (21%) were found. The
myeloid leukemias and myeloid compartment of the mixed leukemias were further
characterized by immunophenotyping with stem cell-, myeloid-, and
erythroid-specific antibodies. The known Cas-Br-M MuLV common VISs (Evi1,
Evi11/Cb2, and Evi12) were demonstrated in 19%, 12%, and 20% of the cases,
respectively, whereas no Fli1 and c-Myb rearrangements were found. Integrations
into Evi1 were restricted to myeloid leukemias, whereas those in Evi11/Cb2 and
Evi12 were identified in myeloid as well as T-lymphoid leukemias. This panel of
well characterized Cas-Br-M MuLV-induced hematopoietic tumors may be useful for
the isolation and characterization of new proto-oncogenes involved in myeloid or 
T-cell leukemias.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10704339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Pediatr Neurosurg. 1999 Dec;31(6):307-15.

Primary Ewing's sarcoma of the skull in children. Utility of molecular
diagnostics, surgery and adjuvant therapies.

Carlotti CG Jr(1), Drake JM, Hladky JP, Teshima I, Becker LE, Rutka JT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, The University of
Toronto, Canada.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) of the skull is rare. Herein, we present 2 cases of ES that 
involved the cranium in young children. In one case, the lesion originated in the
petrous temporal bone; in the other, the frontal bone. Both children were acutely
compromised neurologically by signs and symptoms of raised intracranial pressure.
In both cases, radiographs revealed massive tumors affecting the skull.
Neurosurgical resection of the tumor was undertaken in both instances, and the
diagnosis of ES was confirmed by immunohistochemistry, cytogenetic analysis
(translocation 11;22), spectral karyotyping and RT-PCR (demonstration of a
EWS/FLI1 fusion transcript). Following aggressive surgical resection, both
children received intensive chemotherapy. No child has received radiation
therapy. One child is alive and well 8 years after diagnosis without any evidence
of residual disease. The other is currently undergoing chemotherapy for her
tumor. The principles involved in the management of children with cranial-based
ES are discussed. These 2 cases serve to illustrate the fact that even children
with massive ES tumors of the cranium may be salvaged with aggressive combination
therapy.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 10702731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Am J Pathol. 2000 Mar;156(3):849-55.

Association of EWS-FLI1 type 1 fusion with lower proliferative rate in Ewing's
sarcoma.

de Alava E(1), Panizo A, Antonescu CR, Huvos AG, Pardo-Mindán FJ, Barr FG,
Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

The Ewing's sarcoma (ES) family of tumors, including peripheral neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET), is defined genetically by specific chromosomal translocations
resulting in fusion of the EWS gene with a member of the ETS family of
transcription factors, either FLI1 (90-95%) or ERG (5-10%). A second level of
molecular genetic heterogeneity stems from the variation in the location of the
translocation breakpoints, resulting in the inclusion of different combinations
of exons from EWS and FLI1 (or ERG) in the fusion products. The most common type 
of EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript, type 1, is associated with a favorable prognosis
and appears to encode a functionally weaker transactivator, compared to other
fusion types. We sought to determine whether the observed covariation of
structure, function, and clinical course correlates with tumor cell kinetic
parameters such as proliferative rate and apoptosis, and with expression of the
receptor for insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-1R). In a group of 86 ES/PNET with
defined EWS-ETS fusions (45 EWS-FLI1 type 1, 27 EWS-FLI1 non-type 1, 14 EWS-ERG),
we assessed proliferation rate by immunostaining for Ki-67 using MIB1 antibody (n
= 85), apoptosis by TUNEL assay (n = 66), and IGF-1R expression by immunostaining
with antibody 1H7 (n = 78). Ki-67 proliferative index was lower in tumors with
EWS-FLI1 type 1 than those with non-type 1 EWS-FLI1, whether analyzed as a
continuous (P = 0.049) or categorical (P = 0.047) variable. Logistic regression
analysis suggests that this association was secondary to the association of type 
1 EWS-FLI1 and lower IGF-1R expression (P = 0.04). Comparing EWS-FLI1 to EWS-ERG 
cases, Ki-67 proliferative index was higher in the latter (P = 0.01, Mann-Whitney
test; P = 0.02, Fisher's exact test), but there was no significant difference in 
IGF-1R. TUNEL results showed no significant differences between groups. Our
results suggest that clinical and functional differences between alternative
forms of EWS-FLI1 are paralleled by differences in proliferative rate, possibly
mediated by differential regulation of the IGF-1R pathway.

PMCID: PMC1876855
PMID: 10702401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Feb;24(2):322-3.

'Like--but oh, how different!'.

Gaffney EF.

Comment on
    Am J Surg Pathol. 1999 Feb;23(2):159-65.

PMID: 10680910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):237-52.

Insights into early vasculogenesis revealed by expression of the ETS-domain
transcription factor Fli-1 in wild-type and mutant zebrafish embryos.

Brown LA(1), Rodaway AR, Schilling TF, Jowett T, Ingham PW, Patient RK, Sharrocks
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, King's College
London, 26-29 Drury Lane, London, UK.

Fli-1 is an ETS-domain transcription factor whose locus is disrupted in Ewing's
Sarcoma and F-MuLV induced erythroleukaemia. To gain a better understanding of
its normal function, we have isolated the zebrafish homologue. Similarities with 
other vertebrates, in the amino acid sequence and DNA binding properties of Fli-1
from zebrafish, suggest that its function has been conserved during vertebrate
evolution. The initial expression of zebrafish fli-1 in the posterior lateral
mesoderm overlaps with that of gata2 in a potential haemangioblast population
which likely contains precursors of blood and endothelium. Subsequently, fli-1
and gata2 expression patterns diverge, with separate fli-1 and gata2 expression
domains arising in the developing vasculature and in sites of blood formation
respectively. Elsewhere in the embryo, fli-1 is expressed in sites of
vasculogenesis. The expression of fli-1 was investigated in a number of zebrafish
mutants, which affect the circulatory system. In cloche, endothelium is absent
and blood is drastically reduced. In contrast to the blood and endothelial
markers that have been studied previously, fli-1 expression was initiated
normally in cloche embryos, indicating that induction of fli-1 is one of the
earliest indicators of haemangioblast formation. Furthermore, although fli-1
expression in the trunk was not maintained, the normal expression pattern in the 
anterior half of the embryo was retained. These anterior cells did not, however, 
condense to form blood vessels. These data indicate that cloche has previously
unsuspected roles at multiple stages in the formation of the vasculature.
Analysis of fli-1 expression in midline patterning mutants floating head and
squint, confirms a requirement for the notochord in the formation of the
dorsal-aorta. The formation of endothelium in one-eyed pinhead, cyclops and
squint embryos indicates a novel role for the endoderm in the formation of the
axial vein. The phenotype of sonic-you mutants implies a likely role for Sonic
Hedgehog in mediating these processes.

PMID: 10640707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Br J Cancer. 2000 Jan;82(1):16-9.

Preferential down-regulation of phospholipase C-beta in Ewing's sarcoma cells
transfected with antisense EWS-Fli-1.

Dohjima T(1), Ohno T, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Wen-yi Y, Shimizu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

EWS-Fli-1, a fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuro-ectodermal 
tumour (PNET), encodes a transcriptional activator and promotes cellular
transformation. We have made stable Ewing's sarcoma cells expressing antisense
EWS-Fli-1 transcripts by transfecting the antisense EWS-Fli-1 expression plasmid.
These cells showed partial loss of endogenous EWS-Fli-1 proteins and suppression 
of the cell growth. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the growth
inhibition, we examined the changes of signal transducing proteins by immunoblot 
analysis in Ewing's sarcoma cells stably expressing antisense EWS-Fli-1
transcripts. Western blotting of the cell proteins revealed that expressions of
phospholipase Cbeta2 and beta3 (PLCbeta2, PLCbeta3), and also protein kinase C
alpha and beta (PKCalpha, beta) were significantly reduced by transfecting with
antisense EWS-Fli-1. The inositol phosphates production by bradykinin (BK), but
not platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), was suppressed in these cells. These
results suggest that the PLCbeta2 and PLCbeta3 may play a role in tumour
proliferation in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2363212
PMID: 10638960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 23;18(56):8000-10.

The N-terminal domain of human TAFII68 displays transactivation and oncogenic
properties.

Bertolotti A(1), Bell B, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 163 - 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

In Ewing tumor, the (11;22) chromosomal translocation produces a chimeric
molecule composed of the amino-terminal domain of EWS fused to the
carboxyl-terminal DNA-binding domain of FLI-1. Previously, we have identified a
novel protein TAFII68, which is highly similar to EWS and another closely related
protein TLS (also called FUS). We demonstrate that the N-terminus of TAFII68
efficiently stimulates transcription when fused to two different DNA binding
domains and that overexpression of TAFII68-FLI-1 chimeras in NIH3T3 cells leads
to oncogenic transformation. We have also investigated the molecular mechanisms
which could account for the transcriptional activation and the oncogenic
transformation potential of the N-termini of TAFII68 and EWS. Thus, we have
tested whether the artificial recruitment of components of the preinitiation
complex (PIC) or a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) could bypass the requirement
for the activation domains of either EWS or TAFII68. Recruitment of individual
components of the transcription machinery or the GCN5 HAT is not sufficient to
promote activation from FLI-1 responsive genes either in transfection experiments
or in oncogenic transformation assays. These results suggest that the TAFII68 or 
EWS activation domains enhance a step after PIC formation in the transcriptional 
activation process.

PMID: 10637511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Oncogene. 1999 Dec 16;18(54):7755-64.

Ets transcription factors cooperate with Sp1 to activate the human tenascin-C
promoter.

Shirasaki F(1), Makhluf HA, LeRoy C, Watson DK, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Hollings Cancer Center,
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, SC 29425-2229, 
USA.

Tenascin-C (TN-C), an extracellular matrix glycoprotein is expressed during
embryonic development, but is present only at low levels in normal adult tissues.
TN-C is re-expressed during wound healing, fibrotic diseases and in cancer. To
better understand the mechanisms that control TN-C gene expression, we examined
the regulation of the human TN-C promoter in human fibroblasts. We demonstrate
that a short segment of the TN-C promoter between bp -133 and -27 contains three 
evolutionarily conserved Ets binding sites (EBS). These three EBSs bind in vitro 
expressed Fli1 protein and mediate transactivation of the TN-C gene by Fli1.
Furthermore, two proximal EBSs contribute significantly to basal activity of the 
TN-C promoter. GABP, which is present in human fibroblast nuclear extracts,
interacts with the two proximal EBSs. In addition, several Sp1 and Sp3 binding
sites have been located in close proximity to the EBSs within this promoter
region. The studies performed in Drosophila cells demonstrate that either Fli1 or
GABPalpha+beta1 functionally interact with Sp1 resulting in a synergistic
stimulation of the TN-C promoter activity. In conclusion, this study shows for
the first time that the TN-C gene is regulated by Ets proteins, which together
with Sp1 act as potent activators of TN-C expression.

PMID: 10618716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Lab Invest. 1999 Dec;79(12):1535-43.

EWS/ETS fusion genes induce epithelial and neuroectodermal differentiation in NIH
3T3 fibroblasts.

Teitell MA(1), Thompson AD, Sorensen PH, Shimada H, Triche TJ, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California at Los Angeles, USA. mteitell@ucla.edu

Ewing's sarcoma is the least differentiated member of the peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal (pPNET) tumor family. Chromosomal translocations involving the
EWS gene and five different Ets family transcription factor genes create fusion
genes encoding aberrant transcription factors and are implicated in the vast
majority of Ewing's sarcoma cases. Here, NIH 3T3 fibroblasts were infected with
control (tk-neo or RAS) and two different EWS/ETS-expressing retroviruses. In
vitro studies of established polyclonal lines expressing the two EWS/ETS genes,
either EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ETV1, showed induction of cytokeratin 15 gene expression. 
Both fusion genes also caused characteristic gross morphologic, histologic, and
ultrastructural changes in NIH 3T3 cells when transformed cell lines were
injected into CB-17-scid mice. Native NIH 3T3 cells with a spindled cell
morphology were converted to polygonal cells with high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratios 
that continued to express abundant cytokeratin. Extracellular collagen deposition
was abolished, rough endoplasmic reticulum was markedly diminished, and
rudimentary cell-cell attachments appeared. Most strikingly, neurosecretory-type 
dense core granules like those seen in pPNET were now evident. This murine model,
created in mesenchyme-derived NIH 3T3 cells, demonstrated new characteristics of 
both neuroectodermal and epithelial differentiation and resembled small round
cell tumors microscopically.

PMID: 10616204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 15;28(2):560-9.

The mechanism of complex formation between Fli-1 and SRF transcription factors.

Dalgleish P(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Medical School, University of Newcastle upon
Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

The mechanisms of multicomponent transcription factor complex assembly are
currently poorly defined. A paradigm for this type of complex is the ETS-domain
transcription factor Elk-1 and the MADS-box transcription factor SRF which form a
ternary complex with the c- fos serum response element (SRE). In this study we
have analysed how a different ETS-domain transcription factor Fli-1 interacts
with SRF to form ternary complexes with this element. Two regions of Fli-1 that
are required for ternary complex formation have been identified. These SRF
binding motifs are located on either side of the ETS DNA-binding domain.
Hydrophobic amino acids within these motifs have been identified that play
important roles in binding to SRF and ternary complex formation. By using Fli-1
derivatives with mutations in the N-terminal SRF binding motif, the significance 
of Fli-1-SRF interactions in recruitment of Fli-1 to the c- fos SRE in vivo has
been demonstrated. Collectively our data provide a model of how Fli-1 interacts
with SRF that differs significantly from the mechanism used by a different
ETS-domain protein, Elk-1.

PMCID: PMC102515
PMID: 10606656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.

E1A and the Ewing tumor translocation.

Kovar H.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10581050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.

E1A and the Ewing tumor translocation.

Melot T, Delattre O.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10581049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Nat Genet. 1999 Dec;23(4):481.

Repression of the gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target
of the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Hahm KB.

PMID: 10581042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1999 Sep-Oct;33(5):861-5.

[Analysis of expression of ets-1 and fli-1 proto-oncogenes in murine embryonic
stem cells, induced to differentiation by retinoic acid].

[Article in Russian]

Iakubovich EI(1), Evtushenko VI.

Author information: 
(1)geneng@clonogen.spb.su

PMID: 10579191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Pathol. 1999 Nov;30(11):1356-60.

Absence of EWS/FLI1 fusion in olfactory neuroblastomas indicates these tumors do 
not belong to the Ewing's sarcoma family.

Kumar S(1), Perlman E, Pack S, Davis M, Zhang H, Meltzer P, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, and Cancer Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA.

The balanced reciprocal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is a specific molecular
marker for the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (ESFT). Based on the detection of
this translocation in some olfactory neuroblastomas (ONBs), it has been proposed 
that ONBs also belong to the ESFT. Others have challenged this hypothesis;
however, the rarity of ONBs, as well as the lack of molecular techniques that
work reliably on formalin fixed tissue, have precluded the molecular analysis of 
a significant number of cases. We evaluated the immunophenotypic and molecular
features of 17 paranasal small round neuroectodermal tumors using routinely fixed
tissue. Probes localizing to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) were used in a
standard 2-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay to evaluate
EWS/FLI1 fusion on the der(22). Sixteen tumors were mic-2 negative, whereas 1
tumor was mic-2 positive, compatible with ONB and ESFT, respectively. Thirteen of
15 ONBs could be evaluated by FISH, and all 13 were negative for the EWS/FLI1
fusion. Distinct fusion signals were identified in the single paranasal ESFT. Our
findings indicate that ONBs lack the EWS/FLI1 fusion and are unrelated to the
ESFT; however, true ESFTs may rarely occur as primary sinonasal tumors.

PMID: 10571517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1999 Sep;8(3):120-4.

CD99 positivity and EWS-FLI1 gene rearrangement identify a breast tumor in a
60-year-old patient with attributes of the Ewing family of neoplasms.

Sezer O(1), Jugovic D, Blohmer JU, Turzynski A, Thiel G, Langelotz C, Possinger
K, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology/Hematology, Institute of Medical Genetics
Universitaetsklinikum Charité Medizinische Fakultaet der Humboldt-Universitaet
Berlin, Germany.

Rearrangements of the EWS gene with ETS transcription factor genes as a result of
chromosomal translocation and high expression levels of CD99MIC2 characterize the
Ewing family of tumors (EFT). This group of rather undifferentiated neoplasms
affects bone and soft tissue in children and young adults mostly between 5 and 30
years of age (median, 15 years). This study reports a case of a CD99MIC2 positive
small round cell tumor in the breast of a 60-year-old woman in whom a
t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal aberration was identified by cytogenetic analysis. 
Reverse transcriptase (RT)-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by sequence
analysis revealed expression of a chimera transcript in which EWS exon 10 was
fused to FLI1 exon 6. Previously, this gene fusion has been reported to occur in 
approximately 3% of EFT. The specific gene rearrangement of EWS intron 10 was
confirmed on Southern blot of genomic DNA. This study further contributes to the 
growing list of unusual neoplasms in adults that carry genotypic and phenotypic
traits of the EFT.

PMID: 10565682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 1999 Sep;29(9):438-41.

Synovial sarcoma, histologically mimicking primitive neuroectodermal
tumor/Ewing's sarcoma at distant sites.

Masui F(1), Matsuno Y, Yokoyama R, Nakanishi Y, Hasegawa T, Kanai Y, Beppu Y,
Hirohashi S, Fujii K, Shimoda T.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

We report a case of synovial sarcoma (SS) showing unusual histology at distant
sites. A 47-year-old man was aware of a tumor on the sole of his left foot. After
preoperative chemotherapy with a diagnosis of SS, wide excision was performed.
During postoperative chemotherapy, multiple tumorous lesions developed in the
bone (including the whole spine) and both lungs. The patient died 1 year later.
Histologically, the excised tumor of the foot showed a biphasic cellular pattern 
typical of SS, whereas at autopsy the bone and lung lesions were composed only of
undifferentiated small round cells with cytoplasmic fibrillar processes.
Homer-Wright rosettes were also observed. Immunohistochemically, 80% of the bone 
and lung tumor cells expressed MIC2 protein homogeneously. To clarify whether the
bone and lung round cell tumors were metastatic lesions or second malignancies,
especially primary primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)/Ewing's sarcoma (ES),
we performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of
tumor type-specific fusion gene transcripts. The SYT/SSX fusion transcript was
identified in both the foot and lung lesions, whereas the EWS/FLI1 transcript was
not detected in either lesion. Therefore, we concluded that the multiple bone and
lung tumors were poorly differentiated metastatic tumors, which arose from the SS
of the foot. We also conclude that the identification of chimeric fusion
transcripts can be successfully applied to poorly differentiated sarcomas and
will help in the differential diagnosis of tumors that cannot be distinguished by
conventional morphological examinations. Also, it should be remembered that
cytoplasmic staining for MIC2 protein may occur in sarcomas other than PNET/ES.

PMID: 10563198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Clin Oncol. 1999 Jun;17(6):1809-14.

EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG gene fusions are associated with similar clinical phenotypes
in Ewing's sarcoma.

Ginsberg JP(1), de Alava E, Ladanyi M, Wexler LH, Kovar H, Paulussen M, Zoubek A,
Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Juergens H, Wunder JS, Andrulis IL, Malik R, Sorensen PH, 
Womer RB, Barr FG.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.

PURPOSE: There are a variety of solid tumors in which alternative chromosomal
translocations generate related fusion products. In alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma and
synovial sarcoma, these variant fusions have been found to have major clinical
significance. We investigated whether the two alternative gene fusion products,
EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG, define different clinical subsets within the Ewing's
sarcoma family of tumors.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We selected 30 cases of Ewing's sarcoma with the EWS-ERG
gene fusion and 106 cases with the EWS-FLI1 fusion. Clinical data were obtained
for each case and compared with the molecular diagnostic findings.
RESULTS: There were no significant clinical differences observed between the two 
groups in age of diagnosis, sex, metastasis at diagnosis, primary site,
event-free survival, or overall survival.
CONCLUSION: Differences in the C-terminal partner in the Ewing's sarcoma family
gene fusions are not associated with significant phenotypic differences.

PMID: 10561219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Nov 2;264(3):871-7.

The leukemia-associated gene TEL encodes a transcription repressor which
associates with SMRT and mSin3A.

Chakrabarti SR(1), Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood,
Illinois, 60153, USA.

The E-26 transforming specific (ETS)-related gene TEL, also known as ETV6,
encodes a strong transcription repressor that is rearranged in several recurring 
chromosomal rearrangements associated with leukemia and congenital fibrosarcoma. 
The TEL protein contains two functional domains that have been partially
characterized: a helix-loop-helix (HLH) domain (also known as a pointed domain)
at the N-terminus, which physically interacts with itself, with the
SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9, and with FLI1; and, at the C-terminus, an ETS
domain with DNA-binding properties. Little is known about the function of the
central region of TEL. The HLH domain and the central region of TEL are
consistently maintained in the t(12;21), which is the most frequent chromosomal
translocation involving TEL. In this study, we found that the HLH domain and the 
central region of TEL mediate transcription repression by two distinct
mechanisms. The central region involves the recruitment of a repression complex, 
including SMRT and mSin3A. The HLH domain represses gene transcription through a 
mechanism that is independent of known corepressors. Thus, TEL belongs to a
growing number of transcription factors rearranged by chromosomal translocations 
that are associated with the corepressor complexes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10544023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5592-7.

Transforming activity of EWS/FLI is not strictly dependent upon DNA-binding
activity.

Jaishankar S(1), Zhang J, Roussel MF, Baker SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, TN 38105, USA.

In approximately 85% of Ewing sarcomas, chromosomal translocations give rise to
the chimeric gene EWS/FLI, encoding the N-terminus of the RNA binding protein EWS
fused to the DNA-binding domain of the ETS protein FLI-1. EWS/FLI is a stronger
transcriptional activator than wild-type FLI-1, although both proteins bind to
the same DNA sequences in vitro. In addition, EWS/FLI, but not FLI-1, is a
transforming oncogene in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. EWS/FLI is thought to transform
through its ability to deregulate the expression of target genes. We introduced
several point mutations into the ETS domain of EWS/FLI that abolished DNA-binding
activity. Although two of these mutations disrupted the transforming activity of 
EWS/FLI, one mutated protein containing a substitution of isoleucine 347 with
glutamic acid (I347E) retained diminished transforming activity. In addition,
EWS/FLI I347E did not activate expression of the endogenous EWS/FLI target gene
manic fringe (MFNG). These studies demonstrate that a portion of the oncogenic
activity of EWS/FLI is independent of FLI DNA-binding activity.

PMID: 10523836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5535-45.

The GATA-1 and Spi-1 transcriptional factors bind to a GATA/EBS dual element in
the Fli-1 exon 1.

Barbeau B(1), Barat C, Bergeron D, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biologie moléculaire, Département des Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Fli-1 is a proto-oncogene which is rearranged in tumors induced by three
different retroviruses, Cas-Br-E, F-MuLV, and 10A1. This gene is a member of the 
Ets gene family, a class of transcription factors that recognize and bind to a
DNA motif known as the Ets binding site (EBS). Our laboratory has previously
cloned and characterized the promoter region of both human and mouse Fli-1 genes.
We had then identified several regulatory elements conserved between the two
species. Two of them, an exon 1 GATA/EBS dual element and an EBS element located 
in the 5' end of intron 1, were analysed in the present study. EMSA analysis
performed with nuclear extracts from different cell lines showed that the EBS
element in intron 1 (EBSi) was bound by one potential Ets-related ubiquitous
factor. The GATA/EBS element was bound by several factors that seemed
Ets-related, one of which was found to be specifically expressed in hematopoietic
cells. the GATA/EBS dual element was thus chosen for further analysis. A human
Fli-1-derived genomic fragment containing the GATA/EBS led to enhanced
transcription when positioned upstream of the SV40 promoter in the
erythroleukemic HEL cell line. In addition, an increasing number of GATA/EBS
oligonucleotides upstream of this same promoter resulted in a copy
number-dependent increase in luciferase activity which was greatly reduced when
the EBS consensus sequence was mutated. One of the factors binding to the
GATA/EBS region was identified to be Spi-1 by supershift analysis and was also
shown to bind to the EBS element of the human Ets-2 gene. Supershift analysis
also demonstrated the binding of the GATA-1 factor to the GATA/EBS dual element. 
Our results suggest that Spi-1 and GATA-1 might play a key role in the regulation
of Fli-1.

PMID: 10523830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5525-34.

Loss of p53 in F-MuLV induced-erythroleukemias accelerates the acquisition of
mutational events that confers immortality and growth factor independence.

Wong KS(1), Li YJ, Howard J, Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences
Centre, Research Building, S-Wing, S-218, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M4N 3M5.

Erythroleukemias induced by Friend Murine Leukemia Virus (F-MuLV) involve the
insertional activation of the proto-oncogene Fli-1, and the inactivation of the
p53 tumor suppressor gene. While the activation of Fli-1 is an early, primary
transforming event, p53 mutations are correlated with the immortalization of
erythroleukemic cells in culture. In this study we have further analysed the role
of p53 loss in F-MuLV induced erythroleukemias by examining the progression of
this disease in p53 deficient mice. We found that p53-/- mice succumb to the
disease more rapidly than p53+/+ littermates. Additionally, of the 112 tumors
generated, 19 gave rise to immortal cell lines, eight of which were derived from 
p53-/- mice, and ten of which were from p53+/- mice. The ability of these primary
tumor cells to grow in culture was associated with the complete loss of wild-type
p53 in these cell lines. However, cells from many of the tumors induced in p53-/-
hosts did not survive in vitro. These results suggest that the loss of p53 does
not directly immortalize tumor cells. Instead, we have evidence to suggest that
the loss of p53 promotes the accumulation of mutations that are required for
survival in culture and that are capable of accelerating tumor progression in
vivo. Indeed, mutations causing expression of the growth factor gene
erythropoietin (Epo), were detected in two of seven Epo-independent cell lines
from p53 deficient primary erythroleukemias. Moreover, the mechanism of
activation of the Epo gene in one of these two Epo-independent cell lines
involved genomic rearrangement, that is a hallmark of genetic instability. We
propose that, in F-MuLV induced-erythroleukemias, p53 loss may encourage the
accumulation of further mutations, subsequently conferring a growth advantage and
immortality to the transformed erythroblasts.

PMID: 10523829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 30;18(40):5506-13.

Divergent Ewing's sarcoma EWS/ETS fusions confer a common tumorigenic phenotype
on NIH3T3 cells.

Thompson AD(1), Teitell MA, Arvand A, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Labs, University of 
California at Los Angeles, USA.

Ewing's sarcomas express chimeric transcription factors resulting from a fusion
of the amino terminus of the EWS gene to the carboxyl terminus of one of five ETS
proteins. While the majority of tumors express EWS/FLI1 fusions, some Ewing's
tumors contain variant chimeras such as EWS/ETV1 that have divergent ETS
DNA-binding domains. In spite of their structural differences, both EWS/ETS
fusions up regulate EAT-2, a previously described EWS/FLI1 target gene. In
contrast to EWS/FLI1, NIH3T3 cells expressing EWS/ETV1 cannot form colonies in
soft agar though coexpression of a dominant negative truncated ETV1 construct
attenuates EWS/FLI1 mediated anchorage independent growth. When EWS/ETV1 or
EWS/FLI1 expressing NIH3T3 cells are injected into SCID mice, tumors form more
often and faster than with NIH-3T3 cells with empty vector controls. The
tumorigenic potency of each EWS/ETS fusion is linked to its C-terminal structure,
with the FLI1 C-terminus confering a greater tumorigenic potential than the
corresponding ETV1 domain. The resulting EWS/ETV1 and EWS/FLI1 tumors closely
resemble each other at both a macroscopic and a microscopic level. These tumors
differ greatly from tumors formed by NIH3T3 cells expressing activated RAS. These
data indicate that in spite of their structural differences, EWS/ETV1 and
EWS/FLI1 promote oncogenesis via similar biologic pathways.

PMID: 10523827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 15;274(42):30132-8.

TEL is a sequence-specific transcriptional repressor.

Lopez RG(1), Carron C, Oury C, Gardellin P, Bernard O, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR146, Institut Curie, Centre Universitaire, 91405 Orsay, France.

TEL is a gene frequently involved in specific chromosomal translocations in human
leukemia and sarcoma that encodes a member of the ETS family of transcriptional
regulators. TEL is unusual among other ETS proteins by its ability to
self-associate in vivo, a property that is essential to the oncogenic activation 
of TEL-derived fusion proteins. We show here that TEL is a sequence-specific
transcriptional repressor of ETS-binding site-driven transcription of model and
natural promoters. Deletion of the oligomerization domain of TEL or its
substitution by the homologous region of monomeric ETS1 impaired the ability of
TEL to repress. In contrast, substitution of the oligomerization domain of TEL by
unrelated oligomerization domains resulted in an active repressor, showing that
the ability of TEL to repress depends on its ability to self-associate. The study
of the properties of TEL fusions to the heterologous DNA binding domain of Gal4
identified two autonomous repression domains in TEL, distinct from its
oligomerization domain, that are essential to the ability of TEL to repress
ETS-binding site-containing promoters. These results have implications for the
normal function of TEL, its relation to other ETS proteins, and its role in
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10514502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Death Differ. 1999 Sep;6(9):902-7.

Regulation of the human stress response gene GADD153 expression: role of ETS1 and
FLI-1 gene products.

Seth A(1), Giunta S, Franceschil C, Kola I, Venanzoni MC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in Periodontal Physiology and Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Ontario M5S 1B2,
Canada.

We have previously shown that ETS transcription factors, regulate cell growth and
differentiation, and ETS1 and ETS2 are able to transcriptionally regulate wt p53 
gene expression. In the present study we show that the ETS transcription factors 
also play a role in regulating expression of GADD153, a wt p53 inducible gene,
which induces growth arrest and apoptosis in response to stress signals or DNA
damage. We report the presence of a single EBS in the human GADD153 promoter, and
that the GADD45 gene promoter lacks EBSs. The GADD153 promoter EBS shows a very
high affinity for ETS1 and FLI-1 gene products. In addition, our data show that
both ETS1 and FLI-1 strongly activate transcription of the GADD153 EBS linked to 
the CAT reporter gene. Our results also demonstrate how ETS1 and FLI-1
specifically regulate GADD153 expression. In addition, ectopic ETS2 protein
expression resulted in only a weak induction of the same CAT reporter construct. 
The ETS1 and FLI-1 proteins provide a novel mechanism of activation for GADD153, 
allowing these two ETS genes to control its expression during cell growth and
differentiation, rather than in response to oxidative stress.

PMID: 10510472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nat Genet. 1999 Oct;23(2):222-7.

Repression of the gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target
of the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein.

Hahm KB(1), Cho K, Lee C, Im YH, Chang J, Choi SG, Sorensen PH, Thiele CJ, Kim
SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, DBS, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-5055, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 1999 Dec;23(4):481.

Chromosomal translocations resulting in the expression of chimaeric transcription
factors are frequently observed in tumour cells, and have been suggested to be a 
common mechanism in human carcinogenesis. Ewing sarcoma and related peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumours share recurrent translocations that fuse the
gene EWSR1 (formerly EWS) from 22q-12 to FLI1 and genes encoding other ETS
transcription factors (which bind DNA through the conserved ETS domain). It has
been shown that transduction of the gene EWSR1-FLI1 (encoding EWS-FLI1 protein)
can transform NIH3T3 cells, and that mutants containing a deletion in either the 
EWS domain or the DNA-binding domain in FLI1 lose this ability. This indicates
that the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein may act as an aberrant transcription factor, but
the exact mechanism of oncogenesis remains unknown. Because ETS transcription
factors regulate expression of TGFBR2 (encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor,
TGF-beta RII; Refs 9,14), a putative tumour suppressor gene, we hypothesized that
TGFBR2 may be a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein. We show here that Ewing
sarcoma [corrected] (ES) cell lines with the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion have reduced
TGF-beta sensitivity, and that fusion-positive ES cells and primary tumours both 
express low or undetectable levels of TGFBR2 mRNA and protein product.
Co-transfection of FLI1 and the TGFBR2 promoter induces promoter activity,
whereas EWSR1-FLI1 leads to suppression of TGFBR2 promoter activity and
FLI1-induced promoter activity. Introduction of EWSR1-FLI1 into cells lacking the
EWSR1-FLI1 fusion suppresses TGF-beta RII expression, whereas antisense to
EWSR1-FLI1 in ES cell lines positive for this gene fusion restores TGF-beta RII
expression. Furthermore, introduction of normal TGF-beta RII into ES cell lines
restores TGF-beta sensitivity and blocks tumorigenicity. Our results implicate
TGF-beta RII as a direct target of EWS-FLI1.

PMID: 10508522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genomics. 1999 Sep 15;60(3):371-4.

Cryptic exons as a source of increased diversity of Ewing tumor-associated
EWS-FLI1 chimeric products.

Kovar H(1), Jugovic D, Melot T, Zoubek A, Lenoir G, Fink FM, Philip I, Turc-Carel
C, Thomas G, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria. 
kovar@ccri.univie.ac.at

In the Ewing family of tumors (EFT), the EWS gene is rearranged with members of
the ets oncogene family. Variability in genomic breakpoint locations is the
source of significant heterogeneity in fusion product structure. As a consequence
of variably included exon sequences from the two partner genes, a variable amount
of additional peptide sequence is inserted in between the minimal transforming
domains. Some of this molecular diversity has recently been correlated with
disparate clinical outcome. Here we report on cryptic exons found in the chimeric
RNA of three EFT with different EWS-FLI1 fusions. In two tumors, the emergence of
a cryptic exon from FLI1 intron 5 in the chimeric RNA was apparently unrelated to
the genomic rearrangement that occurred in FLI1 introns 4 and 5, respectively. In
one case, a novel exon was generated through the creation of an artificial splice
acceptor site in FLI1 intron 6 by the genomic rearrangement that occurred in EWS 
intron 8. These results further extend the spectrum of molecular diversity in
EFT.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10493837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hum Pathol. 1999 Sep;30(9):1058-64.

Relation of neurological marker expression and EWS gene fusion types in
MIC2/CD99-positive tumors of the Ewing family.

Amann G(1), Zoubek A, Salzer-Kuntschik M, Windhager R, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, University of Vienna, St Anna Children's
Hospital, Austria.

The Ewing family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by high MIC2/CD99 expression
and specific EWS/ETS gene rearrangements, resulting in different chimeric
transcripts. Further division into peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
and Ewing's sarcoma is still debated and, in the absence of distinct
morphological parameters, has been based on the reactivity with neuroglial
markers (NgM). We investigated 44 EFT in terms of a possible correlation between 
the type of EWS chimeric transcripts and reactivity with the following NgM:
polyclonal and monoclonal neuron-specific enolase (NSE), S-100, chromogranin A,
synaptophysin, Leu-7, glial fibrillary acid protein, and neurofilament. EWS/Fli1 
fusion type 1 was detected in 30 of 44 and type 2 in 11 of 44 tumors. Three
tumors, presenting with an uncommon morphology, carried rare chimeric
transcripts. Our results indicate an association of lack of NgM staining with
type 1 EWS/Fli1 translocations, found in 16 of 18 tumors with no NgM expression
as detectable by any of the antibodies we applied. Using the monoclonal NSE
antibody, 21 of 26 tumors without NgM staining expressed type 1 EWS/FLI1chimeric 
RNA, whereas in the groups with 1 or more and 2 or more NgM, only 9 of 17 and 1
of 5 tumors, respectively, carried type 1 EWS/Fli1 fusion transcripts. Despite
this association of increased NgM expression with a non-type 1 EWS/Fli1 gene
fusion, a strict correlation between the extent of NgM expression and certain EWS
fusion types was not evident. This fortifies the concept to consider EFT as a
spectrum of tumors and suggests the type of EWS fusion transcripts as one, but
not the only parameter influencing the extent of differentiation.

PMID: 10492040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Sep;113(2):188-90.

Clinical and molecular features of Ewing sarcoma in a patient with triple-X
syndrome.

Patiño-García A(1), López de Mesa R, de Alava E, Sierrasesúmaga L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

A case of Ewing sarcoma in a 16-year-old girl with 47 XXXc karyotype is reported.

PMID: 10484990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Sep;113(2):126-33.

Identification of amplified genes in a patient with acute myeloid leukemia and
double minute chromosomes.

Crossen PE(1), Morrison MJ, Rodley P, Cochrane J, Morris CM.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic and Molecular Oncology Unit, Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand.

A case of acute myeloid leukemia (M2) with double minute chromosomes and complex 
karyotypic abnormalities was analyzed cytogenetically and molecularly.
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) showed that the 8q24 region that contains
the MYC oncogene was not amplified. Instead, amplification of chromosomal regions
11q23-->qter and 9p11-->pter was identified. Southern blot analysis confirmed the
CGH findings and showed that the ETS1, FLI1, SRPR, NFRKB, and KCNJ5 genes located
at 11q23-->24 were amplified, whereas the MLL at 11q23 was not amplified.
Additionally, the IFN beta 1 and CDKN2A genes at 9p were amplified, but to a
lesser degree. This is the first example of a case of acute myeloid leukemia with
double minute chromosomes that has not involved amplification of either the MYC
or the MLL genes.

PMID: 10484978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Sep;24(5):527-33.

RT-PCR evaluation of peripheral blood, bone marrow and peripheral blood stem
cells in children and adolescents undergoing VACIME chemotherapy for Ewing's
sarcoma and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma.

Thomson B(1), Hawkins D, Felgenhauer J, Radich J.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

Peripheral blood stem cell support allows dose intensification of multiple cycle 
chemotherapy for metastatic tumors, including pediatric sarcomas. The VACIME
protocol (vincristine, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide, mesna and
etoposide) utilizes peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) collected following the
treatment cycle as support for subsequent dose- and time-intensive chemotherapy. 
A critical assumption is that PBSC collected in this manner will be purged of
residual tumor cells in vivo. We tested this assumption using sensitive
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to assess the presence
of the characteristic translocations of the Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors
(ESFT) and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (ARMS), t(11;22), and t(2;13), respectively.
We used RT-PCR to evaluate 122 samples of peripheral blood (PB), bone marrow (BM)
and PBSC collected from 12 pediatric patients with metastatic ESFT and ARMS. The 
samples included pre-therapy BM and PB, as well as BM, PB, and PBSC collections
at various times in the VACIME treatment course. Molecular evidence of tumor
contamination was detected in 1/40 PBSC collections from 12 patients. In all
patients, we documented clearance of disease by RT-PCR in peripheral blood and
bone marrow by week 9 of the VACIME protocol. In vivo purging in combination with
the intensive VACIME regime appears to be effective in removing tumor cells from 
PBSC, bone marrow, and peripheral blood as detected by RT-PCR.

PMID: 10482938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

An association between viral genes and human oncogenic alterations: the
adenovirus E1A induces the Ewing tumor fusion transcript EWS-FLI1.

Sanchez-Prieto R(1), de Alava E, Palomino T, Guinea J, Fernandez V, Cebrian S,
LLeonart M, Cabello P, Martin P, San Roman C, Bornstein R, Pardo J, Martinez A,
Diaz-Espada F, Barrios Y, Ramon y Cajal S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinica Puerta de Hierro, San Martin de Porres 4,
28035 Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):991-2.
    Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.
    Nat Med. 1999 Dec;5(12):1331.
    Nat Med. 2000 Jan;6(1):4.

Malignant transformation of human cells requires the accumulation of multiple
genetic alterations, such as the activation of oncogenes and loss of function of 
tumor suppressor genes or those related to genomic instability. Among the genetic
alterations most frequently found in human tumors are chromosomal translocations 
that may result in the expression of chimeric products with transforming
capability or are able to change the expression of oncogenes. We show here that
the adenovirus early region 1A (E1A) gene can induce a specific human fusion
transcript (EWS-FLI1) that is characteristic of Ewing tumors. This fusion
transcript was detected by RT-PCR in normal human fibroblasts and keratinocytes
after expression of the adenovirus E1A gene, as well as in human cell lines
immortalized by adenoviruses. Cloning and sequencing of the RT-PCR product showed
fusion points between EWS and FLI1 cDNA identical to those detected in Ewing
tumors. In addition, we detected a chimeric protein by western blot analysis and 
immunoprecipitation and a t(11,22) by fluorescent in situ hybridization. This
association between a single viral gene and a specific human fusion transcript
indicates a direct link between viral genes and chromosome translocations, one of
the hallmarks of many human tumors.

PMID: 10470089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):991-2.

Induction of an oncogenic fusion protein by a viral gene--a new chapter in an old
story.

Kirn D, Hermiston T.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 1999 Sep;5(9):1076-9.

PMID: 10470071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Bone Marrow Transplant. 1999 Aug;24(4):405-9.

Low incidence of molecular evidence for tumour in PBPC harvests from patients
with high risk Ewing tumours.

Fischmeister G(1), Zoubek A, Jugovic D, Witt V, Ladenstein R, Fritsch G, Höcker
P, Gadner H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)St Anna Children's Hospital and Children's Cancer Research Institute, Vienna, 
Austria.

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was applied to evaluate 
the frequency of tumour cells in PBPC products from 15 high risk Ewing tumour
(ET) patients who were treated according to EICESS 92 with high-dose chemotherapy
(HDC) and stem cell rescue. Initial tumour cell contamination of the bone marrow 
(BM) detected by light microscopy was found in five and by RT-PCR in eight cases.
RT-PCR was performed on each PBPC sample repeatedly at a sensitivity comparable
to 20-100 highly EWS-Fli1 expressing tumour cells per 10 ml of fresh blood.
Irrespective of the extent of BM involvement at diagnosis, all BM samples
obtained before harvest were RT-PCR negative. Among 12 of 35 analysed apheresis
products with single positive RT-PCR results only one sample tested reproducibly 
positive for tumour cell contamination in independent determinations. These
preliminary data suggest that tumour cell contamination of PBPC is rarely found
in patients with ET.

PMID: 10467330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Cell. 1999 Mar;12(1):47-56.

[Smooth muscle myosin of SM1 and SM2 isoforms expressing human neuroblastoma cell
line of MP-N-MS].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugimoto T(1), Komada Y, Sakurai M, Horii Y, Morishita R, Nagai R, Takahashi K,
Asada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Miyazaki Medical College, Japan.

Human neuroblastoma (NB) cell lines have at least three morphological appearance 
of neuroblastic (N-type), substrate-adhessive (S-type) and intermediate(I) cells.
Our previous study revealed S-type cells expressed alpha-smooth muscle actin,
desmin and/or basic-calponin, indicating the plausible smooth muscle cell
characteristics of S-type cells. In this study, a new human NB cell line,
MP-N-MS, was established from bone marrow metastasis of a one year and six-month 
old girl with advanced NB, originating from right adrenal gland. Morphology of
this cell line is composed of S-type cells. MP-N-MS was identified as a NB cell
line by surface membrane antigen analysis and MYCN gene amplification. EWS-FLI1
and EWS-ERG chimeric products, observed in Ewing family tumors, were not detected
by RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction). In cytoskeletal
protein analysis, alpha-smooth muscle actin and basic calponin of smooth muscle
cell markers were detected. Furthermore, smooth myosin of SM1 isoform was
identified in MP-N-MS cell line by immunofluorescence, Western blot and RT-PCR,
whereas smooth myosin of SM2 was detected by RT-PCR. MP-N-MS is the first cell
line, showing SM1 and SM2 isoforms. The presence of smooth muscle myosin of SM1
and SM2 isoforms in MP-N-MS demonstrated the mature smooth muscle phenotype of
this NB cell line, and the ability of NB cells to differentiate into smooth
muscle cell.

PMID: 10457905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Soc Biol. 1999;193(2):147-53.

[Transcription factors of the Ets family and morphogenesis of the vascular tree].

[Article in French]

Mattot V(1), Vercamer C, Soncin F, Fafeur V, Vandenbunder B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP560, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Institut de Biologie de Lille, France.

The expression of several members of the Ets family of transcription factors,
Ets1, Erg and Fli, correlates with the occurrence of invasive processes such as
angiogenesis during normal and pathological development. The description of the
phenotype of cultured endothelial cells expressing the DNA binding domain of Ets1
suggests that members of the Ets family take part in the morphogenesis of the
vascular tree. Although transient transfection experiments allowed the
identification of putative targets genes for Ets1 during angiogenesis,
deciphering the Ets1 regulation networks remains a major goal for the future.

PMID: 10451348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. APMIS. 1999 Jun;107(6):577-84.

Molecular detection of EWS-FLI1 chimeric transcripts in Ewing family tumors by
nested reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction: application to archival
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues.

Hisaoka M(1), Tsuji S, Morimitsu Y, Hashimoto H, Shimajiri S, Komiya S, Ushijima 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations generating unique chimeric genes are highly
characteristic of specific sarcomas, and their use as diagnostic markers has been
suggested. From a diagnostic pathologic point of view, detection of such
cytogenetic or molecular aberrations applicable to routinely processed archival
tissue specimens is considered a powerful tool for tumor diagnosis. To assess the
feasibility and reliability of the molecular detection of the transcript
originating from the chimeric gene in paraffin-embedded tumor specimens, we
performed a nested reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)-based
assay to detect the EWS-FLI1 chimeric message in a series of Ewing family tumors.
Of 24 paraffin-embedded tumor specimens from 23 cases analyzed, the chimeric
message was detectable in 20 (83%) specimens from 20 cases (87%) by this nested
RT-PCR assay, whereas none of 7 small round cell tumors not from this family (3
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 2 neuroblastomas, 2 malignant lymphomas) showed
detectable chimeric messages. In the sequence analysis of the PCR products, the
amplified chimeric messages contained the junctions between exon 7 of the EWS
gene and any one of exons 5, 6 and 8 of the FLI1 gene. The detection process was 
usually completed within 3 days, except for the subseqent sequence analysis. Our 
results endorse the use of this molecular assay as an ancillary technique in the 
diagnosis of Ewing family tumors using paraffin-embedded material.

PMID: 10379685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jun 22;96(13):7467-72.

Modulation of TEL transcription activity by interaction with the
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC9.

Chakrabarti SR(1), Sood R, Ganguly S, Bohlander S, Shen Z, Nucifora G.

Author information: 
(1)Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center, Loyola University Medical Center, 2160 South
First Avenue, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

The E-26 transforming specific (ETS)-related gene TEL, also known as ETV6, is
involved in a large number of chromosomal rearrangements associated with leukemia
and congenital fibrosarcoma. The encoded protein contains two functional domains:
a helix-loop-helix (HLH) domain (also known as pointed domain) located at the N
terminus and a DNA-binding domain located at the C terminus. The HLH domain is
involved in protein-protein interaction with itself and other members of the ETS 
family of transcription factors such as FLI1. TEL is a transcription factor, and 
we and others have shown that it is a repressor of gene expression. To understand
further the role of TEL in the cell, we have used an in vivo interaction system
to identify proteins that interact with TEL. We show that a protein, UBC9,
interacts specifically with TEL in vitro and in vivo. UBC9 is a member of the
family of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes. These enzymes usually are involved in
proteosome-mediated degradation; however, our data suggest that interaction of
TEL with UBC9 does not lead to TEL degradation. Our studies show that UBC9 binds 
to TEL exclusively through the HLH domain of TEL. We also show that TEL expressed
as fusion to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4 completely represses a
Gal4-responsive promoter, but that the coexpression of UBC9 in the same system
restores the activity of the promoter. Targeted point mutation of conserved amino
acids in UBC9 essential for enzymatic ubiquitination of proteins does not affect 
interaction nor transcriptional activity. Based on our data, we conclude that
UBC9 physically interacts with TEL through the HLH domain and that the
interaction leads to modulation of the transcription activity of TEL.

PMCID: PMC22109
PMID: 10377438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Development. 1999 Jun;126(14):3131-48.

Precise developmental regulation of Ets family transcription factors during
specification and commitment to the T cell lineage.

Anderson MK(1), Hernandez-Hoyos G, Diamond RA, Rothenberg EV.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.
evroth@its.caltech.edu

Ets family transcription factors control the expression of a large number of
genes in hematopoietic cells. Here we show strikingly precise differential
expression of a subset of these genes marking critical, early stages of mouse
lymphocyte cell-type specification. Initially, the Ets family member factor Erg
was identified during an arrayed cDNA library screen for genes encoding
transcription factors expressed specifically during T cell lineage commitment.
Multiparameter fluorescence-activated cell sorting for over a dozen cell surface 
markers was used to isolate 18 distinct primary-cell populations representing
discrete T cell and B cell developmental stages, pluripotent lymphoid precursors,
immature NK-like cells and myeloid hematopoietic cells. These populations were
monitored for mRNA expression of the Erg, Ets-1, Ets-2, Fli-1, Tel, Elf-1,
GABPalpha, PU.1 and Spi-B genes. The earliest stages in T cell differentiation
show particularly dynamic Ets family gene regulation, with sharp transitions in
expression correlating with specification and commitment events. Ets, Spi-B and
PU.1 are expressed in these stages but not by later T-lineage cells. Erg is
induced during T-lineage specification and then silenced permanently, after
commitment, at the beta-selection checkpoint. Spi-B is transiently upregulated
during commitment and then silenced at the same stage as Erg. T-lineage
commitment itself is marked by repression of PU.1, a factor that regulates B-cell
and myeloid genes. These results show that the set of Ets factors mobilized
during T-lineage specification and commitment is different from the set that
maintains T cell gene expression during thymocyte repertoire selection and in all
classes of mature T cells.

PMID: 10375504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Biol. 1999 Jun 15;210(2):277-87.

Regulation of left-right asymmetries in the zebrafish by Shh and BMP4.

Schilling TF(1), Concordet JP, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, WC2A
3PX, United Kingdom.

Left-right (LR) asymmetry of the heart in vertebrates is regulated by early
asymmetric signals in the embryo, including the secreted signal Sonic hedgehog
(Shh), but less is known about LR asymmetries of visceral organs. Here we show
that Shh also specifies asymmetries in visceral precursors in the zebrafish and
that cardiac and visceral sidedness are independent. The transcription factors
fli-1 and Nkx-2.5 are expressed asymmetrically in the precardiac mesoderm and
subsequently in the heart; an Eph receptor, rtk2, and an adhesion protein,
DM-GRASP, mark early asymmetries in visceral endoderm. Misexpression of shh mRNA,
or a dominant negative form of protein kinase A, on the right side reverses the
expression of these asymmetries in precursors of both the heart and the viscera. 
Reversals in the heart and gut are uncoordinated, suggesting that each organ
interprets the signal independently. Misexpression of Bone Morphogenetic Protein 
(BMP4) on the right side reverses the heart, but visceral organs are unaffected, 
consistent with a function for BMPs locally in the heart field. Zebrafish mutants
with midline defects show independent reversals of cardiac and visceral
laterality. Thus, hh signals influence the development of multiple organ
asymmetries in zebrafish and different organs appear to respond to a central
cascade of midline signaling independently, which in the heart involves BMP4.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10357891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4452-64.

Fli-1, an Ets-related transcription factor, regulates erythropoietin-induced
erythroid proliferation and differentiation: evidence for direct transcriptional 
repression of the Rb gene during differentiation.

Tamir A(1), Howard J, Higgins RR, Li YJ, Berger L, Zacksenhaus E, Reis M,
Ben-David Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Cancer Biology Research, Sunnybrook and
Women's College Health Science Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario
M4N 3M5, Canada.

Erythropoietin (Epo) is a major regulator of erythropoiesis that alters the
survival, proliferation, and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells. The
mechanism by which these events are regulated has not yet been determined. Using 
HB60, a newly established erythroblastic cell line, we show here that Epo-induced
terminal erythroid differentiation is associated with a transient downregulation 
in the expression of the Ets-related transcription factor Fli-1. Constitutive
expression of Fli-1 in HB60 cells, similar to retroviral insertional activation
of Fli-1 observed in Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV)-induced
erythroleukemia, blocks Epo-induced differentiation while promoting Epo-induced
proliferation. These results suggest that Fli-1 modulates the response of
erythroid cells to Epo. To understand the mechanism by which Fli-1 regulates
erythropoiesis, we searched for downstream target genes whose expression is
regulated by this transcription factor. Here we show that the retinoblastoma (Rb)
gene, which was previously shown to be involved in the development of mature
erythrocytes, contains a Fli-1 consensus binding site within its promoter. Fli-1 
binds to this cryptic Ets consensus site within the Rb promoter and
transcriptionally represses Rb expression. Both the expression level and the
phosphorylation status of Rb are consistent with the response of HB60 cells to
Epo-induced terminal differentiation. We suggest that the negative regulation of 
Rb by Fli-1 could be one of the critical determinants in erythroid progenitor
cell differentiation that is specifically deregulated during F-MuLV-induced
erythroleukemia.

PMCID: PMC104404
PMID: 10330185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 May;25(1):6-15.

Molecular characterization of the genomic breakpoint junction in a t(11;22)
translocation in Ewing sarcoma.

Obata K(1), Hiraga H, Nojima T, Yoshida MC, Abe S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Division of Bioscience, Graduate School of
Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based nucleotide sequence analysis was performed 
in 12 cases of Ewing sarcoma on the cDNA and/or genomic DNA breakpoint regions of
a t(11;22)(q24;q12), which joins the EWS gene located on chromosome 22 with the
FLI1 gene located on chromosome 11, in order to understand the molecular
mechanism of this translocation. Reverse transcriptase-PCR on total tumor cell
RNA from the examined cases showed five types of EWS-FLI1 chimeric product,
resulting from various junctions between EWS exon 7 or 10 with FLI1 exon 5, 6, or
8. Sequencing of the genomic fusion junctions of EWS-FLI1 in seven cases showing 
three types of the chimeric cDNA products revealed that most of the breakpoint
junctions shared common nucleotide(s) from both genes, and that the breakpoints
in EWS introns 7 and 10 clustered within 100 bp and 300 bp, respectively. All the
junctions were found to be flanked by various oligomers, among which a consensus 
sequence, 5'-AGAAAARDRR-3', was found near the breakpoints of both genes in four 
cases, suggesting that these oligomers may have a functional significance in the 
genesis of t(11;22). In addition to these oligomers, sequences highly homologous 
to Alu repeats and/or eukaryotic topoisomerase II cleavage sites were located
near, or flanked, or even encompassed, the breakpoints in most of the cases
examined. Thus, these sequences may also mediate DNA double-strand breakage and
rejoining to generate the t(11;22). Genomic sequence analysis of both EWS-FLI1
and FLI1-EWS chimeric genes in three of the seven cases demonstrated a deletion
and duplication of both EWS and FLI1 sequences in two cases and no gain or loss
in one case. The present findings suggest that multiple mechanisms may be
operative for the break and rejoining of the fragments of chromosomes 11 and 22
in the genesis of t(11;22), and that some of these translocations are asymmetric 
at the molecular level.

PMID: 10221334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Exp Hematol. 1999 Apr;27(4):630-41.

Unexpected and coordinated expression of Spi-1, Fli-1, and megakaryocytic genes
in four Epo-dependent cell lines established from transgenic mice displaying
erythroid-specific expression of a thermosensitive SV40 T antigen.

Starck J(1), Mouchiroud G, Gonnet C, Mehlen A, Aubert D, Dorier A, Godet J, Morlé
F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, Université Lyon 
I, ViIleurbanne, France.

Most erythroleukemic cell lines established in vitro coexpress erythrocytic and
megakaryocytic markers that often are associated with expression of Spi-1 and/or 
Fli-1 transcription factors known as transactivators of megakaryocyte-specific
promoters. In the present study, we examined the possibility of establishing new 
cell lines keeping strictly erythroid-specific properties in vitro through the
targeted and conditional immortalization of erythrocytic progenitors. For that
purpose, we established several lines of transgenic mice displaying
erythroid-specific expression of a thermosensitive SV40 T antigen. As expected,
these transgenic mice developed splenomegaly due to the massive amplification of 
Ter 119 positive erythroid nucleated cells expressing T antigen. Despite this
drastic effect in vivo, the in vitro immortalization of erythropoietin-dependent 
erythroid progenitors unexpectedly occurred at low frequency, and all four cell
lines established expressed both erythrocytic (globins) and megakaryocytic
markers (glycoprotein IIb, platelet factor 4) as well as Spi-1 and Fli-1
transcripts at permissive temperature. Switching the cells to the nonpermissive
temperature led to a marked increase in globin gene expression and concomitant
decrease in expression of Spi-1, Fli-1, and megakaryocytic genes in an
erythropoietin-dependent manner. Interestingly, enhanced expression of Spi-1 and 
Fli-1 genes already was detected in the Ter 119 positive cell population of
transgenic mice spleen in vivo. However, like normal Ter 119 erythroid cells,
these Ter 119 positive cells from transgenic mice still expressed high levels of 
beta-globin and very low or undetectable glycoprotein IIb and platelet factor 4
megakaryocytic transcripts. Taken together, these data indicate that the
unexpected expression of megakaryocytic genes is a specific property of
immortalized cells that cannot be explained only by enhanced expression of Spi-1 
and/or Fli-1 genes.

PMID: 10210321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Immunogenetics. 1999 May;49(5):420-8.

Cloning and chromosomal mapping of a gene isolated from thymic stromal cells
encoding a new mouse type II membrane serine protease, epithin, containing four
LDL receptor modules and two CUB domains.

Kim MG(1), Chen C, Lyu MS, Cho EG, Park D, Kozak C, Schwartz RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Immunology, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-0420, 
USA.

We cloned and sequenced a mouse gene encoding a new type of membrane bound serine
protease (epithin) containing a multidomain structure. The initial cDNA clone was
found previously in a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based subtractive library
generated from fetal thymic stromal cells, and the message was shown to be highly
expressed in a thymic epithelial nurse cell line. A clone isolated from a severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) thymus library and extended to its full length
at the 5' end with the RACE technique contains an open reading frame of 902 amino
acids. Based on the sequence of this clone, the predicted protein structure is a 
type II membrane protein with a C-terminal serine protease domain linked to the
membrane by four low density lipoprotein receptor modules and two CUB domains.
High message expression by northern blotting was detected in intestine, kidney,
lung, SCID, and Rag-2(-/-) thymus, and 2-deoxyguanosine-treated fetal thymic
rudiment, but not in skeletal muscle, liver, heart, testis, and brain. Sorted MHC
class II+ and II- fetal thymic stromal cells were positive for expression by
reverse transcriptase-PCR, whereas CD45(+) thymocytes were not. The gene was
found in chicken and multiple mammalian species under low stringency Southern
hybridization conditions. Under high stringency conditions, only a single gene
per haploid genome was identified in the mouse. This gene, Prss14 (protease,
serine, 14), was mapped to mouse chromosome 9 and is closely linked to the Fli1
(Friend leukemia integration 1) gene.

PMID: 10199918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Cancer Res. 1999 Apr 1;59(7):1428-32.

Differential transactivation by alternative EWS-FLI1 fusion proteins correlates
with clinical heterogeneity in Ewing's sarcoma.

Lin PP(1), Brody RI, Hamelin AC, Bradner JE, Healey JH, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is present in up to 95% of cases of Ewing's
sarcoma and results in the formation of an EWS-FLI1 fusion gene which encodes a
chimeric transcription factor. The proximate role of EWS-FLI1 in the pathogenesis
of Ewing's sarcoma is thought to involve the activation of as yet largely unknown
target genes. Many alternative forms of EWS-FLI1 exist because of variations in
the locations of the EWS and FLI1 genomic breakpoints. The most common form,
designated "type 1," consists of the first seven exons of EWS joined to exons 6-9
of FLI1 and accounts for approximately 60% of cases. The "type 2" EWS-FLI1 fusion
also includes FLI1 exon 5 and is present in another 25%. We and others have
observed previously that the type 1 fusion is associated with a significantly
better prognosis than the other fusion types. Because EWS-FLI1 is an aberrant
transcription factor, we investigated whether these differences in clinical
behavior may be correlated to functional differences by comparing transactivation
by the type 1 EWS-FLI1 with other types in both heterologous cells (HeLa, NIH3T3)
and homologous cells (Ewing's sarcoma cell lines). In a panel of seven Ewing's
sarcoma cell lines, we found transactivation of a transiently transfected
FLI1-responsive reporter construct to be significantly lower in cell lines with
the type 1 fusion than in cell lines with the type 2 fusion (P = 0.003).
Cotransfection of the same reporter construct with each of a series of seven
EWS-FLI1 expression constructs (corresponding to the two major fusion types and
five less common types) also showed that type 1 EWS-FLI1 was a significantly
weaker transactivator than the type 2 product in both HeLa and NIH3T3 cells (P = 
0.003, and P = 0.033, respectively). Electromobility shift assays showed
equivalent binding of the type 1 and type 2 EWS-FLI1 to the consensus
FLI1-responsive binding site, indicating that differences in transactivation were
not due simply to differences in DNA binding affinity. The finding that the type 
1 EWS-FLI1 fusion, associated with less aggressive clinical behavior, encodes a
less active chimeric transcription factor may provide the basis for a molecular
explanation of clinical heterogeneity in Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 10197607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Virol. 1999 May;73(5):4439-42.

Oncogene activation in myeloid leukemias by Graffi murine leukemia virus proviral
integration.

Denicourt C(1), Edouard E, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire, Département des Sciences Biologiques,
Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal, Québec H3C 3P8, Canada.

The Graffi murine leukemia virus (MuLV) is a nondefective retrovirus that induces
granulocytic leukemia in BALB/c and NFS mice. To identify genes involved in
Graffi MuLV-induced granulocytic leukemia, tumor cell DNAs were examined for
genetic alterations at loci described as common proviral integration sites in
MuLV-induced myeloid, lymphoid, and erythroid leukemias. Southern blot analysis
revealed rearrangements in c-myc, Fli-1, Pim-1, and Spi-1/PU.1 genes in 20, 10,
3.3, and 3.3% of the tumors tested, respectively. These results demonstrate for
the first time the involvement of those genes in granulocytic leukemia.

PMCID: PMC104225
PMID: 10196342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Blood. 1999 Apr 15;93(8):2637-44.

Regulation of the megakaryocytic glycoprotein IX promoter by the oncogenic Ets
transcription factor Fli-1.

Bastian LS(1), Kwiatkowski BA, Breininger J, Danner S, Roth G.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Section, Medical and Research Services, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Divisions of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Glycoprotein (GP) IX is a subunit of the von Willebrand receptor, GPIb-V-IX,
which mediates adhesion of platelets to the subendothelium of damaged blood
vessels. Previous characterization of the GPIX promoter identified a functional
Ets site that, when disrupted, reduced promoter activity. However, the Ets
protein(s) that regulated GPIX promoter expression was unknown. In this study,
transient cotransfection of several GPIX promoter/reporter constructs into 293T
kidney fibroblasts with a Fli-1 expression vector shows that the oncogenic
protein Fli-1 can transactivate the GPIX promoter when an intact GPIX Ets site is
present. In addition, Fli-1 binding of the GPIX Ets site was identified in
antibody supershift experiments in nuclear extracts derived from hematopoietic
human erythroleukemia cells. Comparative studies showed that Fli-1 was also able 
to transactivate the GPIbalpha and, to a lesser extent, the GPIIb promoter.
Immunoblot analysis identified Fli-1 protein in lysates derived from platelets.
In addition, expression of Fli-1 was identified immunohistochemically in
megakaryocytes derived from CD34(+) cells treated with the megakaryocyte
differentiation and proliferation factor, thrombopoietin. These results suggest
that Fli-1 is likely to regulate lineage-specific genes during
megakaryocytopoiesis.

PMID: 10194443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 1999 Feb 25;18(8):1597-608.

FLI-1 inhibits differentiation and induces proliferation of primary
erythroblasts.

Pereira R(1), Quang CT, Lesault I, Dolznig H, Beug H, Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR146, Institut Curie-Section de Recherche, Centre Universitaire, Orsay,
France.

Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia involves two members of the ETS family of
transcriptional regulators, both activated via proviral insertion in the
corresponding loci. Spi-1/PU.1 is expressed in the disease induced by the
original Friend virus SFFV(F-MuLV) complex in adult mice. In contrast, FLI-1 is
overexpressed in about 75% of the erythroleukemias induced by the F-MuLV helper
virus in newborn mice. To analyse the consequences of the enforced expression of 
FLI-1 on erythroblast differentiation and proliferation and to compare its
activity to that of PU.1/Spi-1, we used a heterologous system of avian primary
erythroblasts previously described to study the cooperation between Spi-1/PU.1
and the other molecular alterations observed in SFFV-induced disease. FLI-1 was
found: (i) to inhibit the apoptotic cell death program normally activated in
erythroblasts following Epo deprivation; (ii) to inhibit the terminal
differentiation program induced in these cells in response to Epo and; (iii) to
induce their proliferation. However, in contrast to Spi-1/PU.1, the effects of
FLI-1 on erythroblast, differentiation and proliferation did not require its
cooperation with an abnormally activated form of the EpoR. Enhanced survival of
FLI-1 expressing erythroblasts correlated with the upregulation of bcl2
expression. FLI-1 also prevented the rapid downregulation of cyclin D2 and D3
expression normally observed during Epo-induced differentiation and delayed the
downregulation of several other genes involved in cell cycle or cell
proliferation control. Our results show that overexpression of FLI-1 profoundly
deregulates the normal balance between differentiation and proliferation in
primary erythroblasts. Thus, the activation of FLI-1 expression observed at the
onset of F-MuLV-induced erythroleukemia may provide a proliferative advantage to 
virus infected cells that would otherwise undergo terminal differentiation or
cell death.

PMID: 10102630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Mar 19;1444(3):315-25.

Characterization and expression of the mouse Hsc70 gene.

Hunt CR(1), Parsian AJ, Goswami PC, Kozak CA.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Radiation Oncology Center, 4511
Forest Park Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63108, USA. hunt@radonc.wustl.edu

A genomic clone encoding the mouse Hsc70 gene has been isolated and characterized
by DNA sequence analysis. The gene is approximately 3. 9 kb in length and
contains eight introns, the fifth, sixth and eighth of which encode the three U14
snoRNAs. The gene has been located on Chr 9 in the order
Fli1-Itm1-Olfr7-Hsc70(Rnu14)-Cbl by genetic analysis. Expression of Hsc70 is
universal in all tissues of the mouse, but is slightly elevated in liver,
skeletal muscle and kidney tissue, while being depressed in testes. In cultured
mouse NIH 3T3 cells or human HeLa cells, Hsc70 mRNA levels are low under normal
conditions, but can be induced 8-fold higher in both lines by treatment with the 
amino acid analog azetidine. A similar induction is seen in cells treated with
the proteosome inhibitor MG132 suggesting that elevated Hsc70 expression may be
coupled to protein degradation. Surprisingly, expression of the human Hsc70 gene 
is also regulated by cell-cycle position being 8-10-fold higher in late
G1/S-phase cells as opposed to the levels in early G1-phase cells.

PMID: 10095055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hum Pathol. 1999 Mar;30(3):352-5.

Translocation (11;22)(q24;q12) in a small cell tumor of the thigh in a 2-year-old
boy: immunohistology, cytogenetics, molecular genetics, and review of the
literature.

Mastik MF(1), Molenaar WM, Plaat BE, de Graaf SS, Hogendoorn PC, van der Hout AH,
van den Berg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.

A case of a 2-year-old boy with a palpable mass in the left thigh is presented.
Incisional biopsy was performed and subsequent histopathological examination
revealed an infiltrative tumor composed of relatively large cells. The tumor
cells were immunoreactive for vimentin and keratin, but not for desmin or smooth 
muscle actin. Cytogenetic analysis showed a 46,XY,t(11;22)(q24;q12) karyotype.
The translocation (11;22)(q24;q12) is said to be characteristic for the family of
Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors. As a result of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) the EWS 
gene on chromosome 22q12 joins the 3' part of FLI-1 gene on chromosome 11q24,
which encodes a member of the ets family of transcriptional regulators. Using
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) a corresponding
EWS-FLI-1 fusion product was detected. Additional immunohistological staining for
p30/p32MIC2, which is suggestive, but not specific for Ewing's sarcoma, appeared 
to be weakly positive. In the current case a diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma was
considered unlikely, because of the location of the tumor and the
immunohistological profile. Nevertheless it was decided to treat the patient
according to a Ewing's sarcoma protocol based on the genotype of the tumor. The
findings were compared with other extraosseous pediatric small cell tumors
showing the t(11;22)(q24;q12) described in the literature.

PMID: 10088556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Hum Pathol. 1999 Mar;30(3):324-30.

Detection of EWS-FLI-1 fusion in Ewing's sarcoma/peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor by fluorescence in situ hybridization using formalin-fixed 
paraffin-embedded tissue.

Kumar S(1), Pack S, Kumar D, Walker R, Quezado M, Zhuang Z, Meltzer P, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, and Cancer Genetics
Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1500, USA.

The balanced translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) is specific for the Ewing's
sarcoma/peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (ES/PNETs) and results in the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript, which can be detected by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Recent studies also have used fluorescence in
situ hybridization (FISH) to show the translocation; however, most of these have 
been performed on cell lines or touch preparations and short-term cultures of
tumors. Moreover, the existing probes generally have shown only the break in the 
specific chromosomes rather than the translocation itself. We describe our
findings with a new set of probes that localize to 22q12 (EWS) and 11q24 (FLI-1) 
and directly show the translocation as juxtaposed red-green signals on der(22) in
nuclei extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffm-embedded tissues. After
establishing the specificity of the probes (on metaphase spreads and interphase
nuclei in two translocation-positive cell lines and normal peripheral blood
lymphocytes), we evaluated 11 ES/PNETs and 10 other tumors (four alveolar
rhabdomyosarcomas, three neuroblastomas, two lymphomas, one extramedullary
myeloid tumor) using a two-color FISH assay. All 11 ES/PNETs showed fusion
signals in 20% to 80% of evaluable nuclei. In two lymphoma cases, random
overlapping signals were present in 2% and 4% of nuclei, whereas the remaining
eight tumors were negative. The presence of t(11;22) was confirmed by RT-PCR in
10 of 11 ES/PNETs. We conclude that FISH analysis with this newly designed probe 
pair is a specific and sensitive method of detecting t(11;22) on routinely
processed tissue and can be useful in the differential diagnosis of ES/PNETs from
other small round blue cell tumors when only fixed tissue is available.

PMID: 10088552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Ophthalmol. 1999 Feb;127(2):226-8.

Translocation of chromosomes 11 and 22 in choroidal metastatic Ewing sarcoma
detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization.

Chan CC(1), Pack S, Pak E, Tsogos M, Zhuang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1857, USA. ccc@helix.nih.gov

PURPOSE: To describe a patient with metastasis of Ewing sarcoma to the choroid
and the molecular genetics of the tumor.
METHODS: A 26-year-old woman with metastatic Ewing sarcoma developed large
choroidal masses in the left eye and died 2 months later. Autopsy of the eyes was
performed. Dual-color fluorescent in situ hybridization was used to detect
genetic alteration in the ocular tumor with EWS and FLI-1 probes.
RESULTS: Histopathology confirmed choroidal metastatic Ewing sarcoma. Molecular
analysis showed chromosomal translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) or EWS/FLI-1
rearrangement in the malignant cells of the eye.
CONCLUSIONS: Ewing sarcoma can rarely metastasize to the uvea. Molecular
detection of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation in Ewing sarcoma is valuable in 
the differential diagnosis of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 10030577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Surg Pathol. 1999 Feb;23(2):159-65.

Adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma: genomic confirmation, phenotypic drift.

Bridge JA(1), Fidler ME, Neff JR, Degenhardt J, Wang M, Walker C, Dorfman HD,
Baker KS, Seemayer TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha 68198-5440, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Surg Pathol. 2000 Feb;24(2):322-3.

Ewing's sarcoma, a highly malignant neoplasm, is characterized by an 11;22
translocation [t(11;22) (q24;q12)], resulting in the fusion of genes FLII and
EWS. Adamantinoma of extragnathic bones, a low-grade malignant neoplasm with
epithelial features, is not typically considered in the differential diagnosis of
Ewing's sarcoma. In this study, three osseous Ewing's sarcomas with histological,
immunohistochemical, or ultrastructural epithelial features were subjected to
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and sequencing studies for the
Ewing's sarcoma molecular rearrangement. (Two of the three cases were originally 
described as adamantinomas or nontypical Ewing's sarcoma before the availability 
of genetic characterization.) In addition, traditional cytogenetic analysis and a
unique combined interphase molecular cytogenetic/ immunocytochemical approach
with bicolor 11;22 translocation breakpoint flanking probes (cosmids) and
pancytokeratin antibodies were performed on one neoplasm. At(11;22) (q24;q12) was
found in one neoplasm and a type II EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript was detected in
all three neoplasms. The combined genetic/immunocytochemical approach revealed
the presence of the 11 ;22 translocation in the nuclei of cytokeratin
immunoreactive cells. These genotypic and phenotypic findings delineate a novel
Ewing's sarcoma histologic variant, "adamantinoma-like Ewing's sarcoma."

PMID: 9989842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Hum Pathol. 1999 Jan;30(1):78-80.

Sensitive detection of rare Ewing's sarcoma cells in peripheral blood by reverse 
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.

Fidelia-Lambert MN(1), Zhuang Z, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Disseminated disease is very important in the clinical assessment of pediatric
sarcomas. Several reports suggest that reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) holds great promise in the early staging of cancer patients in 
general. However, the complexities of these protocols hamper adequate
standardization, and their application as routine diagnostic tools has been
difficult. The aim of this study is to assess the actual minimal number of tumor 
cells that may be detected by RT-PCR in a blood sample. Specific tumor cell
dilutions from a Ewing's sarcoma cell line reconstituted in peripheral blood from
healthy individuals were "ficolled" and submitted to RNA extraction for cDNA
preparation and PCR amplification of the t(11-22) (q24;q12) fusion transcript.
After PCR amplification, we were able to detect the EWS/FI-1 chimeric gene
product at a dilution of 10 tumor cells per 1 or 2 mL of blood. Our simple method
supports a role for routine clinical use of RT-PCR in the detection of
circulating Ewing's sarcoma cells.

PMID: 9923931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Jan 10;246(1):38-46.

Regulatory role of mevalonate and N-linked glycosylation in proliferation and
expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein in Ewing's sarcoma cells.

Wang M(1), Xie Y, Girnita L, Nilsson G, Dricu A, Wejde J, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Tumor Pathology, CCK, R8:04, Karolinska Hospital,
Stockholm, S-171 76, Sweden.

The Ewing's sarcoma cell line RD-ES, which carries the EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene,
responded to the 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase
inhibitor lovastatin with growth arrest. Replenishment of mevalonate (MVA) to the
arrested cells restored cell growth. However, if tunicamycin (TM), which is an
inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation, was present together with MVA the cells
remained arrested, indicating that N-linked glycosylation is of importance for
growth of Ewing's sarcoma cells. Inhibition of the biosynthesis of EWS/FLI-1
fusion protein by treatment with antisense oligonucleotides also led to growth
arrest, suggesting that this protein is of importance for cell growth. We
investigated whether MVA synthesis and N-linked glycosylation could be involved
in regulation of the expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein, which in fact
contains four potential sites for N-linked glycosylation. We found that
inhibition of both HMG-CoA reductase and N-linked glycosylation drastically
decreased the expression of the fusion protein, which mainly appears in the cell 
nuclei. There was no significant difference in the inhibitory effect on the
fusion protein between the cytoplasm and the cell nuclei, indicating that the
transport of the fusion protein to the cell nucleus is not affected. The fusion
protein did not exhibit any gel electrophoretic mobility shift after treatment of
the cells with lovastatin or TM, and it did not incorporate [3H]glucosamine.
Therefore we can conclude that the fusion protein is not a glycoprotein. The
decreased expression of the fusion protein following lovastatin or TM treatment
was found to be due to a lowered stability of de novo-synthesized fusion protein.
The down-regulation of the fusion protein was correlated to growth arrest.
Furthermore, the kinetics between the expression of EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein and 
the initiation of DNA synthesis in MVA-stimulated cells were similar. Taken
together, our data suggest that the regulatory role of N-linked glycosylation in 
the expression of the EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein is important for growth of Ewing's
sarcoma cells. Possible mechanisms underlying TM-induced decrease in EWS/FLI-1
expression may involve the breaking of growth factor receptor pathways.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Bull Cancer. 1998 Oct;85(10):830.

[Fli-1 (Friend leukemia integration 1). Oncogene].

[Article in French]

[No authors listed]

PMID: 9867365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):121-35.

Spi-1/PU.1 is a positive regulator of the Fli-1 gene involved in inhibition of
erythroid differentiation in friend erythroleukemic cell lines.

Starck J(1), Doubeikovski A, Sarrazin S, Gonnet C, Rao G, Skoultchi A, Godet J,
Dusanter-Fourt I, Morle F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR 5534, 69622
Villeurbanne, France.

Spi-1/PU.1 and Fli-1 are two members of the ETS family of transcription factors
whose expression is deregulated by proviral insertion in most erythroleukemic
cell lines induced by the spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) and Friend murine
leukemia virus (F-MuLV) components of the Friend viral complex, respectively. In 
this study, we present evidence that transcription of the Fli-1 gene is
positively regulated by Spi-1/PU.1 in SFFV-transformed cell lines: (i) all
SFFV-transformed cell lines expressing Spi-1/PU.1 are characterized by a specific
pattern of Fli-1 gene transcripts initiated in the -200 region instead of
position -400 as reported for F-MuLV-transformed cell lines; (ii) these Fli-1
transcripts initiated in the -200 region are downregulated in parallel with that 
of Spi-1/PU.1 during hexamethylenebisacetamide (HMBA) induced differentiation;
and (iii) Fli-1 transcription is upregulated in SFFV cells lines following stable
transfection of a Spi-1/PU.1 expression vector. Furthermore, we found by
transient transfection assays that the -270/-41 region of the Fli-1 gene displays
promoter activity which is transactivated by Spi-1/PU.1. This promoter is
strictly dependent on the integrity of two highly conserved ETS DNA binding sites
that bind the Spi-1/PU.1 protein in vitro. Finally, we show that transfection of 
constitutive or inducible Fli-1 expression vectors in SFFV-transformed cells
inhibits their erythroid differentiation induced by HMBA. Overall, these data
indicate that Fli-1 is a target gene of the Spi-1/PU.1 transcription factor in
SFFV-transformed cell lines. We further suggest that deregulated synthesis of
Fli-1 may trigger a common mechanism contributing to erythroleukemia induced by
either SFFV or F-MuLV.

PMCID: PMC83871
PMID: 9858537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Blood. 1998 Dec 15;92(12):4798-807.

An activating mutation in the kit receptor abolishes the stroma requirement for
growth of ELM erythroleukemia cells, but does not prevent their differentiation
in response to erythropoietin.

Leslie NR(1), O'Prey J, Bartholomew C, Harrison PR.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, CRC Beatson Laboratories, Glasgow,
Scotland.

We have previously shown that murine ELM erythroleukemia cells can only be grown 
in vitro in the presence of a stromal feeder layer, or alternatively stem cell
factor (SCF), without which they differentiate. When grown in the presence of
SCF, ELM cells can still differentiate in response to erythropoietin (Epo), but
growth on stroma prevents this. We previously isolated a stroma-independent ELM
variant, ELM-I-1, that is also defective in Epo-induced differentiation. We show 
here that this variant has an activating mutation in the Kit receptor, converting
aspartic acid 814 to histidine. Expression of the mutant receptor in
stroma-dependent ELM-D cells causes growth factor-independent proliferation and
also gives the cells a selective advantage, in terms of proliferation rate and
clonegenicity, compared with ELM-D cells grown in optimal amounts of SCF.
Expression of the mutant receptor in ELM-D cells also prevents spontaneous
differentiation, but not differentiation induced by Epo. Analysis of mitogenic
signaling pathways in these cells shows that the mutant receptor induces
constitutive activation of p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinases. It also
selectively inhibits the expression of p66Shc but not the p46/p52 Shc isoforms
(as did treatment of ELM cells with SCF), which is of interest, because p66Shc is
known to play an inhibitory role in growth factor signaling.

PMID: 9845547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1998 Jun;7(3):152-7.

Ewing family tumors: potential prognostic value of reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction detection of minimal residual disease in peripheral
blood samples.

de Alava E(1), Lozano MD, Patiño A, Sierrasesúmaga L, Pardo-Mindán FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

In more than 95% of patients, the Ewing family of tumors (ET) has chimeric
transcripts caused by fusion of the EWS gene to either FLI1 or ERG. The presence 
of specific EWS-FLI1 or EWS-ERG transcripts in peripheral blood (PB) samples of
patients being treated for ET was prospectively evaluated, and these data were
correlated to their clinical status. The authors studied 113 PB samples from 28
patients with ET. Treatment included chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgical
excision of tumor after induction therapy. PB samples were taken prospectively at
least 2 weeks after resection of tumor. Nested reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by Southern blot was performed in all samples.
Resected tumors were reviewed for the degree of response to chemotherapy and
volume. Seventy-seven PB samples from 28 patients had EWS-FLI1/ERG transcripts.
In 11 patients, PB samples became negative with treatment, and, in 5 of them, the
samples remained negative throughout the study. Samples taken during progression 
were always positive and, in 4 patients, became positive before progression was
clinically evident. All patients with transcripts other than EWS-FLI1 type 1 (n =
3) died from tumor progression. This is a sensitive assay to monitor circulating 
tumor cells in Ewing tumors. The preliminary data suggest that progression is
preceded by positive samples and may be related to specific transcript types.

PMID: 9836070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Am J Surg Pathol. 1998 Nov;22(11):1417-22.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the ovary confirmed by CD99
immunostaining, karyotypic analysis, and RT-PCR for EWS/FLI-1 chimeric mRNA.

Kawauchi S(1), Fukuda T, Miyamoto S, Yoshioka J, Shirahama S, Saito T, Tsukamoto 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan.

We report a case of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET), which
belongs to the PNET/Ewing's sarcoma family, arising in the left ovary of a
29-year-old woman. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of solid nests and
sheets of monotonous, primitive, small round cells with a few rosettes, making it
difficult to distinguish from small cell carcinoma of the ovary.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed intense cell-membranous
immunoreactivity for MIC2 protein (CD99). A short-term cell culture and
karyotypic analysis revealed the tumor to possess a balanced t(11;22)(q24;q12)
chromosomal translocation that is highly specific for tumors of the PNET/Ewing's 
sarcoma family. In addition, EWS/FLI-1 chimeric mRNA that originated from the
characteristic chromosomal translocation was detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. These results confirmed the diagnostic
validity of the present tumor being a pPNET, thus raising the possibility that in
the past, pPNETs which have arisen in the ovary may have been mistakenly
diagnosed as small cell carcinomas of the ovary.

PMID: 9808135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 22;17(16):2039-45.

EWS/FLI1 up regulates mE2-C, a cyclin-selective ubiquitin conjugating enzyme
involved in cyclin B destruction.

Arvand A(1), Bastians H, Welford SM, Thompson AD, Ruderman JV, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology/Laboratory Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, USA.

The EWS/FLI1 fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal
tumor, is able to transform certain cell lines by acting as an aberrant
transcription factor. The ability of EWS/FLI1 to modulate gene expression in
cells transformed and resistant to transformation by EWS/FLI1, was assessed by
Representational Difference Analysis (RDA). We found that the cyclin selective
ubiquitin conjugase murine E2-C, was up regulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by 
EWS/FLI1 but not in a nontransformed NIH3T3 clone expressing EWS/FLI1. We also
found that mE2-C is upregulated in NIH3T3 cells transformed by other genes
including activated cdc42, v-ABL and c-myc. We demonstrated that expression of
mE2-C in both the EWS/FLI1 transformed and parent NIH3T3 lines varies with the
cell cycle. Finally, dominant-negative mE2-C, created by changing a catalytic
cysteine to serine, inhibits the in vitro ubiquitination and degradation of
cyclin B in human HeLa cell extracts. These data suggest that part of the
biologic effect of EWS/FLI1 could be to transcriptionally modulate genes involved
in cell cycle regulation.

PMID: 9798675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 3;17(9):1149-57.

Fli-1b is generated by usage of differential splicing and alternative promoter.

Dhulipala PD(1), Lee L, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

The proto-oncogene Fli-1, a member of Ets family is rearranged or activated
through proviral integration in erythroleukemias, induced by Friends' Murine
Leukemia Virus. The DNA binding domain (ETS domain) of Fli-1 is fused to the RNA 
binding domain of EWS by t(11q24:22q12) chromosomal translocation in Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Screening of human cDNA libraries
has identified two different 5'-termini and alternatively spliced forms of the
human Fli-1 gene (Fli-1b), suggesting the possible existence of two independent
promoters. The genomic sequence adjacent to the alternate exon of human Fli-1b
gene shows functional promoter activity when cloned in promoter-less CAT
expression vector and transfected into QT-6 cells. The transcription initiation
(CAP) site and minimum promoter region necessary for function were localized. The
5'-flanking regions of human Fli-1b and mouse Fli-1 show 80% homology suggesting 
conserved promoter regulatory elements. The Fli-1b 5'-flanking sequence lacks
canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes but contains a partially conserved TATA-like
sequence at position 242. Several transcription factor binding sequences like
ATF/CREB, E2A-PBX1, EBP, PEA-3, ETS-2, Sp-1, c-Myc, TBP, GATA-1 and Oct-3 were
conserved in the promoter sequence. Functional promoter assays revealed that
Fli-1b promoter shows very strong transcriptional activation compared to Fli-1
promoter. We also showed that variant Fli-1b has transcriptional activation
properties similar to those of Fli-1. Fli-1b and Fli-1 show differential
expression in various hematopoietic cell lines. This differential expression and 
promoter activities of Fli-1 and Fli-1b suggests that several mechanisms are
involved in Fli-1 gene regulation which are mediated by many transcription
factors.

PMID: 9764825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Autoimmunity. 1998;28(1):31-45.

Fine-mapping of the mouse T lymphocyte fraction (Tlf) locus on chromosome 9:
association with autoimmune diabetes.

Pearce RB.

Tlf (T lymphocyte fraction) defines a locus that governs the unusually high
fraction of circulating T lymphocytes in the nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse. We
previously mapped Tlf to proximal Chromosome 9 in BC1 mice. Here, Tlf was
tine-mapped on Chromosome 9 using 8 markers covering the 43 cM interval from
D9Mit90 at 9 cM to D9Mit35 at 52 cM. Markers for diabetic genes on Chromosomes 3,
4, 5, 6, and 17 were also examined for effects on the Tlf phenotype. By both
parametric and nonparametric tests. Tlf associated with two areas on Chromosome
9, one with the segment bounded by D9Mit66 (15 cM) and D9Mit2 (17 cM) and a
second region near D9Mit71 (29 cM). This linkage pattern was observed both in BC1
and F2 populations. Thus, the Tlf phenotype is possibly governed by two genes on 
Chromosome 9. An influence by sex on the penetrance of Tlf was evident in that
linkage was strongest for female F2 mice and male BC1 mice. One locus controlling
the T lymphocyte fraction may be Idd2 since historically a subline of NOD mice
with a low T cell fraction showed a low incidence of diabetes. Candidate genes
for Tlf are Ets1 and Fli1, proximally and Igif distally.

PMID: 9754812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):603-10.

Oncogenic EWS-Fli1 interacts with hsRPB7, a subunit of human RNA polymerase II.

Petermann R(1), Mossier BM, Aryee DN, Khazak V, Golemis EA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

As a result of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) chromosomal translocation characterizing the
Ewing family of tumors (ET), the amino terminal portion of EWS, an RNA binding
protein of unknown function, is fused to the DNA-binding domain of the ets
transcription factor Fli1. The hybrid EWS-Fli1 protein acts as a strong
transcriptional activator and, in contrast to wildtype Fli1, is a potent
transforming agent. Similar rearrangements involving EWS or the highly homologous
TLS with various transcription factors have been found in several types of human 
tumors. Employing yeast two-hybrid cloning we isolated the seventh largest
subunit of human RNA polymerase II (hsRPB7) as a protein that specifically
interacts with the amino terminus of EWS. This association was confirmed by in
vitro immunocoprecipitation. In nuclear extracts, hsRPB7 was found to copurify
with EWS-Fli1 but not with Fli1. Overexpression of recombinant hsRPB7
specifically increased gene activation by EWS-chimeric transcription factors.
Replacement of the EWS portion by hsRPB7 in the oncogenic fusion protein restored
the transactivating potential of the chimera. Our results suggest that the
interaction of the amino terminus of EWS with hsRPB7 contributes to the
transactivation function of EWS-Fli1 and, since hsRPB7 has characteristics of a
regulatory subunit of RNA polymerase II, may influence promoter selectivity.

PMID: 9704926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 May;42(4):561-72.

The avian fli gene is specifically expressed during embryogenesis in a subset of 
neural crest cells giving rise to mesenchyme.

Mager AM(1), Grapin-Botton A, Ladjali K, Meyer D, Wolff CM, Stiegler P, Bonnin
MA, Remy P.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 9005 du CNRS MMDCD, Institut de Physiologie et Chimie Biologique,
Strasbourg, France.

The ets-family of transcription factors is involved in the development of
endothelial and hematopoietic cells. Among these genes, fliwas shown to be
responsible for erythroblastomas and Ewing's sarcomas. Its involvement in Ewing's
sarcoma, a putative neurectodermal tumor, as well as the in situ hybridization
studies performed in mice and Xenopus suggested a role in neural crest
development. We cloned quail fli cDNA in order to analyze in more detail its
expression in neural crest cells, which have been extensively studied in avian
species. Fli gene maps on chicken chromosome 1 to band q31->q33. Two RNAs are
transcribed, most likely arising from two different promoters. The analysis of
its expression in neural crest cells reveals that it is expressed rather late,
when the neural crest cells reach their target. Among the various lineages
derived from the crest, it is restricted to the mesenchymal one. It is maintained
at later stages in the cartilage of neural crest but also of mesodermal origin.
In addition, fli is expressed in several mesoderm-derived cells: endothelial
cells as well as intermediate and splanchnopleural mesoderm.

PMID: 9694627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 10;273(28):17525-30.

The ets family member Tel binds to the Fli-1 oncoprotein and inhibits its
transcriptional activity.

Kwiatkowski BA(1), Bastian LS, Bauer TR Jr, Tsai S, Zielinska-Kwiatkowska AG,
Hickstein DD.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System,
Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

The tel gene, recently shown to be translocated in a spectrum of acute and
chronic human leukemias, belongs to the ets family of sequence-specific
transcription factors. To determine the role of Tel in normal hematopoietic
development, we used the tel gene as the bait in the yeast two-hybrid system to
screen a hematopoietic stem cell library. Two partners were identified: Tel binds
to itself, and Tel binds to the ets family member Fli-1. In vitro and in vivo
assays confirmed these interactions. In transient transfection assays, Fli-1
transactivates megakaryocytic specific promoters, and Tel inhibits this effect of
Fli-1. Transactivation studies using deletion mutants of Tel, and the Tel-AML-1
fusion protein, indicate that the helix-loop-helix domain of Tel only partially
inhibits transactivation and that complete inhibition requires the full-length
Tel molecule, including the DNA binding domain. The Tel and Fli-1 proteins are
expressed early in hematopoiesis, and the inability of Tel fusion proteins such
as Tel-AML-1 to counteract Fli-1 mediated transactivation may contribute to the
malignant phenotype in human leukemias where this fusion protein is present.

PMID: 9651344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1998 Feb;7(1):29-35.

Molecular diagnosis of Ewing tumors: improved detection of EWS-FLI-1 and EWS-ERG 
chimeric transcripts and rapid determination of exon combinations.

Meier VS(1), Kühne T, Jundt G, Gudat F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Basel, Switzerland.

Most Ewing tumors (ET), including Ewing sarcomas, peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumors (PNET), and Askin's tumors, can be defined according to
the specific chromosomal translocations t(11;22)(q24;q12) (EWS-FLI-1) or
t(21;22)(q21;q12) (EWS-ERG). Detection of the chimeric RNA transcripts by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) has greatly facilitated the
diagnosis of ET. Because of variable chromosomal breakpoint locations, however,
the EWS gene fusions with FLI-1 and ERG genes are highly heterogenous, resulting 
in different sizes of the amplification products. To improve the diagnostic
usefulness of the RT-PCR assay, we have developed an assay to detect chimeric
mRNA transcripts by nested RT-PCR, followed by digestion of the PCR fragments
with three different restriction endonucleases. This allows confirmation of the
specificity of the PCR product and provides a rapid method to determine the
combination of exons present in a transcript. In the 12 Ewing tumors tested, five
different exon combinations were detected. In nine repeat biopsies of four
patients, the case-specific translocation remained unchanged. One additional
central PNET had no ET-specific translocation. In conclusion, the suggested
combination of RT-PCR and restriction analysis of the PCR products allows a rapid
and specific determination of ET-specific translocations.

PMID: 9646032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1998 Feb;7(1):24-8.

Molecular variants of the EWS-WT1 gene fusion in desmoplastic small round cell
tumor.

Antonescu CR(1), Gerald WL, Magid MS, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Human Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We report two cases of desmoplastic small round cell tumor (DSRCT) with novel
molecular variants of the specific EWS-WT1 gene fusion. This fusion usually
encodes a chimeric RNA with an in-frame junction of exon 7 of EWS to exon 8 of
WT1. In one variant patient, the EWS-WT1 fusion transcript contained an in-frame 
junction of exon 9 of EWS to exon 8 of WT1. Moreover, in this patient the tumor
arose in the hand, an extremely unusual site for DSRCT. In the second patient, an
in-frame junction of exon 10 of EWS to exon 8 of WT1 was present. These two cases
of DSRCT show that the molecular variability in the EWS breakpoint observed in
the EWS-FLI1 fusion of Ewing's sarcoma can occur in DSRCT as well. This type of
heterogeneity is relevant to the interpretation of molecular diagnostic assays
and could also affect the functional properties of the encoded chimeric
transcription factors.

PMID: 9646031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Dev Biol. 1998 May 15;197(2):248-69.

The cloche and spadetail genes differentially affect hematopoiesis and
vasculogenesis.

Thompson MA(1), Ransom DG, Pratt SJ, MacLennan H, Kieran MW, Detrich HW 3rd, Vail
B, Huber TL, Paw B, Brownlie AJ, Oates AC, Fritz A, Gates MA, Amores A, Bahary N,
Talbot WS, Her H, Beier DR, Postlethwait JH, Zon LI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

In vertebrates, hematopoietic and vascular progenitors develop from ventral
mesoderm. The first primitive wave of hematopoiesis yields embryonic red blood
cells, whereas progenitor cells of subsequent definitive waves form all
hematopoietic cell lineages. In this report we examine the development of
hematopoietic and vasculogenic cells in normal zebrafish and characterize defects
in cloche and spadetail mutant embryos. The zebrafish homologs of lmo2, c-myb,
fli1, flk1, and flt4 have been cloned and characterized in this study. Expression
of these genes identifies embryonic regions that contain hematopoietic and
vascular progenitor cells. The expression of c-myb also identifies definitive
hematopoietic cells in the ventral wall of the dorsal aorta. Analysis of b316
mutant embryos that carry a deletion of the c-myb gene demonstrates that c-myb is
not required for primitive erythropoiesis in zebrafish even though it is
expressed in these cells. Both cloche and spadetail mutant embryos have defects
in primitive hematopoiesis and definitive hematopoiesis. The cloche mutants also 
have significant decreases in vascular gene expression, whereas spadetail mutants
expressed normal levels of these genes. These studies demonstrate that the
molecular mechanisms that regulate hematopoiesis and vasculogenesis have been
conserved throughout vertebrate evolution and the clo and spt genes are key
regulators of these programs.

PMID: 9630750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Apr 17;1377(2):F1-11.

Ets transcription factors and human disease.

Dittmer J(1), Nordheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Molekularbiologie, Universität Tübingen, Germany.

PMID: 9606973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Gene. 1998 Mar 27;210(1):71-8.

Cloning of a novel human ELF-1-related ETS transcription factor, ELFR, its
characterization and chromosomal assignment relative to ELF-1.

Aryee DN(1), Petermann R, Kos K, Henn T, Haas OA, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St. Anna Kinderspital,
Kinderspitalgasse 6, A-1090, Vienna, Austria.

The ETS gene family encodes a group of proteins that function as transcription
factors under physiological conditions and, if aberrantly expressed, can lead to 
cellular transformation. ETS transcription factors are characterized by a unique 
conserved DNA binding domain. A subset of these proteins is rearranged with EWS
in Ewing tumors (ET). We recently described a spectrum of ETS genes coexpressed
with EWS-FLI1 in an ETcell line to define proteins that potentially compete in
target site selection. We now report on the cloning and characterization of a
novel ETS family member, ELFR, displaying 92% homology to ELF-1 in its DNA
binding domain while diverging in the rest of the protein. ELFR expression was
found in a very tissue restricted pattern with the highest abundancy in placenta.
We also report the chromosomal assignment of ELFR and ELF-1 to Xq26 and 13q13,
respectively, by means of fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH).

PMID: 9524226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Surg Pathol. 1998 Apr;22(4):391-8.

Olfactory neuroblastoma is not related to the Ewing family of tumors: absence of 
EWS/FLI1 gene fusion and MIC2 expression.

Argani P(1), Perez-Ordoñez B, Xiao H, Caruana SM, Huvos AG, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The relationship of olfactory neuroblastoma to the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors
remains controversial due to its variable histopathology and to conflicting or
inconsistent cytogenetic, immunophenotypic, and molecular data. To address this
issue, we performed a morphologic, immunohistochemical, and molecular study of 20
olfactory neuroblastomas. Morphologically, the tumors consisted of nests of
primitive small, round, blue cells, usually set in a background of
neurofibrillary stroma. Immunohistochemical stains revealed strong reactivity for
neuroendocrine markers (synaptophysin, chromogranin, neuron-specific enolase) and
only focal staining for cytokeratins in two cases. Immunostaining with antibody
O13 to the Ewing sarcoma-associated MIC2 antigen was uniformly negative (0 of
17). Amplifiable RNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tissue blocks of 11
cases, and no evidence of the chimeric EWS/FLI transcript, characteristic of
Ewing sarcoma, was found in any case. The EWS gene was not rearranged using
Southern blot analysis in one additional case in which high molecular weight DNA 
was available. These results disagree with the proposed classification of
olfactory neuroblastoma in the Ewing sarcoma family of tumors and suggest that
therapy developed for the latter tumor group may not be biologically rational for
olfactory neuroblastoma.

PMID: 9580174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Clin Oncol. 1998 Apr;16(4):1248-55.

EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript structure is an independent determinant of prognosis
in Ewing's sarcoma.

de Alava E(1), Kawai A, Healey JH, Fligman I, Meyers PA, Huvos AG, Gerald WL,
Jhanwar SC, Argani P, Antonescu CR, Pardo-Mindan FJ, Ginsberg J, Womer R, Lawlor 
ER, Wunder J, Andrulis I, Sorensen PH, Barr FG, Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol 1998 Aug;16(8):2895.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 1998 Apr;16(4):1241-3.

PURPOSE: More than 90% of Ewing's sarcomas (ES) contain a fusion of the EWS and
FLI1 genes, due to the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. At the molecular level,
the EWS-FLI1 rearrangements show great diversity. Specifically, many different
combinations of exons from EWS and FLI1 encode in-frame fusion transcripts and
result in differences in the length and composition of the chimeric protein,
which functions as an oncogenic aberrant transcription factor. In the most common
fusion type (type 1), EWS exon 7 is linked in frame with exon 6 of FLI1. As the
fundamental pathogenetic lesion in ES, the molecular heterogeneity of these
fusion transcripts may have functional and clinical significance.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We performed a clinical and pathologic analysis of 112
patients with ES in which EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts were identified by
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Adequate treatment and 
follow-up data were available in 99 patients treated with curative intent. Median
follow-up in these 99 patients was 26 months (range, 1 to 140 months). Univariate
and multivariate survival analyses were performed that included other prognostic 
factors, such as age, tumor location, size, and stage.
RESULTS: Among the 99 patients suitable for survival analysis, the tumors in 64
patients contained the type 1 fusion and in 35 patients contained less common
fusion types. Stage at presentation was localized in 74 patients and metastatic
in 25. Metastases (relative risk [RR] = 2.6; P = .008), and type 1 EWS-FLI1
fusion (RR = 0.37; P = .014) were, respectively, independent negative and
positive prognostic factors for overall survival by multivariate analysis. Among 
74 patients with localized tumors, the type 1 EWS-FLI1 fusion was also a
significant positive predictor of overall survival (RR = 0.32; P = .034) by
multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: EWS-FLI1 fusion type appears to be prognostically relevant in ES,
independent of tumor site, stage, and size. Further studies are needed to clarify
the biologic basis of this phenomenon.

PMID: 9552022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Virchows Arch. 1998 Feb;432(2):131-4.

Specific and sensitive detection of the EWS/FLI1 fusion protein in Ewing's
sarcoma by Western blotting.

Wang M(1), Nilsson G, Carlberg M, Dricu A, Wejde J, Kreicbergs A, Larsson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

We applied Western blotting, using an antibody against the carboxy terminal of
the FLI1 protein, for detection of the 68-kDa EWS/FLI1 fusion protein in cultured
Ewing's sarcoma cells and in four surgical biopsies of Ewing's sarcoma. Of six
different human cell lines, the 68-kDa fusion protein was identified only in
Ewing's sarcoma cells carrying the t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. The four
samples from Ewing's sarcoma patients were also found to contain the 68-kDa
fusion protein. The lowest detection level for total protein loaded on the gel
was 0.3 microg. When whole Ewing's sarcoma cells were used for Western blotting
without prior protein extraction, the lowest detection level was 1,300 cells. It 
will be possible to use Western blotting for detection of the EWS/FLI1 fusion
protein in the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma in surgical biopsy specimens, and
possibly also in fine-needle aspirates. As the method is not dependent on the
quality of mRNA in the sample and involves no risk of contamination, it will be a
powerful complement to the reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR).

PMID: 9504857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Hum Pathol. 1998 Mar;29(3):289-94.

Absence of detectable EWS/FLI1 expression after therapy-induced neural
differentiation in Ewing sarcoma.

Knezevich SR(1), Hendson G, Mathers JA, Carpenter B, Lopez-Terrada D, Brown KL,
Sorensen PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, BC's Children's Hospital, Vancouver, Canada.

Ewing sarcoma and other peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs)
display limited neural differentiation and are thought to have a neural crest
origin Greater than 95% of these tumors share common t(11;22)(q24;q12)
ort(21;22)(q22;q12) chromosomal translocations leading to ES/FLI1 or EWS/ERG gene
fusions, respectively. The resulting chimeric oncoproteins seem to function as
aberrant transcription factors. However, whether these molecules contribute to
the limited neural differentiation observed in pPNETs or actually inhibit
differentiation remains unclear. We report a Ewing sarcoma case from the forearm 
of a 10-year-old girl which expressed EWS/FLI1 fusion transcripts. The tumor was 
treated with surgery, chemotherapy, and local radiation, but residual tumor was
detected within a year as a well-differentiated peripheral neural tumor lacking
detectable EWS/FLI1 expression. Further studies suggested that the primary and
residual tumors were clonally related. This association between apparent
therapy-induced differentiation in Ewing sarcoma and absence of detectable fusion
transcripts in the residual tumor provides presumptive evidence that EWS/FLI1
expression may inhibit differentiation in tumour cells.

PMID: 9496833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Cancer. 1998 Feb 20;79(1):56-60.

Predictive potential of testing for bone marrow involvement in Ewing tumor
patients by RT-PCR: a preliminary evaluation.

Zoubek A(1), Ladenstein R, Windhager R, Amann G, Fischmeister G, Kager L, Jugovic
D, Ambros PF, Gadner H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Children's Hospital, Vienna,
Austria.

EWS/ets-oncogene fusion transcripts can be detected in at least 98% of Ewing
tumors [(ET) Ewing sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor] by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), thus confirming the
histopathologic diagnosis. To detect minimal amounts of tumor cells in the bone
marrow (BM), we used an RT-PCR assay with a high sensitivity, revealing one tumor
cell in a background of 10(6) normal cells. We examined BM samples from 35 newly 
diagnosed ET patients (23 with localized and 12 with metastatic disease). At
diagnosis, tumor cells in the BM were detected in 7/23 patients with localized
disease (30%). Fifty percent of patients with isolated lung metastasis were
RT-PCR positive (3/6), whereas 6/6 patients with bone metastases showed positive 
signals (100%). All patients with initial PCR positivity in the BM became
negative during treatment. After a median follow-up of 30 months, relapses were
observed in both groups of patients with localized disease (3/7 RT-PCR positive
and 2/16 RT-PCR negative). The only recurrence in the group with isolated lung
metastases occurred as progressive lung disease in 1 of the 2 RT-PCR-negative
patients, whereas among the 6 patients with bone metastases 2 remain in complete 
remission. So far, RT-PCR screening for BM involvement did not allow prediction
of early relapse in ET. To assess better the significance of this test in the
evaluation of long-term prognosis and in monitoring the effectiveness of systemic
therapy, long observation periods are warranted before it becomes a tool for
treatment stratification.

PMID: 9495359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Hum Pathol. 1998 Feb;29(2):181-4.

Molecular features in a biphenotypic small cell sarcoma with neuroectodermal and 
muscle differentiation.

de Alava E(1), Lozano MD, Sola I, Panizo A, Idoate MA, Martínez-Isla C, Forteza
J, Sierrasesúmaga L, Pardo-Mindán FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clínica Universitaria de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

We report a case of a 13-year-old girl with soft tissue sarcoma of the hand,
which showed muscle and neuroectodermal immunophenotypes. Molecular studies were 
performed on RNA collected from fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology and
peripheral blood samples by nested reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and Southern blot analysis. This biphenotypic tumor showed
simultaneous expression of EWS-FLI1 and PAX3-FKHR transcripts, specific of Ewing 
family tumors and alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, respectively. Although childhood
sarcomas with simultaneous muscle and neural differentiation have been described 
to have EWS-FLI1 transcripts, there are no reports of tumors with both
transcripts. Cytological specimens are a good source of RNA for molecular
studies.

PMID: 9490279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1489-97.

EWS, but not EWS-FLI-1, is associated with both TFIID and RNA polymerase II:
interactions between two members of the TET family, EWS and hTAFII68, and
subunits of TFIID and RNA polymerase II complexes.

Bertolotti A(1), Melot T, Acker J, Vigneron M, Delattre O, Tora L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

The t(11;22) chromosomal translocation specifically linked to Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumor results in a chimeric molecule fusing the
amino-terminus-encoding region of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal
DNA-binding domain encoded by the FLI-1 gene. As the function of the protein
encoded by the EWS gene remains unknown, we investigated the putative role of EWS
in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription by comparing its activity with that
of its structural homolog, hTAFII68. We demonstrate that a portion of EWS is able
to associate with the basal transcription factor TFIID, which is composed of the 
TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs). In vitro binding 
studies revealed that both EWS and hTAFII68 interact with the same TFIID
subunits, suggesting that the presence of EWS and that of hTAFII68 in the same
TFIID complex may be mutually exclusive. Moreover, EWS is not exclusively
associated with TFIID but, similarly to hTAFII68, is also associated with the Pol
II complex. The subunits of Pol II that interact with EWS and hTAFII68 have been 
identified, confirming the association with the polymerase. In contrast to EWS,
the tumorigenic EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is not associated with either TFIID or
Pol II in Ewing cell nuclear extracts. These observations suggest that EWS and
EWS-FLI-1 may play different roles in Pol II transcription.

PMCID: PMC108863
PMID: 9488465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogene. 1997 Dec 18;15(25):3067-82.

Functional interference between retinoic acid or steroid hormone receptors and
the oncoprotein Fli-1.

Darby TG(1), Meissner JD, Rühlmann A, Mueller WH, Scheibe RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Zentrum, Berlin, Germany.

The Fli-1 protein is a member of the ets proto-oncogene family, whose
overexpression is a consequence of Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV)
integration in Friend erythroleukemic cells. We present evidence that Fli-1 and
the retinoic acid receptor (RAR alpha) can reciprocally repress one another's
transcriptional activation. Overexpression of Fli-1 inhibits the retinoic
acid-induced activation of genes carrying a functional retinoic acid response
element (RARE). Conversely, RAR alpha is able to repress Fli-1-mediated
transcriptional activation. Transfection analysis of RAR alpha and Fli-1 mutants 
in cultured cells demonstrate that the DNA binding domain of RAR alpha and the
N-terminal region of Fli-1 are required for repression. Gel retardation analysis 
demonstrates that RAR alpha cannot bind to the Fli-1 binding site in the E74
promoter and the expression of Fli-1 does not affect RAR alpha binding to DNA.
Furthermore, the data suggest an indirect interaction between Fli-1 and RAR alpha
mediated by a 'bridging' factor(s) present in nuclear extracts from RM10
erythroleukemia cells. Fli-1 also interferes with the action of receptors for
thyroid or glucocorticoid hormone in several hematopoietic cell lines. The
RA-induced differentiation and decrease of cell proliferation was blocked in
myeloblastic leukemia HL-60 cells overexpressing the N-terminal region of Fli-1
at physiological concentrations of RA. These data suggest that accumulation of
Fli-1 can oppose the transcriptional activity of hormone receptors in
hematopoietic cells.

PMID: 9444955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Tumori. 1997 Sep-Oct;83(5):847-55.

HLA binding characteristics and generation of cytotoxic lymphocytes against
peptides derived from oncogenic proteins.

Bertazzoli C(1), Marchesi E, Dermime S, Ravagnani F, Parmiani G,
Gambacorti-Passerini C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology D, Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Structurally altered proteins (derived from chromosomal
translocations or gene mutations) can be considered tumor specific antigens and
represent an attractive target for a T-cell mediated response. T lymphocytes
recognize antigens in the form of peptides bound to HLA-molecules.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Peptides derived from oncogenic proteins were screened for
the presence of HLA binding motifs; actual binding were evaluated by HLA
stabilization experiments using transfectants and specific anti-HLA antibodies.
Specific lymphocytes were induced by in vitro peptide sensitization and screened 
by thymidine uptake or cellular cytotoxic assays.
RESULTS: We identified peptides derived from EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein and from
mutated K-RAS protein (encompassing respectively the fusion point and the
mutation at position 12) that showed binding motif for HLA-Cw*0702 and HLA-A3
respectively. The actual binding of these peptides was analysed in a
stabilization assay. We detected binding for the EWS/FLI-1 peptide and for 5 RAS 
peptides (1 wild type and 4 mutated). The effect of temperature, beta
2-microglobulin (beta 2-m) and fetal calf serum (FCS) on the binding and the
stability of the HLA/peptide complex was studied. A low temperature (26 degrees
C) increased the binding both in HLA-A3 and HLA-Cw*0702, while FCS reduced it.
beta 2-m increased the binding to the HLA-A3 molecule but did not influence the
binding to the HLA-Cw*0702. The stability of already formed complexed was
somewhat different in the HLA-A3 and HLA-Cw*0702 system: both were more stable at
26 degrees C than at 37 degrees C but while the beta 2-m and FCS did not
influence the stability of the HLA-A3/peptide complex, they seemed to cause
opposite effects in the HLA-Cw*0702 system (beta 2-m stabilized and FCS
destabilized the complex). Finally, we were able to generate a specific CD8+ CTL 
line against a K-RAS mutated peptide.
CONCLUSIONS: Although binding motifs and actual HLA binding can be detected in
several cases, the generation of a cellular response is infrequent, confirming
that HLA binding is necessary but not sufficient to obtain an in vitro response. 
Further optimization of culture conditions, type of Antigen Presenting Cells
(APC), peptides, use of stabilizers like beta 2-m are still needed.

PMID: 9428921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 5;272(49):30822-7.

The insulin-like growth factor-I receptor is required for EWS/FLI-1
transformation of fibroblasts.

Toretsky JA(1), Kalebic T, Blakesley V, LeRoith D, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Branch, NCI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA. jt@helix.nih.gov

Ewing's family of tumors is characterized by a well described reciprocal
translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12), which produces a fusion protein (EWS/FLI-1)
that transforms mouse fibroblasts. The EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein has been shown to
act as a potent chimeric transcription factor. Overexpression of insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) has been implicated in many tumor models as
playing a role in cell growth and tumorigenesis. In addition, blockade of the
IGF-IR inhibits the growth of Ewing's family of tumors cells. Therefore, we first
studied whether the presence of the IGF-IR is required for transformation by the 
EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein. To perform this study, we used two previously described
fibroblast cell lines, R- and W, derived from an IGF-IR knockout mouse and a
wild-type littermate, respectively. Neither W nor R- cells without the fusion
protein formed soft agar colonies. However, W clones expressing the fusion
message (WF cells) formed soft agar colonies, whereas R- clones expressing the
fusion message (R-F cells) did not form soft agar colonies. Because the IGF-IR is
required for EWS/FLI-1 transformation, we chose to investigate whether altered
signaling occurs from the IGF-IR when the EWS/FLI-1 fusion is present. WF cells
demonstrated a greater degree of ligand-stimulated insulin receptor substrate-1
phosphorylation when compared with W cells, suggesting that expression of the
EWS/FLI-1 fusion protein alters the IGF-IR signaling pathway.

PMID: 9388225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):495-7.

EWS/FLI1-induced manic fringe renders NIH 3T3 cells tumorigenic.

May WA(1), Arvand A, Thompson AD, Braun BS, Wright M, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, USA.

EWS/FLI1, a fusion gene found in Ewing's sarcoma, encodes a transcriptional
regulator and promotes cellular transformation by modulating the transcription of
specific target genes. We have found that EWS/FLI1 and structurally related
fusion proteins upregulate manic fringe (MFNG), a recently described member of
the Fringe gene family instrumental in somatic development. MFNG is also
expressed in human tumour-derived cell lines expressing EWS/FLI1. Overexpression 
of MFNG in NIH 3T3 cells renders them tumorigenic in mice with severe combined
immunodeficiency disease (SCID). These data demonstrate that part of the
oncogenic effect of EWS/FLI1 is to transcriptionally deregulate a member of a
family of morphogenic genes.

PMID: 9398859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hybridoma. 1997 Oct;16(5):457-64.

Production and characterization of mouse monoclonal antibodies to wild-type and
oncogenic FLI-1 proteins.

Melot T(1), Gruel N, Doubeikovski A, Sevenet N, Teillaud JL, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, INSERM U 434, Paris.

Mouse monoclonal antibodies were raised against the C-terminal domain of human
FLI-1, a member of the ETS family of transcription factors which is involved in
various murine and human malignancies. This FLI-1 specific domain is included in 
the fusion product EWS-FLI-1, an oncogenic variant of FLI-1 expressed in Ewing
tumors. Antibodies were screened first by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay onto 
recombinant FLI-1-coated plates. Positive clones were then tested for their
ability to immunoprecipitate over-expressed EWS-FLI-1 protein. Three monoclonal
antibodies were selected and further characterized. One of them, termed 7.3 MoAb,
was shown to react with FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 in immunoblotting,
immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence experiments. With all three methods, 
this antibody not only enabled the detection of overexpressed proteins but also
more interestingly, that of endogenously expressed proteins. Furthermore, the 7.3
MoAb can specifically inhibit the interaction of FLI-1 with its DNA-binding site 
as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The 7.3 MoAb appears to be
specific for FLI-1 because it does not react with ERG, the ETS family member most
closely related to FLI-1. This antibody should be a useful tool in the diagnostic
evaluation of Ewing tumors and should permit biochemical analyses to study the
function of the wild-type FLI-1 protein and of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein.

PMID: 9388029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Semin Oncol. 1997 Oct;24(5):515-25.

Immunohistochemical and molecular genetic approaches to soft tissue tumor
diagnosis: a primer.

Hibshoosh H(1), Lattes R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons Columbia
University New York, NY 10032, USA.

During the past two decades we have witnessed the identification of an expanding 
list of immunohistochemical and molecular markers linked to histopathologically
defined subtypes of tumors. These markers offer new insights and approaches to
the classification of tumors with important prognostic and/or therapeutic
implications. We review the potentially diagnostic immunohistochemical and
molecular markers of soft tissue tumors (STTs). The immunohistochemical markers
reviewed include vimentin, cytokeratin, desmin, HHF35, S100, myoD1,
alpha1-antitrypsin, vascular markers (factor VIII, CD31, CD34), MIC2, and others.
The potentially diagnostic chromosomal translocations and associated genes
identified in STT include Ewing's/PNET t(11;22)(q24;q12)(FLI1;EWS),
t(21;22)(q22;q12)(ERG; EWS); t(7;22)(p22;q12)(ETV1;EWS); desmoplastic small round
cell tumor t(11;22)(p13;q12)(WT1;EWS); extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma
t(9;22)(q22;q12) (TEC(CHN);EWS); malignant ectomesenchymoma
t(11;22)(q24;q12)(FLI1;EWS); alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma
t(2;13)(q35;q14)(PAX-3;FKHR); t(1;13) (p36;q14)(PAX-7;FKHR); myxoid and round
cell liposarcoma t(12;16)(q13;p11)(CHOP;TLS(FUS)); synovial sarcoma
t(X;18)(p11;q11)(SSX1&2;SYT), and others. The nature, utility, and limitations of
these markers in diagnostic settings are explored.

PMID: 9344317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1997 Aug;97(1):12-9.

Multiple chromosomal mechanisms generate an EWS/FLI1 or an EWS/ERG fusion gene in
Ewing tumors.

Desmaze C(1), Brizard F, Turc-Carel C, Melot T, Delattre O, Thomas G, Aurias A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics, Curie Institute, Paris, France.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation is found in about 85% of Ewing tumors and
leads in all cases to an EWS/FLI1 fusion gene. In a few instances, complex
translocations, involving chromosomes 11, 22 and a third chromosome or other
variant translocations not involving chromosome 11 also have been reported. These
rearrangements generate an active fusion gene between the EWS gene and either the
human FLI1 gene or other members of the ETS gene family: the ERG gene localized
in band 21q22.2, the ETV1 gene localized in band 7p22, or the E1AF gene localized
in band 17q12. Using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on interphase
nuclei or metaphases, we report here the characterization of particular
karyotypes in Ewing tumors, namely a complex t(2;11;22) translocation, a variant 
t(12;22) translocation, and one Ewing tumor without specific rearrangements but
with an EWS/ERG fusion gene demonstrated by molecular analysis. These molecular
cytogenetic methods allowed us (1) to precisely localize the genomic breakpoints 
within-EWSR1 and EWSR2 and to identify the chromosome carrying the fusion gene;
(2) to determine the nature of events generating the fusion genes; (3) to
demonstrate that some variant translocations represent masked complex
translocations; and (4) to show that the generation of an EWS/ERG fusion gene
cannot be obtained through a simple balanced translocation.

PMID: 9242212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Rinsho Byori. 1997 Jul;45(7):661-6.

[Pathologic diagnosis on bone and soft tissue tumors by molecular biological
methods].

[Article in Japanese]

Nojima T(1), Takegami T, Abe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kanazawa Medical University Hospital, Ishikawa.

Characteristic chromosome aberrations and the rearranged genes resulting in
chimeric fusion genes have been reported in some bone and soft tissue tumors;
t(X; 18) in synovial sarcoma, t(11; 22) in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, and t(2; 13) in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. We practically 
used the chromosome analysis and the reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) method as a tool for diagnosis and follow up. All of 10 cases of
synovial sarcoma had a chimeric product of SYT/SSX gene. Eleven cases of Ewing's 
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor showed 6 variants of chimeric
products between EWS gene and Fli1 gene in the PCR-directed sequence analysis.
Although PAX3/FKHD or PAX7/FKHD transcripts were amplified in alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma cases, MyoD1 and myogenin gene which are myogenic transcription 
factor were also expressed in most rhabdomyosarcomas. These findings indicate
that molecular biological analysis may be a useful supplementary method for
pathologic diagnosis of bone and soft tissue tumors.

PMID: 9256013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Pathol. 1997 Jul;28(7):767-71.

EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts in three peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors
of the kidney.

Quezado M(1), Benjamin DR, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA.

Although primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) is a well-recognized entity, its 
renal localization as a primary site has not been appreciated. Only nine cases of
renal PNET exist in the literature. The paucity of renal PNET could be explained 
by the lack of objective diagnostic techniques that would facilitate its
distinction from other primitive round cell tumors of the kidney, such as the
more widely recognized monophasic Wilms' tumor and clear-cell sarcoma of the
kidney (CCSK), as well as renal carcinoid, or neuroblastoma invading the kidney
from the adjacent adrenal gland. The recently identified specific fusion
transcripts detectable by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) have provided us with a valuable tool for the detection of renal PNET.
This article reports three renal PNET that expressed EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts
by RT-PCR, in addition to positive staining for MIC2 protein and neuron-specific 
enolase (NSE). One also exhibited dense core granules in cell processes by
electron microscopy. Employment of such methodology will lead to a more accurate 
classification of renal tumors.

PMID: 9224742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Cytol. 1997 May-Jun;41(3):795-801.

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for detecting Ewing's sarcoma in 
archival fine needle aspiration biopsies.

Schlott T(1), Nagel H, Ruschenburg I, Reimer S, Droese M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies on pediatric soft tissue sarcomas have demonstrated a
chromosomal 11;22 (q24;q12) translocation in Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and peripheral 
primitive neuroectodermal tumors that appears to be a unique oncogenic marker. To
investigate the usefulness of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) as an ancillary method for cytodiagnosis, we tested archival aspirates
derived from ES patients to establish whether any beta-actin RNA expression or
tumor-specific EWS/FLI-1 gene translocation had occurred.
STUDY DESIGN: Sixteen skeletal specimens aspirated 10-15 years earlier from
patients with cytologic and histologic diagnoses of ES were prepared for PCR. The
amplification products were sequenced.
RESULTS: Amplifiable RNA was detected in smears from 12 patients by beta-actin
RT-PCR. Seven aspirates from beta-actin-positive patients showed ES-specific
genomic translocation (58%). Sequence analysis of the resulting PCR fragments
revealed EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcriptions of varying length.
CONCLUSION: When RNA was retrievable, RT-PCR applied to routinely stained
aspirate smears was a highly specific method in differential diagnosis of ES.

PMID: 9167704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:474-7.

Molecular mechanisms involved in long-term maintenance of erythroleukaemia cells 
by stromal cells.

Harrison PR(1), Nibbs RJ, Bartholomew C, O'Prey J, Qiu J, Walker M, Clark AM,
Leslie N, Ostertag W.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Beatson Laboratories, Glasgow,
Scotland, UK.

PMID: 9209429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Antisense Nucleic Acid Drug Dev. 1997 Apr;7(2):125-30.

Triplex-forming oligonucleotides with unexpected affinity for a nontargeted GA
repeat sequence.

Beaulieu M(1), Barbeau B, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Sciences Biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada.

We examined the affinity and the specificity of triplex formation for different
purine ODNs directed against two portions of a purine sequence derived from the
mouse fli-1 gene. As expected, the ODNs antiparallel to the purine strand of
their target can form triplex DNA. One parallel ODN showed binding to its target 
sequence. We explain this unusual binding by an interaction of the ODN with a GA 
repetition present in the sequence. We further examined the interaction of this
ODN with a target composed of 14 GA repetitions. Unexpectedly, one ODN shows
higher affinity for a partially complementary GA target relative to its
completely complementary target. For another ODN, the binding to the GA target is
weaker and might involve skipping of bases in a way that resembles alternate
strand triplex formation.

PMID: 9149848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Surg Pathol. 1997 Apr;21(4):461-8.

Primitive neuroectodermal tumor of the kidney confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Sheaff M(1), McManus A, Scheimberg I, Paris A, Shipley J, Baithun S.

Author information: 
(1)Morbid Anatomy Department, Royal Hospitals Trust, Whitechapel, England.

Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs) are rare lesions that form
part of the Ewing family of tumors, which includes osseous and extraosseous
Ewing's sarcoma and Askins tumor of the thorax. All are characterized by
translocations involving the EWS gene at 22q12, usually the translocation
t(11;22)(q24;12). PNETs usually occur in soft tissues but occasionally arise
within a visceral organ. We describe a PNET of the kidney that showed
characteristic microscopic and immunohistochemical appearances of a small, round,
dark blue cell tumor with focal rosette formation and strong membrane positivity 
for the MIC2 gene product. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization on touch
imprints prepared from frozen tissue using cosmid probes flanking the EWS gene at
22q12 and the FLI1 gene at 11q24 indicated the presence of t(11; = +22)(q24; =
+q12), confirming the diagnosis of PNET. This is the first reported PNET of the
kidney supported by cytogenetic analysis. We also review the literature on this
fascinating tumor in this unusual location.

PMID: 9130994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Hum Pathol. 1997 Apr;28(4):502-9.

An intra-abdominal small round cell neoplasm with features of primitive
neuroectodermal and desmoplastic round cell tumor and a EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcript.

Katz RL(1), Quezado M, Senderowicz AM, Villalba L, Laskin WB, Tsokos M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, MD,
USA.

We report an intra-abdominal round cell tumor in a young man which exhibited the 
light and electron microscopic appearance of a peripheral primitive
neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), in addition to the clinical and topographic
characteristics, desmoplasia and a complex immunophenotypic profile of the
intra-abdominal desmoplastic round cell tumor (DSRCT). Reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction revealed a EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript as in
PNET/Ewing's sarcoma, instead of the EWS/WT1 transcript of DSRCT. The tumor was
also strongly positive for the mic2 protein. This is a unique case of a hybrid
tumor arising in the peritoneal cavity of a young male. The existence of such a
hybrid tumor in this location suggests that DSRCT and PNET may be related and
possibly share a common histogenesis.

PMID: 9104953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Oncogene. 1997 Mar 20;14(11):1259-68.

Inhibition of apoptosis by normal and aberrant Fli-1 and erg proteins involved in
human solid tumors and leukemias.

Yi H(1), Fujimura Y, Ouchida M, Prasad DD, Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Allegheny University of the Health Sciences,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Two ets family members, namely erg and Fli-1 are fused with two EWS family
members namely EWS and TLS/FUS as a result of chromosome translocation in human
solid tumors and leukemias. EWS-erg and EWS-Fli-1, which are involved in greater 
than 95% of Ewing family of tumors, were shown to function as transcriptional
activators. TLS/FUS-erg, which is involved in human myeloid leukemias also
functions as a transcriptional activator. Expression of these fusion proteins
(EWS-erg and EWS-Fli-1) are shown to be essential for maintaining the oncogenic
and tumorigenic properties of tumor cells. Cancer is thought to be caused not
only by uncontrolled cell proliferation but also by deregulation of programmed
cell death. Therefore, we have studied the role of normal (Fli-1 and erg) and
aberrant fusion proteins (EWS-erg, EWS-Fli-1 and TLS/FUS-erg) in apoptosis. We
have found that expression of normal (Fli-1 and erg) and aberrant fusion proteins
inhibit the apoptosis of NIH3T3 cells induced by either serum deprivation or by
treatment with calcium ionophore. We have also observed similar suppression of
apoptosis in Ewing's sarcoma cells expressing EWS-Fli-1 and EWS-erg proteins
suggesting that these fusion proteins may be responsible for the decreased
ability of these tumor cells to undergo apoptosis. Inhibition of the expression
of these aberrant fusion proteins by antisense RNA technique resulted in
increased susceptibility to apoptosis leading to the death of tumor cells.
Therefore, our results suggest that one can use therapeutic agents which can down
regulate the expression of fusion proteins in combination with chemotherapeutic
agents as an effective treatment for these human solid tumors and leukemias.

PMID: 9178886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 4;94(5):1949-54.

Functional characterization of ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 in the regulation of the MCSFR
proximal promoter.

Fears S(1), Gavin M, Zhang DE, Hetherington C, Ben-David Y, Rowley JD, Nucifora
G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The ETV6/CBFA2 (TEL/AML1) fusion gene occurs as a result of the chromosome
translocation t(12;21)(p13;q22) in up to 30% of children diagnosed with B cell
precursor (cd10+, cd19+) acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemic cells that have
acquired the t(12;21) usually demonstrate loss of the remaining normal ETV6 (TEL)
allele. Using reporter gene assays we have functionally characterized both the
normal ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 fusion proteins in the regulation of the MCSFR
proximal promoter. Neither ETV6 or ETV6/CBFA2 has any significant, detectable
effect on the promoter by itself. However, both ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2 inhibit the
activation of the promoter by CBFA2B(AML1B) and C/EBPa. We have shown that a
29-bp region of the MCSFR promoter containing the binding sites for CBFA2B and
C/EBPa is sufficient for the inhibition by ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2. Mutational
analysis of the MCSFR promoter revealed that binding of both CBFA2B and C/EBPa to
their respective sites is necessary for the inhibition by ETV6 and ETV6/CBFA2.
Deletion of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) region from the cDNAs of ETV6 and
ETV6/CBFA2 decreased but did not completely abrogate the ability of either
construct to inhibit promoter activation. We also found that the ETS DNA binding 
region of ETV6 is necessary for inhibition of the promoter. Addition of ETS1 and 
FLI1, two ETS family members that have homology in the 5' HLH region, but not
Spi1, an ETS family member without the 5' HLH region, also inhibited reporter
gene expression. Our data show that the inhibition mediated by ETV6 and
ETV6/CBFA2, in the context of the MCSFR promoter, depend on interactions with
other proteins, not just CBFA2B. Our results also indicate that the
transactivation characteristics of ETV6/CBFA2 are a combination of positive and
negative regulatory properties.

PMCID: PMC20023
PMID: 9050885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1997 Mar;18(3):228-31.

EWS-ERG fusion transcript produced by chromosomal insertion in a Ewing sarcoma.

Kaneko Y(1), Kobayashi H, Handa M, Satake N, Maseki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Japan.

The EWS gene is fused in Ewing sarcoma-like tumors by a chromosomal translocation
to one of the four ETS-family genes: FLI1, ERG, ETV1, and E1AF. The orientation
of EWS and FLI1 on chromosomes 22 and 11, respectively, is 5' centromeric and 3' 
telomeric, whereas that of ERG on chromosome 21 is the reverse. Although 10% of
Ewing-family tumors express the EWS-ERG fusion transcript, there have been no
reports on tumors with t(21;22)(q22;q12) identified by banding cytogenetics. We
found the karyotype 50, XY, +8, +8, +12, +mar in all metaphase cells from a
tumor. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis
performed on the tumor and direct sequencing of the products identified the
EWS-ERG fusion transcript. Subsequent two-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis with EWS and ERG clones showed the fused signals on
the der(21) chromosome, but no ERG signals on the chromosome 22 homologs. Thus,
our RT-PCR and FISH analyses indicated that the chromosome 22 fragment containing
the 5' portion of EWS had been inverted and inserted into chromosome 21 and had
fused to the 3' portion of ERG. This subtle chromosome aberration could not be
identified by routine cytogenetics. A chromosomal inversion/insertion has also
been described in acute leukemia with the MLL-AF10 fusion gene, and this may be a
common pathway for producing fusion of reverse-oriented genes in leukemias and
solid tumors.

PMID: 9071576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Eur J Cancer. 1997 Feb;33(2):239-43.

EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts identified in patients with typical neuroblastoma.

Burchill SA(1), Wheeldon J, Cullinane C, Lewis IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Candlelighter's Children's Cancer Research Laboratory, St James University
Hospital, Leeds, U.K.

Erratum in
    Eur J Cancer 1997 Oct;33(11):1907.
    Eur J Cancer 1997 Jul;33(8):1337.

The t(11.22)(q24.q12) results in expression of a chimeric RNA product, EWS-FLI1. 
This RNA product is expressed in over 85% of tumours belonging to the Ewing's
family, and is increasingly used as a definitive characteristic of these tumours.
In this study, we evaluated reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain (RT-PCR) for
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts in 18 neurally derived small round cell tumours.
These included six Ewing's family tumours and 12 neuroblastomas. EWS-FLI1 fusion 
transcripts were identified in all six Ewing's tumours, but also in two of the 12
neuroblastomas. One neuroblastoma contained the classic type 1 fusion transcript,
and the second a type 1 transcript containing a 66 bp (base pair) insert that was
not derived from the EWS or FLI1 gene. The presence of EWS-FLI1 fusion products
in RNA extracted from primary neuroblastoma suggests the identification of
EWS-FLI1 fusion transcripts is not pathognomonic for tumours of the Ewing's
family. The clinical significance of these fusion transcripts in neuroblastoma is
not known.

PMID: 9135495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 16;14(2):213-21.

FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 function as ternary complex factors and ELK1 and SAP1a function
as ternary and quaternary complex factors on the Egr1 promoter serum response
elements.

Watson DK(1), Robinson L, Hodge DR, Kola I, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Medical University of South
Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

The ETS gene products are a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins that
contain a highly conserved and structurally unique DNA binding domain, termed the
ETS domain. Several ETS proteins bind to DNA as monomers, however it has been
shown that the DNA binding activity is enhanced or modulated in the presence of
other factors. By differential display and whole genome PCR techniques, we have
recently shown that the Erg1 gene is a target for ETS proteins. The Egr1 promoter
contains multiple ETS binding sites, three of which exist as parts of two serum
response elements (SREI and SREII). The SRE is a cis-element that regulates the
expression of many growth factor responsive genes. ELK1 and SAP1a have been shown
to form ternary complexes with SRF on the SRE located in the c-fos promoter.
Similarly, we examined whether the ELK1, SAP1a, FLI1, EWS-FLI1, ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 
and PU.1 proteins can form ternary complexes with SRF on the Egr1 SREI and II.
Our results demonstrate that indeed ELK1, SAPla, FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 are able to
form ternary complexes with SRF on Egr1 SREs. In addition, ELK1 and SAP1a can
also form quarternary complexes on the Egr1 SREI. However, the proteins ETS1,
ETS2, PEA3 and PU.1 were unable to form ternary complexes with SRF on either the 
Egr1 or c-fos SREs. Our data demonstrate that FLI1 and EWS-FLI1 constitute new
members of a subgroup of ETS proteins that can function as ternary complex
factors and further implicate a novel function for these ETS transcription
factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene. By amino acid sequence comparison we 
found that, in fact, 50% of the amino acids present in the B-box of SAP1a and
ELK1, which are required for interaction with SRF, are identical to those present
in both FLI1 (amino acids 231- 248) and EWS-FLI1 proteins. This B-box is not
present in ETS1, ETS2, PEA3 or PU.1 and these proteins were unable to form
ternary complexes with SRF and Egrl-SREs or c-fos SRE. Furthermore, deletion of
194 amino terminal amino acids of FLI1 did not interfere with its ability to
interact with SRF, in fact, this truncation increased the stability of the
ternary complex. The FLI1 protein has a unique R-domain located next to the DNA
binding region. This R-domain may modulate the interaction with SRF, providing a 
mechanism that would be unique to FLI1 and EWS-FLI1, thus implicating a novel
function for these ETS transcription factors in the regulation of the Egr1 gene.

PMID: 9010223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Clin Invest. 1997 Jan 15;99(2):239-47.

EWS-Fli1 antisense oligodeoxynucleotide inhibits proliferation of human Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells.

Tanaka K(1), Iwakuma T, Harimaya K, Sato H, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. ktanaka@yoda.nidr.nih.gov

The translocation t(11;22) is a common chromosomal abnormality detected both in
Ewing's sarcoma and in primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. The translocation
results in an EWS-Fli1 fusion gene, made up of the 5' half of the EWS gene on
chromosome 22 fused to the 3' half of the Fli1 gene on chromosome 11. Recent
studies have evaluated possible roles of the fusion gene products. However, the
biological significance of EWS-Fli1 is still unknown. Using a competitive
polymerase chain reaction technique, we show here that there might be a
correlation between the expression levels of the EWS-Fli1 fusion gene and the
proliferative activities of Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor
cells. When the EWS-Fli1 expression is inhibited by antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides against the fusion RNA, the growth of the tumor cells is
significantly reduced both in vitro and in vivo. The data further indicate the
growth inhibition of the cells by the antisense sequence might be mediated by
G0/G1 block in the cell cycle progression. These results suggest that EWS-Fli1
may play an important role in the proliferation of the tumor cells, and the
EWS-Fli1 fusion RNA could be used as a target to inhibit the growth of Ewing's
sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor with the specific antisense
oligonucleotide.

PMCID: PMC507791
PMID: 9005992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1997;220:143-50.

Biology of EWS/FLI and related fusion genes in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor.

May WA(1), Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories, School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024, USA.

PMID: 9103680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 19;13(12):2649-58.

EAT-2 is a novel SH2 domain containing protein that is up regulated by Ewing's
sarcoma EWS/FLI1 fusion gene.

Thompson AD(1), Braun BS, Arvand A, Stewart SD, May WA, Chen E, Korenberg J,
Denny C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90095, USA.

The EWS/FLI1 fusion protein is created by the translocation between chromosomes
11 and 22 that appears in most Ewing's sarcomas. This chimeric protein has been
demonstrated to be an aberrant transcription factor. Genes up regulated by
EWS/FLI1 but not by full-length FLI1 were identified by representational
difference analysis (RDA). We have characterized a novel gene, EWS/FLI1 activated
transcript 2 (EAT-2) that was cloned from a murine cDNA library using a
differentially expressed RDA fragment. EAT-2 expression is seen within 4-8 h of
EWS/FLI1 induction. Its expression correlates with transformation of NIH3T3 cells
by chimeric proteins related to EWS/FLI1 but not by unrelated genes. EAT-2 is
expressed in normal murine tissues and contains a unique but biochemically
functional SH2 domain. An homologous sequence in the human genome has been
identified and mapped to chromosome 1q22. Human EAT-2 transcripts were identified
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in Ewing's sarcoma
cell tumour cell lines. EAT-2's unique structure and correlation with
transformation make it a candidate for playing a role in the transformation of
NIH3T3 cells and the oncogenesis of Ewing's sarcoma.

PMID: 9000139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Nov;7(11):1525-34.

Increased expression of the ETS-related transcription factor FLI-1/ERGB
correlates with and can induce the megakaryocytic phenotype.

Athanasiou M(1), Clausen PA, Mavrothalassitis GJ, Zhang XK, Watson DK, Blair DG.

Author information: 
(1)SAIC-Frederick, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer Research and
Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

The human leukemia cell line K562 can be induced by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) to differentiate along the
megakaryocytic pathway, generating morphological changes and increased expression
of lineage-specific surface markers. We report that TPA-treated K562 cells also
express higher levels of FLI-1/ERGB, a member of the ETS family of transcription 
factors. Furthermore, introduction of a retroviral construct expressing human
FLI-1/ERGB into K562 cells induces changes similar to those seen following TPA
treatment, including increased adherence to the surface of the culture vessel and
altered size and morphology. Infected cells exhibit higher levels of the
megakaryocyte marker CD41a and, to a lesser extent, CD49b. These markers, as well
as virally encoded FLI-1/ERGB-specific RNA and protein, are expressed at the
highest levels in the attached cell population, while the growth rate of adherent
cells is reduced, and the fraction of cells in G0-G1 is increased. FLI-1/ERGB
virus-infected cells also exhibit increased expression of hemoglobin, a marker of
erythroid differentiation. Our results suggest FLI-1/ERGB plays a role in
controlling differentiation and gene expression along the megakaryocyte/platelet 
pathway, and further implicate ETS-related genes in the control of multiple
developmentally regulated hematopoietic genes.

PMID: 8930402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 20;271(38):23329-37.

New insights on DNA recognition by ets proteins from the crystal structure of the
PU.1 ETS domain-DNA complex.

Pio F(1), Kodandapani R, Ni CZ, Shepard W, Klemsz M, McKercher SR, Maki RA, Ely
KR.

Author information: 
(1)La Jolla Cancer Research Center, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1996 Dec 20;271(51):33156.

Transcription factors belonging to the ets family regulate gene expression and
share a conserved ETS DNA-binding domain that binds to the core sequence
5'-(C/A)GGA(A/T)-3'. The domain is similar to alpha+beta ("winged")
helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins. The crystal structure of the PU.1 ETS
domain complexed to a 16-base pair oligonucleotide revealed a pattern for DNA
recognition from a novel loop-helix-loop architecture (Kodandapani, R., Pio, F., 
Ni. C.-Z., Piccialli, G., Klemsz, M., McKercher, S., Maki, R. A., and Ely, K. R. 
(1996) Nature 380, 456-460). Correlation of this model with mutational analyses
and chemical shift data on other ets proteins confirms this complex as a paradigm
for ets DNA recognition. The second helix in the helix-turn-helix motif lies deep
in the major groove with specific contacts with bases in both strands in the core
sequence made by conserved residues in alpha3. On either side of this helix, two 
loops contact the phosphate backbone. The DNA is bent (8 degrees) but uniformly
curved without distinct kinks. ETS domains bind DNA as a monomer yet make
extensive DNA contacts over 30 A. DNA bending likely results from phosphate
neutralization of the phosphate backbone in the minor groove by both loops in the
loop-helix-loop motif. Contacts from these loops stabilize DNA bending and may
mediate specific base interactions by inducing a bend toward the protein.

PMID: 8798534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Diagn Cytopathol. 1996 Jul;15(1):17-22.

Cytogenetic studies on fine-needle aspiration samples from osteosarcoma and
Ewing's sarcoma.

Akerman M(1), Dreinhöfer K, Rydholm A, Willén H, Mertens F, Mitelman F, Mandahl
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cytology, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

The preoperative multidrug chemotherapy of osteosarcoma and Ewing's sarcoma
patients requires a reliable diagnosis. There are several advantages with
obtaining the diagnosis by fine-needle aspiration (FNA) and cytologic
examination. Although cytologic criteria have been defined, adjunctive methods
such as cytogenetic analysis are valuable to support the diagnosis. We have
cytogenetically analyzed FNAs from 18 primary bone sarcomas (six osteosarcomas
and 12 Ewing's sarcomas). Two of the osteosarcomas showed abnormal, complex
karyotypes seen in most highly-malignant osteosarcomas. Seven Ewing's sarcoma
aspirates displayed abnormal karyotypes; five of these had the characteristic
11;22 translocation, and in one of these cases molecular genetic analysis
revealed the hybrid EWS/FLI1 transcript. Since only two of six osteosarcomas
showed clonal changes, chromosomal analysis of FNAs from suspected osteosarcoma
seems to be of limited value, but may in some cases support the diagnosis of
high-grade malignancy. In Ewing's sarcomas, however, the finding of an 11;22
translocation was valuable and strongly supported the cytologic diagnosis. As
shown in one case, the material obtained by FNA is sufficient for cytologic,
cytogenetic, and molecular genetic analysis.

PMID: 8807247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Jun 7;1307(2):220-32.

Characterization of the human and mouse Fli-1 promoter regions.

Barbeau B(1), Bergeron D, Beaulieu M, Nadjem Z, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Sciences Biologiques, Université du Québec à Montréal, Canada.

Overexpression of the Fli-1 gene has been shown to be involved in
retrovirus-induced mouse tumors. Cloning of the 5' flanking sequence of the mouse
and human Fli-1 exon 1 was performed. At least two major transcription initiation
sites were localized respectively at 143 and 114 nucleotides upstream of the
previously defined mouse Fli-1 cDNA 5' end. The sequences flanking the CAP sites 
show good conservation between human and mouse (94%). The promoter region
contains a potential TATA box lying 30 bp from one of the major identified CAP
sites. Several conserved elements, such as GATA, EBS, GC rich, AP-2, AP-3
elements and a repetition of GA were observed next to the two major CAP sites.
Furthermore, this latter was shown to form a H-DNA structure in vitro by S1
nuclease sensitivity experiments. The highly conserved 5' non-translated region
of exon 1 is predicted to form a very stable hairpin structure which could
regulate the Fli-1 expression at the post-transcriptional level. In
Cas-Br-E-induced tumors, all the proviruses are found clustered within 35
nucleotides directly upstream the Fli-1 ATG start codon, thus deleting the
hairpin structure from the transcript. Promoter activity was tested using the CAT
reporter gene transfected in mouse and human erythroid cell lines. No promoter
activity could be detected with various mouse Fli-1 promoter-CAT constructs
containing 600 bp of the 5' flanking region, the complete exon 1, the 5' end of
intron 1 and/or retroviral LTR sequence. Constructions of the human homologue
containing nearly 1.5 kbp of Fli-1 5' flanking region was also inactive in
transfected cells. These results suggest that multiple levels of regulation might
control the Fli-1 expression.

PMID: 8679708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2708-18.

Generation of a novel Fli-1 protein by gene targeting leads to a defect in thymus
development and a delay in Friend virus-induced erythroleukemia.

Mélet F(1), Motro B, Rossi DJ, Zhang L, Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The proto-oncogene Fli-1 is a member of the ets family of transcription factor
genes. Its activation by either chromosomal translocation or proviral insertion
leads to Ewing's sarcoma in humans or erythroleukemia in mice, respectively,
Fli-1 is preferentially expressed in hematopoietic and endothelial cells. This
expression pattern resembled that of c-ets-1, another ets gene closely related
and physically linked to Fli-1. We also generated a germ line mutation in Fli-1
by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. Homozygous mutant mice
exhibit thymic hypocellularity which is not related to a defect in a specific
subpopulation of thymocytes or to increased apoptosis, suggesting that Fli-1 is
an important regulator of a prethymic T-cell progenitor. This phenotype was
corrected by crossing the Fli-1 deficient mice expressing Fli-1 cDNA. Homozygous 
mutant mice remained susceptible to erythroleukemia induction by Friend murine
leukemia virus, although the latency period was significantly increased.
Surprisingly, the mutant Fli-1 allele was still a target for Friend murine
leukemia virus integration, and leukemic spleens with a rearranged Fli-1 gene
expressed a truncated Fli-1 protein that appears to arise from an internal
translation initiation site and alternative splicing around the neo cassette used
in the gene targeting. The fortuitous discovery of the mutant Fli-1 protein,
revealed only as the result of the clonal expansion of leukemic cells harboring a
rearranged Fli-1 gene, suggests caution in the interpretation of gene-targeting
experiments that result in either no or only a subtle phenotypic alteration.

PMCID: PMC231261
PMID: 8649378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4678-85.

Analysis of the thrombopoietin receptor (MPL) promoter implicates GATA and Ets
proteins in the coregulation of megakaryocyte-specific genes.

Deveaux S(1), Filipe A, Lemarchandel V, Ghysdael J, Roméo PH, Mignotte V.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 91, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

The MPL gene codes for the thrombopoietin receptor, whose ligand specifically
controls megakaryocytic differentiation. To understand the molecular basis for
the megakaryocyte-specific expression of MPL, we analyzed the promoter of this
gene. A 200 bp fragment is sufficient for high-level specific expression. This
fragment can bind several trans-acting factors in vitro, including GATA-1 and
members of the Ets family. GATA-1 binds with low affinity to a unique GATA motif 
at -70 in the MPL promoter, and destruction of this site yields only a modest
decrease in expression level in HEL cells. Ets proteins also bind with low
affinity to two sites. One is located at position -15 and its destruction reduces
expression to 50%; the other is located immediately downstream of the GATA motif 
and plays a crucial role in expression of the promoter in HEL cells, as its
inactivation reduces expression to 15%. Furthermore, GATA-1 and two Ets proteins,
Ets-1 and Fli-1, can trans-activate the MPL promoter in heterologous cells. The
effects of GATA-1 and these two Ets proteins are additive. Together with our
previous results on the glycoprotein IIb (GpIIb) promoter, this study indicates a
molecular basis for the coregulation of early markers of megakaryocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 8639837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Pediatr Pathol Lab Med. 1996 May-Jun;16(3):379-92.

EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript detection and MIC2 immunohistochemical staining in
the diagnosis of Ewing's sarcoma.

Lee CS(1), Southey MC, Waters K, Kannourakis G, Georgiou T, Armes JE, Chow CW,
Venter DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and other primitive peripheral neuroectodermal tumors
(pPNETs) can present a significant diagnostic problem, as they may
morphologically resemble other small round cell tumors (SRCTs) of childhood.
However, ES/pPNET is known to carry a characteristic t(11;22)(q24;q12), the
detection of which may aid diagnosis. The recent identification of the EWS and
FLI-1 genes flanking the translocation break point has enabled reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to be used to detect the
putative chimeric transcription factor mRNA produced by the fusion gene. We have 
assessed the RT-PCR method of detection by examining 40 cases of ES for the
presence of EWS/FLI-1 transcripts. Twenty-six (76%) of the 34 cases with intact
mRNA yielded fusion transcripts. Four different transcript sizes were detected
and two tumors contained two transcripts of different size. No transcripts were
detected in a control group of non-ES/pPNET SRCTs. Eight cases with intact mRNA
were transcript negative. The MIC2 cell surface antigen, which is reported to be 
present in over 95% of ES/pPNETs, was present in 32 of 33 tumors (97%), including
all 24 EWS/FLI-1 transcript-positive cases examined. Hence MIC2 is a useful
screen for ES, with RT-PCR detection of t(11;22) being the optimal method for
confirming the diagnosis.

PMID: 9025840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Apr;7(4):429-37.

EWS/FLI-1 antagonists induce growth inhibition of Ewing tumor cells in vitro.

Kovar H(1), Aryee DN, Jug G, Henöckl C, Schemper M, Delattre O, Thomas G, Gadner 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, Austria.

Among primitive neuroectodermal tumors, Ewing tumors are characterized by a gene 
rearrangement recombining the 5'-EWS gene portion with one of two ETS-related
proto-oncogenes, FLI-1 or ERG, in roughly 90 and 10% of cases, respectively. We
attempted to antagonize EWS/FLI-1 function in Ewing tumor cell lines. As a
control, a cell line derived from another small round cell tumor of
neuroectodermal origin, neuroblastoma, was used. This cell line was found to
express almost identical patterns of ETS proteins except for EWS/FLI-1 and a
novel, ELF-related gene product. Stable expression of antisense EWS/FLI-1 cDNA
resulted in decreased endogenous EWS/FLI-1 RNA levels and growth reduction of ET 
cells but not of neuroblastoma cells. DNA-binding FLI-1 derivatives localizing to
the nucleus in which the 5'-EWS regulatory domain was replaced by bacterial
beta-galactosidase dominantly modulated transcriptional transactivation from a
degenerate ETS-binding motif. Transient transfection of these dominant-negative
recombinants resulted in a significant decrease in the relative number of mitoses
in four Ewing tumor cell lines tested but not in the neuroblastoma cell line. The
presented evidence for modulation of tumor cell proliferation by EWS/FLI-1
antagonists suggests a causal role for EWS/FLI-1-mediated gene activation in the 
malignant transformation of the enigmatic Ewing tumor-precursor cell.

PMID: 9052984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Clin Oncol. 1996 Apr;14(4):1245-51.

Does expression of different EWS chimeric transcripts define clinically distinct 
risk groups of Ewing tumor patients?

Zoubek A(1), Dockhorn-Dworniczak B, Delattre O, Christiansen H, Niggli F,
Gatterer-Menz I, Smith TL, Jürgens H, Gadner H, Kovar H.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Children's Hospital, Vienna,
Austria.

PURPOSE: Because of the high heterogeneity of EWS gene fusions with FLI1 and ERG 
genes due to variable chromosomal breakpoint locations in Ewing tumors (ET) (14
different chimeric transcripts identified so far), we evaluated the clinical
impact of the expression of diverse fusion transcripts in ET patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In a European multicenter study, 147 ET were analyzed by
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and the molecular data
statistically compared with all clinical data available.
RESULTS: Most tumors expressed chimeric transcripts with fusion of EWS exon 7 to 
FLI1 exon 6 (75 of 147) (type I) or five (39 of 147) and EWS exon 10 to FLI1 exon
5 (eight of 147) or 6 (five of 147). In five cases, chimerism between EWS exon 9 
and FLI1 exons 4 and EWS exon 7 and FLI1 exon 7 or 8 was observed. Fifteen cases 
of EWS-ERG rearrangement were identified. In 85 of these patients treated in the 
European Cooperative Ewing Sarcoma Studies, molecular results were analyzed in
comparison to age, sex, tumor localization, tumor volume, and disease extension. 
No significant correlation between the various fusion types and these features
were observed. Relapse-free survival (RFS) for the 31 patients with localized
disease and fusion type I tended to be longer compared with the 24 patients with 
localized tumors bearing other chimeric transcripts (P = .04).
CONCLUSION: Results suggest a possible advantage in PFS for patients with
localized disease and fusion type I transcripts, although this will require
prospective validation with a larger number of patients and longer follow-up
periods.

PMID: 8648380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Am J Pathol. 1996 Apr;148(4):1125-38.

Is the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcript specific for Ewing sarcoma and peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor? A report of four cases showing this transcript
in a wider range of tumor types.

Thorner P(1), Squire J, Chilton-MacNeil S, Marrano P, Bayani J, Malkin D,
Greenberg M, Lorenzana A, Zielenska M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.

The presence of t(11;22)(q24;q12) is often considered diagnostic of Ewing sarcoma
and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor. We report four cases, all of
which possessed this translocation as detected by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and confirmed by sequencing with or without fluorescent
in situ hybridization, but none of which were Ewing sarcoma or peripheral
primitive neuroectodermal tumor by histological criteria. Two were polyphenotypic
tumors and two were mixed embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas. Only one case
was positive for MIC2 by immunohistochemistry and only in a rare cell. Two cases 
(one polyphenotypic tumor and one rhabdomyosarcoma) had double minute chromosomes
with > 100 copies of the MDM2 gene. The presence of the t(11;22)(q24;ql2)
translocation should probably not be considered diagnostic of Ewing sarcoma and
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor in the absence of supporting
histological evidence. The presence of this translocation in Ewing sarcoma and
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor has been taken as evidence that these 
two tumors are related. Extending this relationship to include some
polyphenotypic tumors and some rhabdomyosarcomas may not be justified unless
additional evidence is gathered. Pathologists and oncologists will need to decide
whether treatment regimens for tumors are better based on phenotype rather than
genotype when these two profiles are seemingly in conflict.

PMCID: PMC1861517
PMID: 8644855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncogene. 1996 Mar 21;12(6):1199-1204.

ETS1 and ETS2 in p53 regulation: spatial separation of ETS binding sites (EBS)
modulate protein: DNA interaction.

Venanzoni MC(1), Robinson LR, Hodge DR, Kola I, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute-FCRDC, Frederick, 
Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

p53 is an extensively studied tumor suppressor gene implicated in the genesis of 
a large number of varied tumors. However, the pathways of regulation for the
wild-type p53 gene and its product are as yet unknown. In situ hybridization
analyses of ETS1 and ETS2 expression during mouse embryogenesis, have shown a
pattern similar to that of p53 gene expression. Significantly, we have identified
several ETS-binding sites (EBS) in the promoter regions of the human and mouse
p53 genes. In the human promoter two of these EBS are present in the form of a
palindrome, with the two EBS cores being separated by four nucleotides. This
report shows that the EBS palindrome of the human p53 promoter has a high
affinity for ETS1 and ETS2 and that such binding interaction intracellularly is
able to activate the transcription of a CAT reporter gene by 5-10-fold using COS 
cells. To investigate whether the spacing between the two EBS cores influences
the DNA binding activity, we synthesized oligonucleotides with increasing
distances (4,12,16, and 20 bases respectively) between the two EBS cores of the
palindrome. We observed an inverse correlation between an increasing distance in 
the two EBS cores of the palindrome and the ETS1 and ETS2 DNA binding activity
respectively. Interestingly, optimal DNA binding activity was observed when the
distance between the two EBS cores was four bases, identical to that which occurs
in the natural promoter. Furthermore we show that the p53 mRNA is expressed at
higher levels in NIH3T3 cells overexpressing ETS2 gene product, suggesting that
the ETS2 transcription factor is a likely candidate for regulating the expression
of p53 in vivo.

PMID: 8649821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Mar 15;24(6):1052-8.

SRE elements are binding sites for the fusion protein EWS-FLI-1.

Magnaghi-Jaulin L(1), Masutani H, Robin P, Lipinski M, Harel-Bellan A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Villejuif,
France.

EWS-FLI-1 is a chimeric protein produced in most Ewing's sarcomas. It results
from the fusion of the N-terminal-encoding region of the EWS gene to the
C-terminal DNA-binding domain (the ETS domain) encoded by the FLI-1 ets family
gene. Both EWS-FLI-1 and FLI-1 proteins function as transcription factors that
bind specifically to ets sequences (the ets boxes) present in promoter elements. 
EWS- FLI-1 is a powerful transforming protein, whereas FLI-1 is not. In a search 
for potential DNA binding sites for these two proteins, we have tested their
ability to recognize the serum responsive element (SRE) in the c-fos promoter.
This cis element contains an ets box which can be occupied by members of the ETS 
protein family which do not bind DNA autonomously but form a ternary complex with
a second protein, p67SRF (serum responsive factor). We demonstrate here that
EWS-FLI-1, but not FLI-1, is able to form a ternary complex on the c-fos SRE.
Using a GST pull-down assay, we show that both FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 interact in
vitro with SRF in the absence of DNA. In electromobility shift assays, EWS-FLI-1 
binding to the SRE is detectable in the absence of SRF whereas the binding of
FLI-1 is not, suggesting that the interaction with DNA is the step which limits
ternary complex formation by FLI-1. Deletion of the N-terminal portion of FLI-1
resulted in a protein which behaved as EWS-FLI-1, suggesting the existence of an 
N- terminal inhibitory domain in the normal protein. Taken together, our data
indicate that there are intrinsic differences in the binding of EWS-FLI-1 and
FLI-1 proteins to distinct ets sequences.

PMCID: PMC145748
PMID: 8604338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 1996 Jan 4;12(1):11-8.

Interaction of ETS-1 and ERGB/FLI-1 proteins with DNA is modulated by spacing
between multiple binding sites as well as phosphorylation.

Hodge DR(1), Robinson L, Watson D, Lautenberger J, Zhang XK, Venanzoni M, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA.

ETS is a family of transcription factors that contain a highly conserved ETS DNA 
binding domain. Various members of the ETS family are expressed in cells of
hematopoietic lineage. ETS-1, ETS-2 and ERGB/FLI-1 are expressed at high levels
in T-lymphocytes. HIV-1 infects T-cells and it has been shown that its LTR
contains binding sites for various transcription factors. In this study we show
that the HIV-1 core enhancer is directly regulated by ERGB/FLI-1 protein
positively, as well as, negatively, depending upon the presence or absence of
accessory factors in different cell types. In addition, we show that the ETS-1
transactivation activity is enhanced upon dephosphorylation of the
Calmodulin-dependent Protein Kinase II phosphorylation site located in exon VII. 
Finally, we demonstrate that the spacing between the two EBS cores in palindromic
or direct repeat sites play a crucial role in binding of ETS proteins to DNA.

PMID: 8552380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Hybridoma. 1995 Dec;14(6):563-9.

Generation and characterization of monoclonal antibodies against the ERGB/FLI-1
transcription factor.

Zhang XK(1), Papas TS, Bhat NK, Watson DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Structural Biology, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425, USA.

Five monoclonal antibodies were produced from mice immunized with recombinant
full length human ERGB protein. Among these monoclonal antibodies, four clones
did not cross react with other ets family proteins and thus are specific for the 
ERGB protein; however, one clone did react with the ERG protein, which has high
amino acid identity with the ERGB protein. The epitope location of these
antibodies was studied using bacterially expressed fragments of the human, ERGB
protein. These monoclonal antibodies recognized 51 kDa (p51) and 48 kDa (p48),
two ERGB gene-encoded proteins, from human, mouse, and rat cell lines. These
results suggest that the monoclonal antibodies can be used in human, mouse, or
rat cell lines and will be useful for the biochemical and functional analysis of 
the ERGB protein.

PMID: 8770644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6961-70.

An immunological renal disease in transgenic mice that overexpress Fli-1, a
member of the ets family of transcription factor genes.

Zhang L(1), Eddy A, Teng YT, Fritzler M, Kluppel M, Melet F, Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Cancer, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The proto-oncogene Fli-1 is a member of the ets family of transcription factor
genes. Its high expression in the thymus and spleen and the presence of DNA
binding sites for Fli-1 in a number of lymphoid cell-specific gene suggest that
Fli-1 is involved in the regulation of lymphopoiesis. Activation of the Fli-1
gene by either chromosomal translocation or viral insertion leads to Ewing's
sarcoma in humans and erythroleukemia in mice, respectively. Thus, Fli-1 is
normally involved in pathways involved in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation. We have generated H-2Kk-Fli-1 transgenic mice that overexpress
Fli-1 in various mouse tissues, with the highest levels of Fli-1 protein in the
thymus and spleen. These Fli-1 transgenic mice developed a high incidence of a
progressive immunological renal disease and ultimately died of renal failure
caused by tubulointerstitial nephritis and immune-complex glomerulonephritis. The
incidences of renal disease correlated with the levels of Fli-1 protein in
lymphoid tissues of transgenic lines. The hypergammaglobulinemia, splenomegaly,
B-cell hyperplasia, accumulation of abnormal CD3+ B220+ T lymphoid cells and CD5+
B220+ B cells in peripheral lymphoid tissues, and detection of various
autoantibodies in the sera of diseased Fli-1 transgenic mice suggested the
involvement of an immune dysfunction in the pathogenesis of the renal disease. In
addition, splenic B cells from transgenic mice exhibited increased proliferation 
and prolonged survival in vitro in response to mitogens. Taken together, these
data suggest that overexpression or ectopic expression of Fli-1 perturbs normal
lymphoid cell function and programmed cell death. Thus, H-2Kk-Fli-1 transgenic
mice may serve as a murine model for autoimmune disease in humans, such as
systemic lupus erythematosus.

PMCID: PMC230951
PMID: 8524263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Cancer. 1995 Nov 15;63(4):500-4.

EWS-FLI-1 and EWS-ERG chimeric mRNAs in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumor.

Ida K(1), Kobayashi S, Taki T, Hanada R, Bessho F, Yamamori S, Sugimoto T, Ohki
M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12) and t(21;22)(q22;q12) are specific chromosomal
translocations found in the Ewing family of tumors including ES, PNET and Askin
tumors. In these translocations, the amino-terminal portion of the EWS gene
located in 22q12 fuses to the carboxyl-terminal portion of the FLI-1 gene located
in 11q24 or the ERG gene located in 21q22, which belong to the ets oncogene
superfamily of transcription activators. We investigated the chimeric mRNAs of 15
ESs (7 cell lines and 8 tumor samples) and 7 PNETs (3 cell lines and 4 tumor
samples) using the RT-PCR method and sequencing. We detected 2 types of EWS-ERG
chimeric mRNA in 2 ES cell lines and 1 PNET tumor sample in addition to 4 types
of EWS-FLI-1 chimeric mRNA in 11 ESs (4 cell lines and 7 tumor samples) and 4
PNETs (2 cell lines and 2 tumor samples). There seemed to be no association
between the type of chimeric mRNA and clinical features such as sex, age, primary
site and histopathology of the patients. All of the chimeric mRNAs are generated 
from in-frame junctions and are thought to encode fusion proteins that may be the
molecular mechanism involved in the Ewing family of tumors.

PMID: 7591257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1995 Sep;4(3):162-73.

The emerging molecular genetics of sarcoma translocations.

Ladanyi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York
10021, USA.

Many types of sarcomas are characterized by specific chromosomal translocations
which are likely to be of etiologic significance. The recent elucidation of the
molecular structure of the several of these translocations has revealed some
striking similarities. Nearly all appear to result in the production of novel,
tumor-specific chimeric transcription factors. Furthermore, six of the
translocations, namely the t(11;22), t(21;22), and t(7;22) of Ewing's sarcoma,
the t(12;22) of clear cell sarcoma, the t(12;16) of myxoid liposarcoma, and the
t(11;22) of desmoplastic small round cell tumor, achieve this following a
peculiar pattern, consisting in the fusion of a gene with an RNA-binding domain
(EWS or TLS) with a transcription factor gene (FLI1, ERG, ETV1, ATF-1, CHOP, or
WT1). The observation that the different translocation partners of the EWS gene
are specifically associated with several distinct types of primitive sarcomas
suggests a model in which the translocation partner supplying the DNA-binding
domain confers the target specificity of the transcriptional activation mediated 
by these chimeric proteins, whereas the partner supplying the N-terminal domain
and promoter region determines their transactivation potential and expression
level. Further analysis of the normal functions and expression patterns of these 
genes should yield insights into the histogenesis of these different tumor types 
and into normal tissue development and differentiation. Clinically, our new
understanding of the molecular structure of these translocations opens new
avenues for molecular diagnosis and investigative therapeutics.

PMID: 7493135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Aug;15(8):4623-30.

Identification of target genes for the Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI fusion protein by 
representational difference analysis.

Braun BS(1), Frieden R, Lessnick SL, May WA, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles 90024, USA.

The EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene results from the 11;22 chromosomal translocation in
Ewing's sarcoma. The product of the gene is one of a growing number of
structurally altered transcription factors implicated in oncogenesis. We have
employed a subtractive cloning strategy of representational difference analysis
in conjunction with a model transformation system to identify genes transcribed
in response to EWS/FLI. We have characterized eight transcripts that are
dependent on EWS/FLI for expression and two transcripts that are repressed in
response to EWS/FLI. Three of the former were identified by sequence analysis as 
stromelysin 1, a murine homolog of cytochrome P-450 F1 and cytokeratin 15.
Stromelysin 1 is induced rapidly after expression of EWS/FLI, suggesting that the
stromelysin 1 gene may be a direct target gene of EWS/FLI. These results
demonstrate that expression of EWS/FLI leads to significant changes in the
transcription of specific genes and that these effects are at least partially
distinct from those caused by expression of germ line FLI-1. The representational
difference analysis technique can potentially be applied to investigate
transformation pathways activated by a broad array of genes in different tumor
systems.

PMCID: PMC230703
PMID: 7623854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Br J Cancer. 1995 Jul;72(1):96-100.

Sensitive detection of occult Ewing's cells by the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

Peter M(1), Magdelenat H, Michon J, Melot T, Oberlin O, Zucker JM, Thomas G,
Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Transfert, INSERM U 434, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Recently, Ewing's tumours have been shown to carry specific hybrid transcripts
resulting from the fusion of the EWS gene with FLI-1 or ERG genes. Based on the
sensitivity and specificity of the detection of these alterations by the reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction technique, we have developed an assay to 
search for small numbers of Ewing cells in various sites from patients with
Ewing's tumour. This method enables the detection of fewer than one tumour cell
per million blood mononuclear cells. A total of 28 primary sites and 51
peripheral samples from 36 patients were investigated. Tumour cells could be
detected in 4/18 blood samples, 4/15 bone marrow aspirates and 2/18 peripheral
stem cell harvests. EWS/FLI-1 and EWS/ERG transcripts being observed in eight and
two cases respectively. The type of fusion transcript detected in peripheral
site(s) was identical to that observed in the primary site. At diagnosis 5/16
patients (31%) demonstrated either circulating tumour cells or/and occult bone
marrow metastasis. After induction therapy, tumour cells were detected in 3/21
patients. This highly sensitive method should be a relevant tool to allow a more 
accurate clinical assessment of the dissemination of Ewing's tumours.

PMCID: PMC2034130
PMID: 7599072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genomics. 1995 Apr 10;26(3):489-501.

High-resolution physical mapping of a 250-kb region of human chromosome 11q24 by 
genomic sequence sampling (GSS).

Selleri L(1), Smith MW, Holmsen AL, Romo AJ, Thomas SD, Paternotte C, Romberg LC,
Wei YH, Evans GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037, USA.

A physical map of the region of human chromosome 11q24 containing the FLI1 gene, 
disrupted by the t(11;22) translocation in Ewing sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumors, was analyzed by genomic sequence sampling. Using a 4- to 
5-fold coverage chromosome 11-specific library, 22 region-specific cosmid clones 
were identified by phenol emulsion reassociation hybridization, with a 245-kb
yeast artificial chromosome clone containing the FLI1 gene, and by directed
"walking" techniques. Cosmid contigs were constructed by individual clone
fingerprinting using restriction enzyme digestion and assembly with the Genome
Reconstruction and AsseMbly (GRAM) computer algorithm. The relative orientation
and spacing of cosmid contigs with respect to the chromosome was determined by
the structural analysis of cosmid clones and by direct visual in situ
hybridization mapping. Each cosmid clone in the contig was subjected to
"one-pass" end sequencing, and the resulting ordered sequence fragments represent
approximately 5% of the complete DNA sequence, making the entire region
accessible by PCR amplification. The sequence samples were analyzed for putative 
exons, repetitive DNAs, and simple sequence repeats using a variety of computer
algorithms. Based upon the computer predictions, Southern and Northern blot
experiments led to the independent identification and localization of the FLI1
gene as well as a previously unknown gene located in this region of chromosome
11q24. This approach to high-resolution physical analysis of human chromosomes
allows the assembly of detailed sequence-based maps and provides a tool for
further structural and functional analysis of the genome.

PMID: 7607672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 1995 Mar 16;10(6):1229-34.

A variant Ewing's sarcoma translocation (7;22) fuses the EWS gene to the ETS gene
ETV1.

Jeon IS(1), Davis JN, Braun BS, Sublett JE, Roussel MF, Denny CT, Shapiro DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38101.

Most Ewing's sarcomas or related primitive neuroectodermal tumors have the
(11;22)(q24;q12) or less frequently the (21;22)(q22;q12) translocation. These
rearrangements fuse the EWS gene on chromosome 22q12 to either the FLI1 or ERG
genes, both members of the ETS family of transcription factors. Simple variant
chromosomal translocations have been occasionally described in these tumors. We
have identified a third Ewing's sarcoma translocation, the t(7;22)(p22;q12), that
fuses EWS to the human homologue of the murine ETS gene ER81. This gene,
designated ETV1 (for ETS Translocation Variant), is located on chromosome band
7p22. Identical EWS nucleotide sequences found in the majority of EWS-FLI1 and
EWS-ERG chimeric transcripts are fused to a portion of ETV1 encoding an ETS
domain with sequence specific DNA-binding activity. These findings confirm that
the fusion of EWS to different ETS family members can result in a similar tumor
phenotype.

PMID: 7700648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cancer Res. 1995 Mar 15;55(6):1385-92.

Biphenotypic sarcomas with myogenic and neural differentiation express the
Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI1 fusion gene.

Sorensen PH(1), Shimada H, Liu XF, Lim JF, Thomas G, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, British Columbia's Children's
Hospital/University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Accurate diagnosis of primitive childhood sarcomas continues to be a formidable
problem because these malignancies generally demonstrate very little
morphological evidence of their tissue of origin. One of these tumor classes, the
Ewing's sarcoma family of peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs),
are thought to have a neural histogenesis based on evidence of neuroectodermal
differentiation. Greater than 95% of pPNETs carry t(11;22) or t(21;22)
chromosomal translocations which fuse the EWS gene from chromosome 22q12 in-frame
with either FLI1 from chromosome 11q24 or ERG from chromosome 21q22. The pPNETs
are considered to be histogenetically distinct from rhabdomyosarcomas, myogenic
tumors lacking these EWS gene fusions and hypothesized to derive from immature
skeletal muscle precursors. In the present study, we describe a unique set of
childhood soft tissue sarcomas that show both neural and myogenic
differentiation. These biphenotypic tumors express myogenic regulatory factors
and muscle-specific antigens and also show neuroectodermal differentiation with
ultrastructural evidence of neurosecretory granules and expression of
neural-associated genes. Northern analysis and reverse transcriptase PCR reveal
expression of EWS/FLI1 gene fusions in all biphenotypic sarcomas analyzed.
Chimeric EWS/FLI1 transcripts and fusion proteins in these tumors are identical
to those described for pPNETs. Our results provide evidence for a class of
biphenotypic childhood sarcomas with myogenic and neural differentiation and
suggest that these tumors may be related to the Ewing's sarcoma family of pPNETs.

PMID: 7882340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. JAMA. 1995 Feb 15;273(7):553-7.

Molecular assays for chromosomal translocations in the diagnosis of pediatric
soft tissue sarcomas.

Barr FG(1), Chatten J, D'Cruz CM, Wilson AE, Nauta LE, Nycum LM, Biegel JA, Womer
RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6082.

OBJECTIVE: To compare molecular assays for characteristic chromosomal
translocations with standard histopathologic and cytogenetic analysis in the
differential diagnosis of pediatric soft tissue sarcomas.
DESIGN: Blinded comparison with histopathologic diagnosis.
SETTING: Tertiary care children's hospital.
PATIENTS: A total of 79 soft tissue sarcoma patients with frozen tumor tissue and
histopathologic slides available for review.
METHODS: The RNA from the tumors was assayed by the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. These assays detect PAX3-FKHR and
PAX7-FKHR chimeric transcripts in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, EWS-FLI1 and EWS-ERG
chimeric transcripts in Ewing's sarcoma, and EWS-WT1 chimeric transcripts in
desmoplastic small round cell tumor.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The polymerase chain reaction findings were compared with 
cytogenetic and histopathologic results.
RESULTS: These assays detected chimeric transcripts in all cases in which
translocations were found by standard cytogenetics as well as additional cases
without cytogenetically detectable translocations. PAX3-FKHR or PAX7-FKHR fusions
were present in 18 of 21 alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, two of 30 embryonal
rhabdomyosarcomas, and one of seven undifferentiated sarcomas. EWS-FLI1 or
EWS-ERG fusions were detected in six of eight Ewing's sarcomas and one of seven
undifferentiated sarcomas. The EWS-WT1 fusion was found in three of three
desmoplastic small round cell tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular assays for specific gene fusions provide a genetic
approach to the differential diagnosis of soft tissue sarcomas. The genetic
categories correspond closely to the standard histopathologic categories. The
polymerase chain reaction assays for chimeric transcripts are useful tools for
the rapid and objective assessment of pediatric soft tissue sarcomas.

PMID: 7530783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 1995 Feb 2;10(3):423-31.

Multiple domains mediate transformation by the Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI-1 fusion
gene.

Lessnick SL(1), Braun BS, Denny CT, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The (11;22) chromosomal translocation found in Ewing's sarcoma and related tumors
fuses the amino terminus of the EWS protein to the DNA-binding domain of the
FLI-1 transcription factor. In contrast to normal FLI-1, the EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transforms NIH3T3 cells and this activity requires both EWS and FLI-1 sequences. 
Reporter gene assays showed that the portion of EWS fused to FLI-1 encodes a
strong transcriptional activation domain. To determine whether this function is
necessary for transformation by EWS/FLI-1, deletion analysis of EWS was
performed. We found that the EWS domain could be functionally subdivided into two
regions: (i) an amino terminal domain (domain A) which transforms efficiently
when fused to FLI-1 but has little transactivation activity in a model system and
(ii) a distal region (domain B) which transactivates efficiently but transforms
less efficiently when fused to FLI-1. Replacement of the EWS domain with known
heterologous transcriptional activation domains yielded chimeric FLI-1 fusions
that in some instances could transform NIH3T3 cells. Finally we demonstrate that 
EWS/FLI-1 and related FLI-1 chimeras are able to cooperate with another
transcription factor to activate a model reporter gene. These results further
demonstrate that EWS/FLI-1 is an aberrant transcription factor and suggest that
the EWS domain mediates important protein-protein interactions with other factors
resulting in the transcriptional modulation of target genes.

PMID: 7845667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1995;41(3):155-9.

Experimental bias in the evaluation of the cellular transient expression in DNA
co-transfection experiments.

Bergeron D(1), Barbeau B, Léger C, Rassart E.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Immunologie, Faculté de Médecine, Université
de Montréal, Québec, Canada.

beta-Galactosidase (beta-gal) expressing vectors are commonly used to standardize
the transfection efficiency in transient expression experiments. In the Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cell line, we transfected beta-gal expressing vectors in
combination with different plasmid DNAs. We reported here that the presence of
specific DNAs led to statistically significant variations in the beta-gal
expression level. Therefore, the measure of beta-gal activity is not necessarily 
an accurate method to monitor transfection efficiency, and its use to normalize
the expression from reporter genes could be questionable.

PMID: 8589755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Virology. 1994 Dec;205(2):563-8.

10A1 MuLV induces a murine leukemia that expresses hematopoietic stem cell
markers by a mechanism that includes fli-1 integration.

Ott DE(1), Keller J, Rein A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Carcinogenesis, PRI/DynCorp, Inc.,
NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702-1201.

The 10A1 murine leukemia virus induces tumors that lack lineage-specific markers 
found on myeloid, T-cell, and B-cell lineages. Either erythroid or multipotent
stem cells can have this phenotype; therefore we have used fluorescence-activated
cell sorter analysis with either multipotent stem cell markers or markers found
on lineage-restricted precursors to differentiate between these two
possibilities. The results showed that tumors induced by 10A1 expressed
multipotent stem cell markers as well as some lineage-restricted precursor
markers. To further study the tumor phenotype, we analyzed total RNAs from
10A1-induced tumors by Northern blotting for c-kit, erythropoietin receptor, and 
T-cell gamma receptor mRNAs. Most of the tumors contained these mRNAs, which are 
characteristic of early hematopoietic cells. These results are consistent with
the hypothesis that 10A1-induced tumor cells are early multipotent hematopoietic 
stem cells. Southern blot analysis revealed that 14 of 14 10A1-induced tumor cell
DNAs examined contained MuLV integrations into the fli-1 gene. The results
strongly suggested that promoter insertion into fli-1 is required for tumor
formation.

PMID: 7975258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nat Struct Biol. 1994 Dec;1(12):871-5.

Solution structure of the ets domain of Fli-1 when bound to DNA.

Liang H(1), Mao X, Olejniczak ET, Nettesheim DG, Yu L, Meadows RP, Thompson CB,
Fesik SW.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois 
60064, USA.

Members of the ets family of transcription factors share a conserved DNA-binding 
domain, the ets domain. By using multidimensional NMR, we have determined the
structure of the ets domain of human Fli-1 in the DNA-bound form. It consists of 
three alpha-helices and a four-stranded beta-sheet, similar to structures of the 
class of helix-turn-helix DNA binding proteins first found in the catabolite
activator protein of Escherichia coli. NMR and mutagenesis experiments suggest
that in comparison to structurally related proteins, the ets domain uses a new
variation of the helix-turn-helix motif for binding to DNA.

PMID: 7773776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Nov 22;91(24):11655-9.

The secondary structure of the ets domain of human Fli-1 resembles that of the
helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif of the Escherichia coli catabolite gene
activator protein.

Liang H(1), Olejniczak ET, Mao X, Nettesheim DG, Yu L, Thompson CB, Fesik SW.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064.

The ets family of eukaryotic transcription factors is characterized by a
conserved DNA-binding domain of approximately 85 amino acids for which the
three-dimensional structure is not known. By using multidimensional NMR
spectroscopy, we have determined the secondary structure of the ets domain of one
member of this gene family, human Fli-1, both in the free form and in a complex
with a 16-bp cognate DNA site. The secondary structure of the Fli-1 ets domain
consists of three alpha-helices and a short four-stranded antiparallel
beta-sheet. This secondary structure arrangement resembles that of the
DNA-binding domain of the catabolite gene activator protein of Escherichia coli, 
as well as those of several eukaryotic DNA-binding proteins including histone H5,
HNF-3/fork head, and the heat shock transcription factor. Differences in chemical
shifts of backbone resonances and amide exchange rates between the DNA-bound and 
free forms of the Fli-1 ets domain suggest that the third helix is the DNA
recognition helix, as in the catabolite gene activator protein and other
structurally related proteins. These results suggest that the ets domain is
structurally similar to the catabolite gene activator protein family of
helix-turn-helix DNA-binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC45290
PMID: 7972119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. N Engl J Med. 1994 Aug 4;331(5):294-9.

The Ewing family of tumors--a subgroup of small-round-cell tumors defined by
specific chimeric transcripts.

Delattre O(1), Zucman J, Melot T, Garau XS, Zucker JM, Lenoir GM, Ambros PF,
Sheer D, Turc-Carel C, Triche TJ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumeurs, INSERM Contrat Jeune Formation, Paris,
France.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 1994 Aug 4;331(5):325-7.

BACKGROUND: Precise diagnosis of small-round-cell tumors is often a challenge to 
the pathologist and the clinical oncologist. In Ewing's sarcomas and related
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors, a t(11;22) translocation or a
(21,22) rearrangement is associated with hybrid transcripts of the EWS gene with 
the FLI1 or ERG gene. To investigate the diagnostic implication of this
observation, we searched for these hybrid transcripts in tumors from patients
with clinical and radiologic features of Ewing's sarcoma or peripheral primitive 
neuroectodermal tumors.
METHODS: Samples of RNA from 114 tumors were reverse transcribed and subjected to
the polymerase chain reaction with primers designed to amplify the relevant
chimeric transcripts. All amplified products were sequenced.
RESULTS: In-frame hybrid transcripts were observed in 89 cases. A hybrid
transcript was found in 83 of 87 cases (95 percent) of Ewing's sarcoma or
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors. Samples of RNA from all of 12 tumors
that had been proved to be other than Ewing's sarcoma or neuroectodermal tumors
had no hybrid transcript. However, 6 of 15 undifferentiated tumors whose type was
ambiguous (nonsecreting, poorly differentiated neuroblastoma or undifferentiated 
sarcoma) contained a hybrid transcript, suggesting that they might have to be
reclassified.
CONCLUSIONS: A subgroup of small-round-cell tumors identified as belonging to the
Ewing family of tumors can be defined according to a specific molecular genetic
lesion that is detectable by a rapid, reliable, and efficient method. This
approach can be applied to small specimens obtained by fine-needle biopsies.

PMID: 8022439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1994 Aug;76(1):19-22.

ERG gene is translocated in an Ewing's sarcoma cell line.

Dunn T(1), Praissman L, Hagag N, Viola MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York at Stony Brook 11794.

Ewing's sarcoma (ES) and related neoplasias are characterized by the reciprocal
translocation, t(11;22)(q24;q12). The translocation has been reported to generate
a fusion gene between the EWS (a previously undescribed gene on chromosome 22)
and FLI1 genes. We report a similar translocation of EWS and FLI1 in an Askin's
tumor cell line (SK-NM-C). Further, we describe an alternative translocation in
an ES cell line (#5838) in which the 5' end of the EWS gene is juxtaposed to the 
3' end of the ERG gene. The ERG gene is on chromosome 21, but no microscopically 
visible changes in chromosome 21 were observed. Elevated steady state levels of
the EWS/ERG fusion gene transcript were detected in the #5838 cell line. This is 
the first report of a structural alteration of ERG in human cancer. Also, it
confirms a general mechanism of generating putative oncogenic fusion genes by
placing an ETS DNA binding domain in direct proximity to the carboxy terminus
domain (CTD) related region of the EWS gene.

PMID: 8076344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Clin Invest. 1994 Aug;94(2):489-96.

EWS-erg and EWS-Fli1 fusion transcripts in Ewing's sarcoma and primitive
neuroectodermal tumors with variant translocations.

Giovannini M(1), Biegel JA, Serra M, Wang JY, Wei YH, Nycum L, Emanuel BS, Evans 
GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037.

We have determined the frequency of EWS fusion transcripts in a series of primary
Ewing's sarcomas and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors and cells lines.
Type 1 and 2 EWS-Fli1 fusions were demonstrated in 8 cell lines and 14 patient
samples. Five patients with cytogenetically characterized rearrangements of
chromosome 22 that did not involve chromosome 11 were included in these studies. 
A novel EWS-Fli1 in-frame isoform fusing EWS to exon 8 of Fli1 was isolated from 
a tumor with a variant t(12;22;22)(q14;p1;q12) translocation. Three in-frame
isoforms of a novel hybrid transcript derived from the fusion of EWS with the ETS
domain of the human erg gene were identified in patient samples and a cell line
with cytogenetically unidentified or cryptic translocations involving chromosomes
21 and 22. Interphase analysis by fluorescent in situ suppression hybridization
using two overlapping erg yeast artificial chromosome clones demonstrated
disruption of the erg gene on chromosome 21 in a patient sample with monosomy 22.
Our results provide new information about the involvement of EWS in small round
cell tumors involving exchange of its putative RNA-binding domain with
DNA-binding domains derived from different members of the ETS family of
transcription factors. These studies emphasize the utility of reverse
transcriptase PCR analysis and fluorescent in situ hybridization as additional
diagnostic tools for differential diagnosis among small round cell tumors.

PMCID: PMC295111
PMID: 8040301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jul 8;269(27):18216-22.

The FLI-1 and chimeric EWS-FLI-1 oncoproteins display similar DNA binding
specificities.

Mao X(1), Miesfeldt S, Yang H, Leiden JM, Thompson CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Immunology, University of Michigan Medical Center, 
Ann Arbor 48109.

Although recent data have demonstrated that the chimeric EWS-FLI-1 cDNA isolated 
from cases of Ewing's sarcoma can transform NIH 3T3 cells, little is known about 
the basis for this transformation. Since FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 contain an Ets
domain, both proteins may act as sequence-specific transcription factors. Here
the DNA binding properties of FLI-1 and EWS-FLI-1 have been examined. An
epitope-tagging strategy was developed to determine the optimum DNA-binding
sequence of FLI-1. The alignment of cloned binding sequences showed a consensus
DNA-binding site of ACCGGAAG/aT/c. This consensus sequence shows greater
specificity for sequence 5' of the GGAA core site than those of other Ets
proteins. Using several truncated forms of FLI-1, we show that the Ets domain is 
necessary and sufficient for the DNA binding specificity of FLI-1. The EWS-FLI-1 
protein displayed the same DNA binding specificity and affinity as FLI-1 did.
Despite their DNA binding similarities, the EWS-FLI-1 translocation product is
likely to have a distinct pattern of expression from that of FLI-1 since the
translocation results in the replacement of the 5' regulatory region of Fli-1
with that of EWS. Consistent with this we found that Fli-1 mRNA expression in
lymphocytes was high in quiescent cells and disappeared upon activation while EWS
mRNA expression was low in resting cells and increased in activated T cells. In
summary, our data suggest that EWS-FLI-1 might act through the same target genes 
normally regulated by FLI-1, and EWS-FLI-1-induced transformation may result from
dysregulation of FLI-1 target genes during cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMID: 7517940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Klin Padiatr. 1994 Jul-Aug;206(4):196-200.

[The EWS gene rearrangement in Ewing tumors: key to the disease].

[Article in German]

Kovar H(1), Zoubek A, Pfleiderer C, Jug G, Auinger A, Aryee D, Ambros PF,
Salzer-Kuntschik M, Amann G, Windhager R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Cancer Research Institute (CCRI), St. Anna Kinderspital, Wien.

The family of Ewing tumors (ET) is characterised by a unique gene rearrangement
which is represented by a translocation t(11;22) (q24;q12) or a deletion del
22q12 in most cytogenetically analysable cases. The recent cloning of the
underlying gene fusion provides the basis for the diagnostic detection of minimal
amounts of residual tumor cells at resection margins, in blood and bone marrow.
In addition, the very first steps in ET tumorigenesis can be studied on a
functional basis. In this study, a variety of fusion products were identified
with a sensitivity of 10(-6) by means of RT-PCR. In 20 of 22 ET, a gene
rearrangement was identified which resulted in the substitution of the effector
domain of one of the closely related DNA-binding oncogenes, FLI-1 or ERG, by the 
transactivating domain of a new gene, EWS. Presumably, the oncogene and
consequently its target genes are activated by this type of translocation. If the
EWS domain was replaced with a transcriptionally irrelevant domain by
transfection of a recombinant gene into ET cells, competition with the endogenous
chimeric oncogene-product for DNA-binding was observed resulting in a partial
growth inhibition. Activation of FLI-1 has been previously shown to occur as a
primary event in Friend virus induced mouse erythroleukemia. During progression
of this disease, inactivating p53 mutations have been observed frequently. In
contrast, such aberrations were found to be extremely rare in ET.

PMID: 7967416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Genomics. 1994 Jul 1;22(1):137-47.

Yeast artificial chromosome cloning of 3.2 megabases within chromosomal band
11q24 closely linking c-ets 1 and Fli-1 and encompassing the Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint.

Selleri L(1), Giovannini M, Hermanson GG, Romo A, Quackenbush J, Penny L,
Khristich JV, Evans GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, California 92037.

Human chromosome 11 harbors many genes of medical significance and cancer-related
rearrangements. The availability of cloned DNA in cosmids and in yeast artificial
chromosomes (YACs), combined with fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis,
has led to the cloning of genes at sites of chromosomal breakpoints in acute
leukemias in 11q23 and in Ewing tumors in 11q24. YAC cloning has facilitated the 
construction of contigs covering large portions of chromosomes for the detailed
analysis of disease gene regions. Here we have cloned in YACs approximately 3.2
Mb of DNA within band 11q24, spanning the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint. Landmark
cosmids 23.2 (D11S374) and 5.8 (D11S372), shown by FISH to flank the breakpoint
within a 1.5- to 1.8-Mb segment, were used to seed two YAC "walks" both
centromeric and telomeric to the breakpoint by YAC-end cloning and screening of
two total genomic YAC libraries. The centromeric YAC contig, which consists of 23
overlapping YACs and orders 19 sequence-tagged sites (STSs), covers a minimum of 
2.2 Mb and spans the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint. c-ets 1 and Fli-1, two members of 
the ets family, have been linked within 400 kb of intervening DNA within this
contig, which also comprises a polymorphic microsatellite, D11S912 (CA)n, which
we have localized within the Fli-1 gene. The telomeric YAC contig, which consists
of 11 overlapping YACs, comprises 5 STSs and covers a minimum of 1 Mb distal to
the breakpoint. Taken together, the two contigs, which consist of a total of 34
YACs and comprise 24 STSs, are separated by a maximum gap of 200-400 kb and cover
as a whole 3.2 Mb of DNA. This represents about 70% of human chromosomal band
11q24, which extends over approximately 4.4 Mb of DNA.

PMID: 7959760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3230-41.

DNA-binding and transcriptional activation properties of the EWS-FLI-1 fusion
protein resulting from the t(11;22) translocation in Ewing sarcoma.

Bailly RA(1), Bosselut R, Zucman J, Cormier F, Delattre O, Roussel M, Thomas G,
Ghysdael J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Oncologie Virale et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, URA 1443, Institut Curie, Orsay, France.

The 5' half of the EWS gene has recently been described to be fused to the 3'
regions of genes encoding the DNA-binding domain of several transcriptional
regulators, including ATF1, FLI-1, and ERG, in several human tumors. The most
frequent occurrence of this situation results from the t(11;22)(q24;q12)
chromosome translocation specific for Ewing sarcoma (ES) and related tumors which
joins EWS sequences to the 3' half of FLI-1, which encodes a member of the Ets
family of transcriptional regulators. We show here that this chimeric gene
encodes an EWS-FLI-1 nuclear protein which binds DNA with the same sequence
specificity as the wild-type parental FLI-1 protein. We further show that
EWS-FLI-1 is an efficient sequence-specific transcriptional activator of model
promoters containing FLI-1 (Ets)-binding sites, a property which is strictly
dependent on the presence of its EWS domain. Comparison of the properties of the 
N-terminal activation domain of FLI-1 to those of the EWS domain of the fusion
protein indicates that EWS-FLI-1 has altered transcriptional activation
properties compared with FLI-1. These results suggest that EWS-FLI-1 contributes 
to the transformed phenotype of ES tumor cells by inducing the deregulated and/or
unscheduled activation of genes normally responsive to FLI-1 or to other close
members of the Ets family. ES and related tumors are characterized by an elevated
level of c-myc expression. We show that EWS-FLI-1 is a transactivator of the
c-myc promoter, suggesting that upregulation of c-myc expression is under control
of EWS-FLI-1.

PMCID: PMC358690
PMID: 8164678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Pathologe. 1994 Apr;15(2):103-12.

[Molecular genetic detection of t(11;22)(q24;12) translocation in Ewing sarcoma
and malignant peripheral neuroectodermal tumors].

[Article in German]

Dockhorn-Dworniczak B(1), Schäfer KL, Dantcheva R, Blasius S, van Valen F,
Burdach S, Winkelmann W, Jürgens H, Böcker W.

Author information: 
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institut für Pathologie, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität
Münster.

Ewing's sarcomas and malignant peripheral neuroectodermal tumors (MPNTs) show
very little evidence of differentiation and lack characteristic morphological
features at the light-microscopic level. These malignancies have always presented
a significant differential diagnostic challenge to the pathologist. Electron
microscopy, immunohistochemical staining for neural antigens such as
neuron-specific enolase (NSE), Leu 7, synaptophysin and, more recently, the
detection of Mic-2 gene expression have been included in the routine
histopathological diagnostic procedure. However, the expression of these antigens
is not restricted to this entity. Thus, further modalities are required to prove 
diagnostic reliability. One consistent feature of the Ewing's sarcoma family is
the presence of the reciprocal chromosomal t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation.
Recent cloning of the t(11;22) break point has led to the identification of the
genes involved in this translocation. This provides the possibility of molecular 
genetic detection of the t(11;22) translocation in Ewing's sarcomas and MPNTs. We
have established a method using reverse transcription and the polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for the detection of the specific gene fusion transcript caused
by the 11;22 translocation. The validity of our approach was proved by analyzing 
Ewing's tumor cell lines and tissue material obtained from primary biopsies and
tumor resections. Molecular genetic detection of the 11;22 translocation by
RT-PCR analysis should perhaps be included in the diagnostic work-up of suspected
Ewing's sarcoma and MPNT.

PMID: 8197066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Genet. 1994 Feb;6(2):146-51.

A second Ewing's sarcoma translocation, t(21;22), fuses the EWS gene to another
ETS-family transcription factor, ERG.

Sorensen PH(1), Lessnick SL, Lopez-Terrada D, Liu XF, Triche TJ, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Childrens Hospital of Los
Angeles/University of Southern California 90027.

The t(11;22)(q24;q12), present in 85% of Ewing's sarcoma and related tumours,
fuses the EWS gene from chromosome 22q12 and the ETS family member, FLI-1. This
results in the expression of a chimaeric protein containing the amino-terminal
portion of EWS fused to the ETS DNA-binding domain of FLI-1. We have identified a
second Ewing's sarcoma translocation, t(21;22)(q22;q12), that fuses EWS to a
different ETS family member, the ERG gene located on band 21q22. Identical EWS
nucleotide sequences found in the EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts are fused to
portions of ERG encoding an ETS DNA-binding domain resulting in expression of a
hybrid EWS/ERG protein. These findings suggest that fusion of EWS to different
members of the ETS family of transcription factor genes may result in the
expression of similar disease phenotypes.

PMID: 8162068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1994;67(2):129-36.

Cloning of the entire FLI1 gene, disrupted by the Ewing's sarcoma translocation
breakpoint on 11q24, in a yeast artificial chromosome.

Selleri L(1), Giovannini M, Romo A, Zucman J, Delattre O, Thomas G, Evans GA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037.

FLI1 (Friend leukemia virus integration 1), a member of the Ets gene family, is
disrupted on 11q24 by the Ewing's Sarcoma (ES) and Peripheral Neuroepithelioma
(PNE) t(11;22)(q24;q12) translocation. ES and PNE are Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumors (PNETs) and the consistent translocation t(11;22)(q24;q12) can be used for
differential diagnosis. In PNETs the 3' part of human FLI1 is translocated from
11q24 to 22q12, where it is juxtaposed to the 5' end of the Ewing's Sarcoma gene 
(EWS). A fusion transcript, resulting in a chimeric protein, is generated. Here, 
we present the isolation and detailed characterization of a 250-kb colinear YAC, 
B45C11, which encompasses the ES and PNE breakpoint on 11q24, as shown by FISSH
on ES and PNE chromosomes and interphase nuclei. This YAC represents a new
reagent for potential use in rapid differential diagnosis by FISSH on tumor
biopsies and on paraffin embedded samples, particularly when DNA and/or RNA are
not available for molecular analysis. YAC B45C11, which spans 250 kb of
contiguous DNA around the ES and PNE breakpoint, contains the entire FLI1 gene.
Three potential HpaII-tiny-fragment (HTF) islands are revealed within the YAC.
One of these islands appears to be associated with the 5' end of FLI1, which
extends over approximately 120 kb of DNA on 11q24. In addition, we demonstrate
that YAC B45C11 contains other transcribed sequences in addition to FLI1, by
"cross-species" Northern blot hybridizations, which suggests the presence of
additional genes in the immediate vicinity of the ES breakpoint on 11q24.

PMID: 8039423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1994;78:214-9.

[Detection of EWS-/FLI-1 gene fusion transcripts by RT-PCR as a tool in the
diagnosis of tumors of the Ewing sarcoma group].

[Article in German]

Dockhorn-Dworniczak B(1), Schäfer KL, Dantcheva R, Blasius S, van Valen F,
Burdach S, Winkelmann W, Jürgens J, Böcker W.

Author information: 
(1)Gerhard-Domagk-Institut für Pathologie, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität,
Münster.

Recent cloning of the chromosome breakpoint regions of the reciprocal chromosomal
t(11;22) (q24;q12) has revealed that the breakpoints were localized within the
EWS gene (Ewings sarcoma gene) on chromosome 22 and the FLI-1 gene on chromosome 
11. Thus, molecular genetic techniques were applicable for the detection of this 
genetic aberration, which occurs as a consistent feature of the Ewings tumor
family. By reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction technique (RT-PCR)
in 78% of Ewings sarcoma derived cell lines, and in 91% of primary Ewings tumor
tissue t(11;22) specific EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts were detected. Furthermore,
in bone marrow samples from an Ewings sarcoma patient contaminating tumor cells
could be shown by RT-PCR. Our results indicate that molecular genetic detection
of the t(11;22) translocation opens a new modality for the differential diagnosis
and the staging of Ewings tumor patients.

PMID: 7533989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Cancer. 1994;30A(6):827-31.

EWS/FLI-1 rearrangement in small round cell sarcomas of bone and soft tissue
detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction amplification.

Pellin A(1), Boix J, Blesa JR, Noguera R, Carda C, Llombart-Bosch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Valencia, Spain.

Recent cloning of the t(11;22) region has led to the detection of a number of
sequences involved in the breakpoints by substituting a sequence which encodes a 
putative RNA binding domain for that of the DNA binding domain of the human
homologue of murine FLI-1. Several tumours display consistent translocation at
t(11;22) (q24;q12), a finding that suggests these fusion transcripts could be
expressed and detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
amplification. To date, only a small number of Ewing's sarcomas (Es) and
peripheral neuroectodermal tumours (pPNET) of bone have been tested with this
novel molecular biology approach. In this study, we confirmed the presence of the
three putative chimaeric transcripts on 7 cases of Es and pPNET sarcomas of bone 
and soft tissue, providing 100% positivity for the tested tumours. For
comparative purposes, a number of other neuroectodermal tumours were analysed
with negative results: esthesioneuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, Schwannoma. A
primitive soft tissue sarcoma (ectomesenchymoma) with a 22 chromosome
rearrangement did not express any transcript, nor did a number of
non-neuroectodermal small round cell sarcomas of soft tissue (rhabdomyosarcomas) 
and bone (microcellular osteosarcoma), conventional bone sarcomas,
leiomyosarcomas, malignant fibrous histiocytomas and synovial sarcomas. These
results reinforce the value of molecular biology techniques for the correct
assessment of histology difficult evaluable neoplasms, such as the group of small
round cell tumours within the Es family.

PMID: 7522496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Res. 1993 Dec 15;53(24):5859-63.

EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein is a transcriptional activator.

Ohno T(1), Rao VN, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jefferson Cancer Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107-5541.

Fli-1, an ets related gene, was found to be rearranged in 75% of erythroleukemias
induced by Friend murine leukemia virus. We have shown previously that the Fli-1 
gene codes for a sequence specific transcriptional activator which contains two
autonomous transcriptional activation domains, one at the amino terminal region
and the other at the carboxy terminal region. Recently human Fli-1 gene was shown
to be involved in Ewing's sarcoma and related subtypes of primitive
neuroectodermal tumors which share t(11;22) (q24;q12) chromosome translocation.
In these tumors the carboxyl terminal region of Fli-1 was found to be fused with 
the amino terminal region of a putative RNA binding protein, EWS. Because part of
the amino terminal transcriptional activation domain of Fli-1 was replaced with
the amino terminal domain of the EWS (NTD-EWS) which shares homology with RNA
polymerase II, it was speculated that NTD-EWS may interfere with RNA pol II
function. Alternatively, NTD-EWS could also contribute to the transcriptional
activation function of EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein by providing either a
modulatory/regulatory domain or a novel transcriptional activation domain. Here
we show that EWS/Fli-1 chimeric protein functions as a transcriptional activator.
Deletion analysis reveals that the EWS domain functions as a
modulatory/regulatory domain for the transcriptional activation properties of the
carboxy terminal transcriptional activation domain of EWS/Fli-1. We therefore
propose that replacement of the amino terminal transcriptional activation domain 
of the Fli-1 protein with the regulatory domain of NTD-EWS results in the
activation of the carboxy terminal transcriptional activation domain of Fli-1
which may be the molecular mechanism involved in these human tumors.

PMID: 7503813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7393-8.

The Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI-1 fusion gene encodes a more potent transcriptional
activator and is a more powerful transforming gene than FLI-1.

May WA(1), Lessnick SL, Braun BS, Klemsz M, Lewis BC, Lunsford LB, Hromas R,
Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
University of California, Los Angeles.

EWS/FLI-1 is a chimeric protein formed by a tumor-specific 11;22 translocation
found in both Ewing's sarcoma and primitive neuroectodermal tumor of childhood.
EWS/FLI-1 has been shown to be a potent transforming gene, suggesting that it
plays an important role in the genesis of these human tumors. We now demonstrate 
that EWS/FLI-1 has the characteristics of an aberrant transcription factor.
Subcellular fractionation experiments localized the EWS/FLI-1 protein to the
nucleus of primitive neuroectodermal tumor cells. EWS/FLI-1 specifically bound in
vitro an ets-2 consensus sequence similarly to normal FLI-1. When coupled to a
GAL4 DNA-binding domain, the amino-terminal EWS/FLI-1 region was a much more
potent transcriptional activator than the corresponding amino-terminal domain of 
FLI-1. Finally, EWS/FLI-1 efficiently transformed NIH 3T3 cells, but FLI-1 did
not. These data suggest that EWS/FLI-1, functioning as a transcription factor,
leads to a phenotype dramatically different from that of cells expressing FLI-1. 
EWS/FLI-1 could disrupt normal growth and differentiation either by more
efficiently activating FLI-1 target genes or by inappropriately modulating genes 
normally not responsive to FLI-1.

PMCID: PMC364810
PMID: 8246959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. EMBO J. 1993 Dec;12(12):4481-7.

Combinatorial generation of variable fusion proteins in the Ewing family of
tumours.

Zucman J(1), Melot T, Desmaze C, Ghysdael J, Plougastel B, Peter M, Zucker JM,
Triche TJ, Sheer D, Turc-Carel C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique des Tumerurs, INSERM CJF 9201, Paris, France.

Balanced translocations involving band q12 of human chromosome 22 are the most
frequent recurrent translocations observed in human solid tumours. It has been
shown recently that this region encodes EWS, a protein with an RNA binding
homologous domain. In Ewing's sarcoma and malignant melanoma of soft parts,
translocations of band 22q12 to chromosome 11 and 12 result in the fusion of EWS 
with the transcription factors FLI-1 and ATF1, respectively. The present analysis
of 89 Ewing's sarcomas and related tumours show that in addition to the expected 
EWS-FLI-1 fusion, the EWS gene can be fused to ERG, a transcription factor
closely related to FLI-1 but located on chromosome 21. The position of the
chromosome translocation breakpoints are shown to be restricted to introns 7-10
of the EWS gene and widely dispersed within introns 3-9 of the Ets-related genes.
This heterogeneity generates a variety of chimeric proteins that can be detected 
by immuno-precipitation. On rare occasions, they may be associated with a
truncated EWS protein arising from alternate splicing. All 13 different fusion
proteins that were evidenced contained the N-terminal domain of EWS and the Ets
domain of FLI-1 or ERG suggesting that oncogenic conversion is achieved by the
linking of the two domains with no marked constraint on the connecting peptide.

PMCID: PMC413872
PMID: 8223458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1993 Nov;8(3):167-71.

Long-range mapping of the 11q23 region involved in chromosome aberrations in
human tumors by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis with a yeast artificial
chromosome.

Akao Y(1), Tsujimoto Y, Seto M, Imai T, Bergeron D, Berbeau B, Otsuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Biology, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan.

We have previously demonstrated that the RCK gene involved in t(11;14)(q23;q32)
and the more centromeric MLL/ALL1 gene involved in t(4;11)(q21;q23) and
t(11;19)(q23;p13) are localized on different adjacent NotI fragments by using
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis with the yeast artificial
chromosome (YAC) clone yB22B2. The PFGE analysis using the YACs of YTY17
containing the prophobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), CBL2 and THY1 genes and yB22B2
allowed the following ordering of genes and breakpoints from CD3 to THY1 on
11q23: cent-CD3-ALL/MLL1-RCK-PBGD-CBL2-THY1, and the establishment of a
long-range restriction map covering these genes. In addition, we showed that the 
FLI1 region involved in the t(11;22)(q24;q12) in Ewing's sarcoma was more
telomeric region that the THY1 gene by analyzing somatic cell hybrids carrying
the 11q- and/or 14q+ chromosome of the t(11;14)(q23;q32) translocation, and by
PFGE analysis of the YAC clone YTY17.

PMID: 7509624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Diagn Mol Pathol. 1993 Sep;2(3):147-57.

Reverse transcriptase PCR amplification of EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts as a
diagnostic test for peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors of childhood.

Sorensen PH(1), Liu XF, Delattre O, Rowland JM, Biggs CA, Thomas G, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Childrens Hospital of Los
Angeles/University of Southern California 90027.

The peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (pPNETs) of childhood, including 
Ewing's sarcoma, peripheral neuroepithelioma, and Askin's tumor, often present
significant diagnostic challenges for the anatomic pathologist. One consistent
feature of these tumors is the presence of the t(11;22)(q24;q12) in tumor cells, 
and this translocation has been useful as a marker for this group of tumors. The 
recent cloning of the t(11;22) breakpoint has revealed the fusion of the human
FLI-1 gene on chromosome 11q24 with a gene of unknown function called EWS on
22q12, and fusion transcripts have been detected. These findings have raised the 
possibility of using molecular genetic analysis as a tool to diagnose pPNETs. To 
this end, we have tested pPNETs for the presence of EWS/FLI-1 fusion transcripts 
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using EWS and FLI-1
specific primers. Eight (80%) of 10 pPNET cell lines were positive for amplified 
products using this technique. These results were confirmed by Southern analysis,
which revealed rearrangements of EWS using genomic EWS probes in all eight
positive cell lines. We then tested 20 primary pPNET tumors, and identified
fusion transcripts by RT-PCR in 18 (90%) of these cases. Cloning and sequencing
of PCR products confirmed the presence of EWS and FLI-1 sequences in these
products. Furthermore, fusion transcripts were not detected by this technique in 
a series of non-pPNET pediatric solid tumors. Detection of EWS/FLI-1 fusion
transcripts by RT-PCR therefore provides a novel adjunctive tool in the diagnosis
of pPNETs.

PMID: 7506981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Res. 1993 Aug 15;53(16):3655-7.

Chimeric EWS-FLI1 transcript in a Ewing cell line with a complex t(11;22;14)
translocation.

Bonin G(1), Scamps C, Turc-Carel C, Lipinski M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Tumeurs Humaines, CNRS URA 1156, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Peripheral neuroectodermal tumors include the differentiated neuroepithelioma and
the undifferentiated Ewing's tumor. Despite clinical and pathological
differences, both malignancies are characterized by a t(11;22)(q24;q12)
translocation which is observed in > 90% of the cases. Molecularly, the
translocation is underlaid by a rearrangement between the EWS and Fli-1 genes on 
chromosomes 22 and 11, respectively. Because of the difficulties in the
differential diagnosis between various small round cell tumors of childhood,
including Ewing's tumor, a molecular diagnostic assay would be desirable. A
prerequisite for predicting the reliability of such a test resides in the
molecular elucidation of the peripheral neuroectodermal tumor cases which do not 
exhibit the prototypical translocation. We have analyzed one such case of Ewing's
tumor-derived cell line with a t(11;22;14)(q24;q12;q11) translocation. An
EWS-Fli-1 fusion transcript was evidenced by polymerase chain reaction
amplification of a reverse transcription product obtained from total RNA. Direct 
sequencing was performed to demonstrate that the molecular rearrangement in this 
particular Ewing sample resulted in a fusion transcript similar to those observed
in tumors with the prototypical translocation.

PMID: 8339272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Oncogene. 1993 Aug;8(8):2167-73.

Analysis of the DNA-binding and transcriptional activation functions of human
Fli-1 protein.

Rao VN(1), Ohno T, Prasad DD, Bhattacharya G, Reddy ES.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Cancer Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

Three of the ets oncogene superfamily members v-ets, Spi-1/PU.1 and Fli-1, have
been shown to be directly involved in retroviral-mediated acute erythroleukemias.
The Fli-1 gene was found to be rearranged in 75% of the erythroleukemias induced 
by Friend murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV), suggesting that it could play a key
role in cellular transformation. We have previously isolated and characterized
the human Fli-1 gene and have found it to be highly homologous (80%) to the human
erg-2 gene. Human Fli-1 was also shown to be rearranged in Ewing's sarcoma cases,
in which the amino-terminal region of the Fli-1 gene was replaced with a novel
coding region of a putative RNA-binding protein, EWS. In this report, we show
that the recombinant Fli-1 protein expressed in bacteria binds to DNA in a
sequence-specific manner. It appears that Fli-1 and erg proteins fall into the
category of ets proteins that recognize limited ets target sequences, unlike
c-ets-1, ets-2 and Elk-1. The Fli-1 gene was found to activate the transcription 
of the reporter gene that was linked to Fli-1 target sequences, suggesting that
Fli-1 is a sequence-specific transcriptional activator. Deletion analysis
revealed the presence of two autonomous transcriptional activation domains, one
at the amino-terminal region (amino-terminal transcriptional activation domain,
ATA) and the other at the carboxy-terminal region (carboxy-terminal
transcriptional activation domain, CTA). Secondary structural analysis of ATA and
CTA domains revealed the presence of helix-loop-helix (H-L-H) and/or
turn-loop-turn (T-L-T) regions. From these results it appears that a portion of
the Fli-1 ATA domain (H-L-H region) was replaced by the amino-terminal domain of 
EWS gene in Ewing's sarcoma cases. Therefore alteration in the transcriptional
activation function of Fli-1 may be responsible for human malignancies such as
sarcomas, leukemias and lymphomas in which this gene is rearranged.

PMID: 8336942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Oncogene. 1993 Jul;8(7):1783-90.

Transactivation of GATA-1 promoter with ETS1, ETS2 and ERGB/Hu-FLI-1 proteins:
stabilization of the ETS1 protein binding on GATA-1 promoter sequences by
monoclonal antibody.

Seth A(1), Robinson L, Thompson DM, Watson DK, Papas TS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

Ets family proteins activate transcription via binding to the GGAA core sequence 
located in the promoter/enhancer elements of many cellular and viral genes.
GATA-1 is an erythroid-specific transcription factor. The promoter of the chicken
GATA-1 gene contains multiple ets binding sites (EBS), two of them are present in
palindromic form. The GATA-1 promoter has been shown to be activated by the E26
virus. In this study, we have analysed whether the palidromic EBS of the chicken 
GATA-1 promoter is a target for binding and activation by members of the cellular
ets gene family products. The results herein indicate that both EBS in the
palindrome are required for DNA-binding because mutations in either site reduces 
the activity by at least 95%. Moreover, DNA binding of ETS1 to the EBS palindrome
is dramatically stabilized in the presence of a specific monoclonal antibody
whose epitope maps between amino acid positions 240-260. Although each of the
single sites bind, the efficiency of binding is extremely low. Furthermore, for
efficient binding the two sites must be in an inverted configuration because of
the fact that the oligonucleotide containing the left and right EBS in the same
orientation binds 10-fold less than the oligonucleotide containing the EBS
palindrome. Additionally, we show that the transcription of a reporter gene (CAT)
either linked to the GATA-1 EBS palindrome or GATA-1 promoter can be activated by
cotransfection with ETS1, alternatively-spliced ETS1, ETS2 or ERGB/Hu-FLI-1
expression vectors.

PMID: 8510925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jun 15;90(12):5752-6.

Ewing sarcoma 11;22 translocation produces a chimeric transcription factor that
requires the DNA-binding domain encoded by FLI1 for transformation.

May WA(1), Gishizky ML, Lessnick SL, Lunsford LB, Lewis BC, Delattre O, Zucman J,
Thomas G, Denny CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gwynne Hazen Cherry Memorial Laboratories,
University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

The 11;22 chromosomal translocation specifically linked to Ewing sarcoma and
primitive neuroectodermal tumor results in a chimeric molecule fusing the
amino-terminal-encoding portion of the EWS gene to the carboxyl-terminal
DNA-binding domain encoded by the FLI1 gene. We have isolated a fourth EWS-FLI1
fusion cDNA that is structurally distinct from the three forms previously
described. To determine the transforming activity of this gene, alternative forms
of the EWS-FLI1 fusion were transduced into NIH 3T3 cells. Cells expressing
either type 1 or type 4 fusion constructs formed foci in culture and colonies in 
soft agar, indicating that EWS-FLI1 is a transforming gene. EWS-FLI1 deletion
mutants were created to map functionally the critical regions within the chimera.
Deletion of either the EWS domain or the FLI1 corresponding to the DNA-binding
domain totally abrogated the ability for EWS-FLI1 to transform 3T3 cells. These
data indicate that the oncogenic effect of the 11;22 translocation is caused by
the formation of a chimeric transcription factor. Formation of chimeric
transcription factors has now been demonstrated to promote tumors of both
neuroectodermal and hematopoietic origin, suggesting that this may be a common
mechanism in human carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC46800
PMID: 8516324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Oncogene. 1993 Jun;8(6):1621-30.

The Fli-1 proto-oncogene, involved in erythroleukemia and Ewing's sarcoma,
encodes a transcriptional activator with DNA-binding specificities distinct from 
other Ets family members.

Zhang L(1), Lemarchandel V, Romeo PH, Ben-David Y, Greer P, Bernstein A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, Samuel Lunenfeld Research
Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The late stages of the erythroleukemias induced by either the
replication-defective Friend spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) or the Friend
murine leukemia virus (F-MuLV) are associated with the insertional activation of 
one of two members (Spi-1 or Fli-1) of the Ets protooncogene family of
transcriptional factors. Fli-1 is not rearranged or activated in the
erythroleukemias induced by SFFV, and similarly Spi-1 is not rearranged or
activated in the leukemic cell clones induced by F-MuLV. This strict specificity 
of integration sites suggests that Fli-1 and Spi-1 may be functionally distinct
and transactivate different downstream genes during the progression of multistage
Friend erythroleukemia. In this study, we show that the Fli-1 protein, like other
Ets proteins, has DNA-binding activity and can act as a sequence-specific
transcriptional activator. We also show that the Fli-1 and Spi-1 proteins are
functionally distinct in that they recognize and transactivate through distinct
DNA binding sites. Furthermore, we have identified an octanucleotide core
sequence that is required in vitro for optimal binding of Fli-1 to the Drosophila
E74 target and the promoter sequence of the human GPIIB gene.

PMID: 8502483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 15;268(8):5769-73.

Characterization of the ets oncogene family member, fli-1.

Klemsz MJ(1), Maki RA, Papayannopoulou T, Moore J, Hromas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University Medical Center, 
Indianapolis 46202.

The recently cloned fli-1 gene is a member of the ets oncogene family that is
preferentially expressed in hematopoietic cells. It is a target of dysregulation 
by Friend leukemia virus insertion and translocation in Ewing's sarcoma and
neuroepithelioma. In this report, we have studied the function and regulation of 
both murine and human fli-1. Analysis of the human and mouse fli-1 proteins
showed that fli-1 binds to specific DNA sequences highly related to m-ets-2
binding sites. Methylation protection experiments showed that fli-1 and m-ets-2
contacted the same nucleotides in two different binding sites. The fli-1 protein 
was shown to be a transcriptional activator in co-transfection studies.
Stimulation of murine bone marrow macrophages by mediators of inflammation, such 
as lipopolysaccharide, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, interleukin-1, and
interferon-gamma resulted in the reduced expression of fli-1 mRNA. fli-1 was only
expressed in a defined subset of human erythroleukemia cell lines.

PMID: 8449942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Growth Differ. 1992 Oct;3(10):705-13.

The ERGB/Fli-1 gene: isolation and characterization of a new member of the family
of human ETS transcription factors.

Watson DK(1), Smyth FE, Thompson DM, Cheng JQ, Testa JR, Papas TS, Seth A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
Maryland 21702-1201.

All cellular ets proteins contain a region of high amino acid identity to those
found in the last two exons of the ets-1 gene (C domain). We have identified and 
characterized a new member of the human ETS gene family, ERGB. The ERGB gene
shows extensive amino acid identity to the human ERG and the mouse Fli-1 genes.
The ERGB gene is found to be transcriptionally active in a variety of human cell 
lines and tissues, in contrast to the more restrictive expression pattern of the 
ERG gene. The ERGB gene encodes for a 3.2-kilobase mRNA containing an open
reading frame of 451 amino acids. The ERGB gene, like human ETS1, is located on
chromosome 11 and is transposed to chromosome 4 as a result of the translocation 
t(4;11) associated with leukemia. Pulse-field gel analysis suggests that ETS1 and
ERGB are more than 200 kilobases apart. Similar to the other members of the ets
family (ets 1, ets 2), this new member is also able to trans-activate
transcription of a reporter gene linked to the ETS-binding sequences derived from
either the GATA-1 promoter or an optimal Ets-binding site.

PMID: 1445800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Genomics. 1991 Sep;11(1):223-4.

The human homolog of the mouse common viral integration region, FLI1, maps to
11q23-q24.

Baud V(1), Lipinski M, Rassart E, Poliquin L, Bergeron D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie des Tumeurs, URA 1156 CNRS, Institut Gustave Roussy,
Villejuif, France.

FLI1 is a common mouse viral integration region in virus-induced leukemias and
lymphomas. Using an evolutionarily conserved mouse probe and Southern
hybridization to (rodent x human) somatic cell hybrid DNAs, the human homolog of 
FLI1 has been shown to lie on a fragment of chromosome 11 flanked on the
centromeric side by the acute lymphoblastic leukemia-associated t(4;11)(q21;q23) 
translocation breakpoint and on the telomeric side by the Ewing- and
neuroepithelioma-associated t(11;22) (q24;q12) breakpoint.

PMID: 1765382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


