
1. J Orthop Res. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1002/jor.23209. [Epub ahead of print]

RNA-seq analysis of clinical-grade osteochondral allografts reveals activation of
early response genes.

Lin Y(1,)(2), Lewallen EA(1), Camilleri ET(1), Bonin CA(1), Jones DL(1),
Dudakovic A(1), Galeano-Garces C(1), Wang W(1,)(3), Karperien MJ(4), Larson
AN(1), Dahm DL(1), Stuart MJ(1), Levy BA(1), Smith J(1), Ryssman DB(1),
Westendorf JJ(1), Im HJ(5), van Wijnen AJ(1), Riester SM(1), Krych AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, WuHan Orthopedics Hospital/Puai Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430033,
China. (4)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, 60612.

Preservation of osteochondral allografts used for transplantation is critical to 
ensure favorable outcomes for patients after surgical treatment of cartilage
defects. To study the biological effects of protocols currently used for
cartilage storage, we investigated differences in gene expression between stored 
allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage from living donors using high throughput 
molecular screening strategies. We applied next generation RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) and real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) to assess genome-wide differences in mRNA expression between
stored allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage tissue from living donors. Gene
ontology analysis was used to characterize biological pathways associated with
differentially expressed genes. Our studies establish reduced levels of mRNAs
encoding cartilage related extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins (i.e., COL1A1,
COL2A1, COL10A1, ACAN, DCN, HAPLN1, TNC, and COMP) in stored cartilage. These
changes occur concomitantly with increased expression of 'early response genes'
that encode transcription factors mediating stress/cytoprotective responses (i.e.
EGR1, EGR2, EGR3, MYC, FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB and JUND). The elevated
expression of 'early response genes' and reduced levels of ECM-related mRNAs in
stored cartilage allografts suggests that tissue viability may be maintained by a
cytoprotective program that reduces cell metabolic activity. These findings have 
potential implications for future studies focused on quality assessment and
clinical optimization of osteochondral allografts used for cartilage
transplantation. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26909883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Development. 2016 Jan 1;143(1):113-22. doi: 10.1242/dev.126136.

The AP-1 transcription factor component Fosl2 potentiates the rate of myocardial 
differentiation from the zebrafish second heart field.

Jahangiri L(1), Sharpe M(1), Novikov N(1), González-Rosa JM(1), Borikova A(1),
Nevis K(1), Paffett-Lugassy N(1), Zhao L(1), Adams M(1), Guner-Ataman B(1), Burns
CE(2), Burns CG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
cburns6@partners.org gburns@cvrc.mgh.harvard.edu. (3)Cardiovascular Research
Center, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA
02129, USA Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA cburns6@partners.org
gburns@cvrc.mgh.harvard.edu.

The vertebrate heart forms through successive phases of cardiomyocyte
differentiation. Initially, cardiomyocytes derived from first heart field (FHF)
progenitors assemble the linear heart tube. Thereafter, second heart field (SHF) 
progenitors differentiate into cardiomyocytes that are accreted to the poles of
the heart tube over a well-defined developmental window. Although heart tube
elongation deficiencies lead to life-threatening congenital heart defects, the
variables controlling the initiation, rate and duration of myocardial accretion
remain obscure. Here, we demonstrate that the AP-1 transcription factor, Fos-like
antigen 2 (Fosl2), potentiates the rate of myocardial accretion from the
zebrafish SHF. fosl2 mutants initiate accretion appropriately, but cardiomyocyte 
production is sluggish, resulting in a ventricular deficit coupled with an
accumulation of SHF progenitors. Surprisingly, mutant embryos eventually correct 
the myocardial deficit by extending the accretion window. Overexpression of Fosl2
also compromises production of SHF-derived ventricular cardiomyocytes, a
phenotype that is consistent with precocious depletion of the progenitor pool.
Our data implicate Fosl2 in promoting the progenitor to cardiomyocyte transition 
and uncover the existence of regulatory mechanisms to ensure appropriate
SHF-mediated cardiomyocyte contribution irrespective of embryonic stage.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4725205 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26732840  [PubMed - in process]


3. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Oct 29;7(12):1529-46. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201505439.

Aberrant epigenome in iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons from Parkinson's disease 
patients.

Fernández-Santiago R(1), Carballo-Carbajal I(2), Castellano G(3), Torrent R(4),
Richaud Y(5), Sánchez-Danés A(4), Vilarrasa-Blasi R(3), Sánchez-Pla A(6),
Mosquera JL(7), Soriano J(8), López-Barneo J(9), Canals JM(10), Alberch J(10),
Raya Á(11), Vila M(12), Consiglio A(13), Martín-Subero JI(3), Ezquerra M(1),
Tolosa E(14).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurology, Hospital
Clínic of Barcelona Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain
Cell Therapy Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB),
Barcelona, Spain ruben.fernandez.santiago@gmail.com ezquerra@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Laboratory,
Hospital Vall d'Hebron Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR) Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathological
Anatomy, Pharmacology and Microbiology, University of Barcelona (UB) Institut
d'investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute for Biomedicine (IBUB) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Control of Stem Cell Potency Group, Institute for Bioengineering of
Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain Centre for Networked Biomedical Research on
Bioengineering Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Department of Statistics, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona,
Spain. (7)Department of Statistics, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain. (8)Departament d'Estructura i Constituents de la Matèria (ECM), Facultat
de Física, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain. (9)Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED),
Madrid, Spain Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBiS) Hospital Universitario
Virgen del Rocío Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)
University of Seville, Seville, Spain. (10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) University of 
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain. (11)Control of Stem Cell Potency Group,
Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain Centre for
Networked Biomedical Research on Bioengineering Biomaterials and Nanomedicine
(CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. (12)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Neurodegenerative
Diseases Research Laboratory, Hospital Vall d'Hebron Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR) Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Institute for Biomedicine (IBUB) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia
and National Institute of Neuroscience, Brescia, Italy. (14)Laboratory of
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínic of
Barcelona Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS)
University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Cell Therapy 
Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) University of 
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain.

The epigenomic landscape of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains unknown. We
performed a genomewide DNA methylation and a transcriptome studies in induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived dopaminergic neurons (DAn) generated by cell
reprogramming of somatic skin cells from patients with monogenic LRRK2-associated
PD (L2PD) or sporadic PD (sPD), and healthy subjects. We observed extensive DNA
methylation changes in PD DAn, and of RNA expression, which were common in L2PD
and sPD. No significant methylation differences were present in parental skin
cells, undifferentiated iPSCs nor iPSC-derived neural cultures
not-enriched-in-DAn. These findings suggest the presence of molecular defects in 
PD somatic cells which manifest only upon differentiation into the DAn cells
targeted in PD. The methylation profile from PD DAn, but not from controls,
resembled that of neural cultures not-enriched-in-DAn indicating a failure to
fully acquire the epigenetic identity own to healthy DAn in PD. The PD-associated
hypermethylation was prominent in gene regulatory regions such as enhancers and
was related to the RNA and/or protein downregulation of a network of
transcription factors relevant to PD (FOXA1, NR3C1, HNF4A, and FOSL2). Using a
patient-specific iPSC-based DAn model, our study provides the first evidence that
epigenetic deregulation is associated with monogenic and sporadic PD.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4693505
PMID: 26516212  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cancer Biol Med. 2015 Sep;12(3):246-54. doi: 10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2015.0010.

Quantitative proteomic analysis for high-throughput screening of differential
glycoproteins in hepatocellular carcinoma serum.

Gao HJ(1), Chen YJ(1), Zuo D(1), Xiao MM(1), Li Y(1), Guo H(1), Zhang N(1), Chen 
RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Research Center of Basic Medical Sciences & School of Medical Laboratory,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China ; 2 Laboratory of Cancer Cell
Biology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital, National
Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention 
and Therapy, Tianjin 300060, China.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths. Novel serum biomarkers are required to increase the sensitivity and
specificity of serum screening for early HCC diagnosis. This study employed a
quantitative proteomic strategy to analyze the differential expression of serum
glycoproteins between HCC and normal control serum samples.
METHODS: Lectin affinity chromatography (LAC) was used to enrich glycoproteins
from the serum samples. Quantitative mass spectrometric analysis combined with
stable isotope dimethyl labeling and 2D liquid chromatography (LC) separations
were performed to examine the differential levels of the detected proteins
between HCC and control serum samples. Western blot was used to analyze the
differential expression levels of the three serum proteins.
RESULTS: A total of 2,280 protein groups were identified in the serum samples
from HCC patients by using the 2D LC-MS/MS method. Up to 36 proteins were
up-regulated in the HCC serum, whereas 19 proteins were down-regulated. Three
differential glycoproteins, namely, fibrinogen gamma chain (FGG), FOS-like
antigen 2 (FOSL2), and a-1,6-mannosylglycoprotein
6-ß-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase B (MGAT5B) were validated by Western blot.
All these three proteins were up-regulated in the HCC serum samples.
CONCLUSION: A quantitative glycoproteomic method was established and proven
useful to determine potential novel biomarkers for HCC.

PMCID: PMC4607824
PMID: 26487969  [PubMed]


5. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2015 Nov;21(11):898-904. doi: 10.1111/cns.12450. Epub 2015 Sep
19.

Synaptic Plasticity and Signal Transduction Gene Polymorphisms and Vulnerability 
to Drug Addictions in Populations of European or African Ancestry.

Levran O(1), Peles E(2,)(3), Randesi M(1), Correa da Rosa J(4), Ott J(5,)(6),
Rotrosen J(7), Adelson M(1,)(2,)(8), Kreek MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of the Biology of Addictive Diseases, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY, USA. (2)Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G. Adelson Clinic for
Drug Abuse Treatment and Research, Tel Aviv Elias Sourasky Medical Center, Tel
Aviv, Israel. (3)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. (4)Center for Clinical and Translational Science, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY, USA. (5)Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. (6)The Laboratory of Statistical Genetics, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. (7)VA New York Harbor Healthcare
System, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. (8)Dr. Miriam and Sheldon G.
Adelson Clinic for Drug Abuse Treatment and Research, Las Vegas, NV, USA.

AIM: Drug addiction is characterized, in part, by deregulation of synaptic
plasticity in circuits involved in reward, stress, cue learning, and memory. This
study was designed to assess whether 185 variants in 32 genes central to synaptic
plasticity and signal transduction contribute to vulnerability to develop heroin 
and/or cocaine addiction.
METHODS: Analyses were conducted in a sample of 1860 subjects divided according
to ancestry (African and European) and drug of abuse (heroin or cocaine).
RESULTS: Eighteen SNPs in 11 genes (CDK5R1, EPHA4, EPHA6, FOSL2, MAPK3, MBP,
MPDZ, NFKB1, NTRK2, NTSR1, and PRKCE) showed significant associations (P < 0.01),
but the signals did not survive correction for multiple testing. SNP rs230530 in 
the NFKB1 gene, encoding the transcription regulator NF-kappa-B, was the only SNP
indicated in both ancestry groups and both addictions. This SNP was previously
identified in association with alcohol addiction. SNP rs3915568 in NTSR1, which
encodes neurotensin receptor, and SNP rs1389752 in MPDZ, which encodes the
multiple PDZ domain protein, were previously associated with heroin addiction or 
alcohol addiction, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The study supports the involvement of genetic variation in signal
transduction pathways in heroin and cocaine addiction and provides preliminary
evidence suggesting several new risk or protective loci that may be relevant for 
diagnosis and treatment success.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4619135 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26384852  [PubMed - in process]


6. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec;230(12):3084-92. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25049.

Tamoxifen Inhibits TGF-ß-Mediated Activation of Myofibroblasts by Blocking
Non-Smad Signaling Through ERK1/2.

Carthy JM(1), Sundqvist A(1), Heldin A(1), van Dam H(1,)(2), Kletsas D(3), Heldin
CH(1), Moustakas A(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical 
Center, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Department of Molecular Cell
Biology, Cancer Genomics Centre Netherlands, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Ageing,
Institute of Biosciences and Applications, National Centre for Scientific
Research "Demokritos", Athens, Greece. (4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Microbiology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Center, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is a multifunctional cytokine which
stimulates the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts. Myofibroblasts
are critical for normal wound healing, but also accumulate pathologically in a
number of chronic inflammatory conditions where they are key contributors to
aberrant tissue remodeling and fibrosis, and in cancer stroma. In the current
study, we identified a role for tamoxifen as a potent inhibitor of the
TGF-ß-mediated activation of primary human skin and breast fibroblasts. Our data 
indicate that tamoxifen does not interfere with canonical Smad signaling
downstream of TGF-ß but rather blocks non-Smad signaling through ERK1/2
MAP-kinase and the AP-1 transcription factor FRA2. We further demonstrate by
siRNA-mediated knockdown that FRA2 is critical for the induced expression of
myogenic proteins in response to TGF-ß. Functionally, TGF-ß-stimulated
fibroblast-mediated contraction of collagen gels was impaired in the presence of 
tamoxifen. Altogether, these data demonstrate that tamoxifen prevents
myofibroblast differentiation and, therefore, may provide therapeutic benefits to
patients suffering from chronic inflammatory conditions or cancer.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26096876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 16;10(4):e0124246. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124246.
eCollection 2015.

Lymphocyte gene expression signatures from patients and mouse models of
hereditary hemochromatosis reveal a function of HFE as a negative regulator of
CD8+ T-lymphocyte activation and differentiation in vivo.

Costa M(1), Cruz E(2), Oliveira S(3), Benes V(4), Ivacevic T(4), Silva MJ(5),
Vieira I(3), Dias F(5), Fonseca S(5), Gonçalves M(5), Lima M(5), Leitão C(6),
Muckenthaler MU(7), Pinto J(3), Porto G(8).

Author information: 
(1)I3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal; Basic and Clinical Research on Iron Biology, IBMC-Instituto de
Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Doctoral
Program in Biomedicine, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (2)I3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do
Porto, Porto, Portugal; Basic and Clinical Research on Iron Biology,
IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal; Clinical Hematology, Santo António Hospital-Centro Hospitalar do Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (3)I3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; Basic and Clinical Research on Iron
Biology, IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (4)Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Clinical Hematology, Santo António
Hospital-Centro Hospitalar do Porto, Porto, Portugal. (6)Advanced Flow Cytometry 
Unit, IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (7)Departments of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology,
University of Heidelberg and Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, Heidelberg,
Germany. (8)I3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do 
Porto, Porto, Portugal; Basic and Clinical Research on Iron Biology,
IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto,
Portugal; Clinical Hematology, Santo António Hospital-Centro Hospitalar do Porto,
Porto, Portugal; Molecular Immunology and Pathology, ICBAS-Instituto de Ciências 
Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Abnormally low CD8+ T-lymphocyte numbers is characteristic of some patients with 
hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), a MHC-linked disorder of iron overload. Both
environmental and genetic components are known to influence CD8+ T-lymphocyte
homeostasis but the role of the HH associated protein HFE is still insufficiently
understood. Genome-wide expression profiling was performed in peripheral blood
CD8+ T lymphocytes from HH patients selected according to CD8+ T-lymphocyte
numbers and from Hfe-/- mice maintained either under normal or high iron diet
conditions. In addition, T-lymphocyte apoptosis and cell cycle progression were
analyzed by flow cytometry in HH patients. HH patients with low CD8+ T-lymphocyte
numbers show a differential expression of genes related to lymphocyte
differentiation and maturation namely CCR7, LEF1, ACTN1, NAA50, P2RY8 and FOSL2, 
whose expression correlates with the relative proportions of naïve, central and
effector memory subsets. In addition, expression levels of LEF1 and P2RY8 in
memory cells as well as the proportions of CD8+ T cells in G2/M cell cycle phase 
are significantly different in HH patients compared to controls. Hfe-/- mice do
not show alterations in CD8+ T-lymphocyte numbers but differential gene response 
patterns. We found an increased expression of S100a8 and S100a9 that is most
pronounced in high iron diet conditions. Similarly, CD8+ T lymphocytes from HH
patients display higher S100a9 expression both at the mRNA and protein level.
Altogether, our results support a role for HFE as a negative regulator of CD8+
T-lymphocyte activation. While the activation markers S100a8 and S100a9 are
strongly increased in CD8+ T cells from both, Hfe-/- mice and HH patients, a
differential profile of genes related to differentiation/maturation of CD8+ T
memory cells is evident in HH patients only. This supports the notion that HFE
contributes, at least in part, to the generation of low peripheral blood CD8+ T
lymphocytes in HH.

PMCID: PMC4399836
PMID: 25880808  [PubMed - in process]


8. Endocrinology. 2015 Jun;156(6):2239-53. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1566. Epub 2015 Mar 
17.

Progesterone receptor transcriptome and cistrome in decidualized human
endometrial stromal cells.

Mazur EC(1), Vasquez YM, Li X, Kommagani R, Jiang L, Chen R, Lanz RB, Kovanci E, 
Gibbons WE, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (E.C.M., E.K., W.E.G.),
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Texas Children's Hospital Pavilion for
Women, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology (Y.M.V., X.L., R.K., R.B.L., 
F.J.D.), and Department of Molecular and Human Genetics (L.J., R.C.), Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Decidualization is a complex process involving cellular proliferation and
differentiation of the endometrial stroma that is required to establish and
support pregnancy. Progesterone acting via its nuclear receptor, the progesterone
receptor (PGR), is a critical regulator of decidualization and is known to
interact with certain members of the activator protein-1 (AP-1) family in the
regulation of transcription. In this study, we identified the cistrome and
transcriptome of PGR and identified the AP-1 factors FOSL2 and JUN to be
regulated by PGR and important in the decidualization process. Direct targets of 
PGR were identified by integrating gene expression data from RNA sequencing with 
the whole-genome binding profile of PGR determined by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) in primary human
endometrial stromal cells exposed to 17ß-estradiol, medroxyprogesterone acetate, 
and cAMP to promote in vitro decidualization. Ablation of FOSL2 and JUN
attenuates the induction of 2 decidual marker genes, IGFBP1 and PRL. ChIP-seq
analysis of genomic binding revealed that FOSL2 is bound in proximity to 8586
distinct genes, including nearly 80% of genes bound by PGR. A comprehensive
assessment of the PGR-dependent decidual transcriptome integrated with the
genomic binding of PGR identified FOSL2 as a potentially important
transcriptional coregulator of PGR via direct interaction with regulatory regions
of genes actively regulated during decidualization.

PMCID: PMC4430623 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25781565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Genes Dev. 2015 Jan 15;29(2):144-56. doi: 10.1101/gad.249748.114. Epub 2014 Dec
29.

Terminal epidermal differentiation is regulated by the interaction of Fra-2/AP-1 
with Ezh2 and ERK1/2.

Wurm S(1), Zhang J(2), Guinea-Viniegra J(1), García F(3), Muñoz J(3), Bakiri
L(1), Ezhkova E(4), Wagner EF(5).

Author information: 
(1)BBVA Foundation-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid E28029, Spain; (2)Medical Research Center, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao, Shandong Province 266500,
China; (3)Proteomics Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid
E28029, Spain; (4)Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell 
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA. (5)BBVA
Foundation-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer Research
Centre (CNIO), Madrid E28029, Spain; ewagner@cnio.es.

Altered epidermal differentiation characterizes numerous skin diseases affecting 
>25% of the human population. Here we identified Fra-2/AP-1 as a key regulator of
terminal epidermal differentiation. Epithelial-restricted, ectopic expression of 
Fra-2 induced expression of epidermal differentiation genes located within the
epidermal differentiation complex (EDC). Moreover, in a papilloma-prone
background, a reduced tumor burden was observed due to precocious keratinocyte
differentiation by Fra-2 expression. Importantly, loss of Fra-2 in suprabasal
keratinocytes is sufficient to cause skin barrier defects due to reduced
expression of differentiation genes. Mechanistically, Fra-2 binds and
transcriptionally regulates EDC gene promoters, which are co-occupied by the
transcriptional repressor Ezh2. Fra-2 remains transcriptionally inactive in
nondifferentiated keratinocytes, where it was found monomethylated and
dimethylated on Lys104 and interacted with Ezh2. Upon keratinocyte
differentiation, Fra-2 is C-terminally phosphorylated on Ser320 and Thr322 by
ERK1/2, leading to transcriptional activation. Thus, the induction of epidermal
differentiation by Fra-2 is controlled by a dual mechanism involving
Ezh2-dependent methylation and activation by ERK1/2-dependent phosphorylation.

© 2015 Wurm et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4298134
PMID: 25547114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 6;9(11):e112150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112150.
eCollection 2014.

FOSL2 positively regulates TGF-ß1 signalling in non-small cell lung cancer.

Wang J(1), Sun D(1), Wang Y(1), Ren F(1), Pang S(1), Wang D(1), Xu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Thoracic Surgery, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital,
Harbin, China.

Fos-related antigen 2 (FRA-2/FOSL2) belongs to the AP-1 transcription factor
family. Although FOSL2 has been shown to be involved in diverse physiological and
pathological processes, very little is known about the signalling pathways that
regulate FOSL2 expression and the mechanisms of FOSL2 function. Here, we show
that FOSL2 expression is regulated by TGF-ß1 and that FOSL2 is required for
TGF-ß1-induced migration. We demonstrate that FOSL2 interacts with Smad3 in vitro
and in vivo and thus up-regulates TGF-ß1-induced signalling responses.
Mechanistically, FOSL2 promotes P300 binding to Smad3 and the acetylation of
Smad3 by P300. Furthermore, we show that the expression of FOSL2 correlates with 
activated Smad3 expression in clinical non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
samples. In summary, the present study indicates that FOSL2 facilitates
TGF-ß1-induced migration by interaction with Smad3 in NSCLC and suggests FOSL2 as
a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC4223012
PMID: 25375657  [PubMed - in process]


11. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Feb;67(2):508-16. doi: 10.1002/art.38942.

Cardiomyopathy in murine models of systemic sclerosis.

Venalis P(1), Kumánovics G, Schulze-Koops H, Distler A, Dees C, Zerr P,
Palumbo-Zerr K, Czirják L, Mackevic Z, Lundberg IE, Distler O, Schett G, Distler 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden; University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Cardiomyopathy has emerged as a leading cause of death in patients
with systemic sclerosis (SSc). However, the pathogenesis of SSc-related
cardiomyopathy is poorly understood, and new therapies as well as platforms for
testing are needed. The aim of this study was to characterize the histopathologic
features of cardiomyopathy in patients with SSc and in common mouse models of
SSc.
METHODS: The histopathologic features of myocardial tissue specimens obtained at 
autopsy from 5 subjects with SSc and 5 control subjects matched for sex, age, and
cardiovascular risk factors were evaluated and compared with those of myocardial 
tissue specimens obtained from 3 common mouse models of SSc with systemic
manifestations: Fra-2-transgenic mice, mice with sclerodermatous chronic
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), and TSK-1 mice.
RESULTS: Myocardial tissue from autopsy subjects with SSc and no clinically
manifest cardiac involvement showed endothelial cell apoptosis with reduced
capillary density, perivascular inflammation, myofibroblast differentiation, and 
accumulation of collagen. Only selected features of SSc-related cardiomyopathy
were observed in the mice with chronic GVHD and TSK-1 mice. However, the
myocardial tissue of Fra-2-transgenic mice mimicked all features of SSc-related
cardiomyopathy and also demonstrated comparable vascular, inflammatory, and
fibrotic manifestations. Of note, the expression of Fra-2 was also increased in
the myocardium of autopsy subjects with SSc.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that all typical manifestations of SSc-related
cardiomyopathy are mimicked in Fra-2-transgenic mice. Moreover, overexpression of
Fra-2 in the myocardium of autopsy subjects with SSc may suggest similar
underlying pathogenic mechanisms. Thus, Fra-2-transgenic mice might be a suitable
preclinical model with which to study the mechanisms of and therapeutic
approaches to myocardial involvement in SSc.

Copyright © 2015 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 25371068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):605-19. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.09.015.

miR-155 promotes T follicular helper cell accumulation during chronic, low-grade 
inflammation.

Hu R(1), Kagele DA(1), Huffaker TB(1), Runtsch MC(1), Alexander M(1), Liu J(1),
Bake E(1), Su W(2), Williams MA(1), Rao DS(3), Möller T(2), Garden GA(2), Round
JL(1), O'Connell RM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of Utah, 4280 JMRB, 15 North Medical Dr. East, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Division of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Utah, 4280 JMRB, 15 North Medical Dr. 
East, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA. Electronic address:
ryan.oconnell@path.utah.edu.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):509-11.

Chronic inflammation is a contributing factor to most life-shortening human
diseases. However, the molecular and cellular mechanisms that sustain chronic
inflammatory responses remain poorly understood, making it difficult to treat
this deleterious condition. Using a mouse model of age-dependent inflammation
that results from a deficiency in miR-146a, we demonstrate that miR-155
contributed to the progressive inflammatory disease that emerged as Mir146a(-/-) 
mice grew older. Upon analyzing lymphocytes from inflamed versus healthy
middle-aged mice, we found elevated numbers of T follicular helper (Tfh) cells,
germinal center (GC) B cells, and autoantibodies, all occurring in a
miR-155-dependent manner. Further, Cd4-cre Mir155(fl/fl) mice were generated and 
demonstrated that miR-155 functions in T cells, in addition to its established
role in B cells, to promote humoral immunity in a variety of contexts. Taken
together, our study discovers that miR-146a and miR-155 counterregulate Tfh cell 
development that drives aberrant GC reactions during chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4657560
PMID: 25367574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):509-11. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.10.003.

MicroRNAs in Tfh cells: micromanaging inflammaging.

Yu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Molecular Immunomodulation, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Department of Medicine,
Southern Clinical School, Monash University, Clayton, Australia. Electronic
address: di.yu@monash.edu.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Oct 16;41(4):605-19.

MicroRNA (miR)-146a-deficient mice develop low-grade, chronic, and systemic
inflammation, similar to inflammaging. Hu et al. (2014) demonstrate that the lack
of miR-155 prevents the accumulation of Tfh cells and inflammaging in
miR-146a-deficient mice. They identify Fosl2 as a functionally important target
of miR-155 in Tfh cells.

PMID: 25367565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2014 Nov;38:30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2014.07.006. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

Prenatal stress increases the striatal and hippocampal expression of correlating 
c-FOS and serotonin transporters in murine offspring.

Bielas H(1), Arck P(2), Bruenahl CA(3), Walitza S(4), Grünblatt E(4).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinics of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Zurich,
Neumünsterallee 9, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland; Department of Psychosomatics and
Psychiatry, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: hannes.bielas@kispi.uzh.ch. (2)Laboratory for Experimental
Feto-Maternal Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical
Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. (4)University Clinics of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, University of Zurich, Neumünsterallee 9, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland;
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland.

Prenatal stress (PS) is a known risk factor for several psychiatric diagnoses,
including schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism,
anxiety, and depression which have been associated with serotonin transporter
(SERT) dysregulation. Moreover, long-term effects in animal models associate with
higher levels of immediate early genes, e.g. c-FOS (up-regulated in response to
neuronal activity), in the brain of PS offspring. We therefore quantified the
expression of both protein related mRNAs in adolescent BALB/c mice subjected to
mild auditory stress on two separate days in mid gestation. SERT and c-FOS
consistently correlated in most brain regions of PS mice and controls. Moreover, 
two-way ANOVAs revealed concomitantly increased levels of proteins, as well as of
FOSL1 and FOSL2 mRNA, especially in the striatum and hippocampus of the PS
offspring. Sex affected only and less consistently mRNA expression, yet
interacted with PS, demonstrating that glucocorticoid receptor mRNA expression
decreased in PS males but increased in PS females compared to the respective
controls. This first finding of a correlation between SERT and c-FOS protein
expression affected by PS, together with related mRNAs, may be considered a new
target for behavioral and treatment studies in offspring.

Copyright © 2014 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25102410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Placenta. 2014 Jul;35(7):483-90. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.04.001. Epub 2014
Apr 14.

JunB/cyclin-D1 imbalance in placental mesenchymal stromal cells derived from
preeclamptic pregnancies with fetal-placental compromise.

Nuzzo AM(1), Giuffrida D(1), Zenerino C(1), Piazzese A(1), Olearo E(1), Todros
T(1), Rolfo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. (2)Dept. of
Surgical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. Electronic address:
alessandro.rolfo@unito.it.

INTRODUCTION: In the present study, we characterized the expression of Activating
Protein 1 (AP-1) factors, key cell cycle regulators, in primary placental
mesenchymal stromal cells (PDMSCs) derived from normal and preeclamptic (PE)
pregnancies with fetal-placental compromise.
METHODS: PDMSCs were isolated from control (n = 20) and preeclamptic (n = 24)
placentae. AP-1 expression was determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR (sqRT-PCR),
Real Time PCR and Western Blot assay. PDMSCs were plated and JunB siRNA was
performed. JunB and Cyclin-D1 expression were assessed by Real Time and Western
Blot analyses.
RESULTS: JunB expression was significantly increased while Cyclin-D1 expression
was significantly down-regulated in PE relative to control PDMSCs. JunB siRNA was
accompanied by JunB down-regulation and increased Cyclin-D1 in normal PDMSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: We described, for the first time, AP-1 expression in PDMSCs derived 
from physiological and PE placentae. Importantly, we demonstrated that JunB
over-expression in PE-PDMSCs affects Cyclin-D1 regulation. Our data suggest a
possible contribution of these pathological placental cells to the altered cell
cycle regulation typical of preeclamptic placentae.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1004242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004242.
eCollection 2014.

FRA2A is a CGG repeat expansion associated with silencing of AFF3.

Metsu S(1), Rooms L(1), Rainger J(2), Taylor MS(2), Bengani H(2), Wilson DI(3),
Chilamakuri CS(4), Morrison H(2), Vandeweyer G(1), Reyniers E(1), Douglas E(5),
Thompson G(6), Haan E(7), Gecz J(8), Fitzpatrick DR(2), Kooy RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(2)Medical and Developmental Genetics Section, MRC Human Genetics Unit, IGMM,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. (3)University of Southampton,
Centre for Human Development, Stem Cells and Regeneration, Human Genetics,
Southampton, United Kingdom. (4)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer
Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (5)Genetics and Molecular
Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (6)Department of
Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South 
Australia, Australia. (7)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; South Australian Clinical Genetic Service, 
SA Pathology (at Women's and Children's Hospital), Adelaide, South Australia,
Australia. (8)Genetics and Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Folate-sensitive fragile sites (FSFS) are a rare cytogenetically visible subset
of dynamic mutations. Of the eight molecularly characterized FSFS, four are
associated with intellectual disability (ID). Cytogenetic expression results from
CGG tri-nucleotide-repeat expansion mutation associated with local CpG
hypermethylation and transcriptional silencing. The best studied is the FRAXA
site in the FMR1 gene, where large expansions cause fragile X syndrome, the most 
common inherited ID syndrome. Here we studied three families with FRA2A
expression at 2q11 associated with a wide spectrum of neurodevelopmental
phenotypes. We identified a polymorphic CGG repeat in a conserved, brain-active
alternative promoter of the AFF3 gene, an autosomal homolog of the X-linked
AFF2/FMR2 gene: Expansion of the AFF2 CGG repeat causes FRAXE ID. We found that
FRA2A-expressing individuals have mosaic expansions of the AFF3 CGG repeat in the
range of several hundred repeat units. Moreover, bisulfite sequencing and
pyrosequencing both suggest AFF3 promoter hypermethylation. cSNP-analysis
demonstrates monoallelic expression of the AFF3 gene in FRA2A carriers thus
predicting that FRA2A expression results in functional haploinsufficiency for
AFF3 at least in a subset of tissues. By whole-mount in situ hybridization the
mouse AFF3 ortholog shows strong regional expression in the developing brain,
somites and limb buds in 9.5-12.5dpc mouse embryos. Our data suggest that there
may be an association between FRA2A and a delay in the acquisition of motor and
language skills in the families studied here. However, additional cases are
required to firmly establish a causal relationship.

PMCID: PMC3998887
PMID: 24763282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Clin Lab Anal. 2014 Sep;28(5):391-7. doi: 10.1002/jcla.21699. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Association of FOS-like antigen 1 promoter polymorphism with podocyte foot
process effacement in immunoglobulin A nephropathy patients.

Park HJ(1), Kim JW, Cho BS, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Kohwang Medical Research Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: FOS has been implicated in the progression of renal disease including
IgAN. In this study, we investigated whether polymorphisms of FOS family genes
[FOS, FOSB, FOS-like antigen 1 (FOSL1), and FOSL2] were associated with
immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) and the clinical phenotypes of IgAN patients.
METHODS: We genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of FOS family genes 
(rs2239615 and rs7101 for FOS, rs12373539 and rs2282695 for FOSB, rs637571 for
FOSL1, and rs925255 for FOSL2) using direct sequencing in 198 IgAN patients and
290 control subjects.
RESULTS: No SNPs were associated with IgAN; however, in the analysis of clinical 
phenotypes, we found that rs637571 of FOSL1 was associated with podocyte foot
process effacement of IgAN in additive (CT vs. TT vs. CC, P = 0.0031, OR = 2.08, 
95% CI = 1.27-3.40) and dominant models (CT/TT vs. CC, P = 0.0034, OR = 2.50, 95%
CI = 1.35-4.64). The frequency of genotypes containing the T allele was increased
in IgAN patients with podocyte foot process effacement, compared to those without
podocyte foot process effacement.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that FOSL1 may be related to IgAN severity.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24652774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 28;9(2):e90370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090370. eCollection
2014.

FRA2 is a STAT5 target gene regulated by IL-2 in human CD4 T cells.

Rani A(1), Greenlaw R(1), Runglall M(1), Jurcevic S(1), John S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation Immunology and Mucosal Biology, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Immunobiology, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription 5(STAT5) are cytokine induced 
signaling proteins, which regulate key immunological processes, such as tolerance
induction, maintenance of homeostasis, and CD4 T-effector cell differentiation.
In this study, transcriptional targets of STAT5 in CD4 T cells were studied by
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Genomic mapping of the sites cloned and
identified in this study revealed the striking observation that the majority of
STAT5-binding sites mapped to intergenic (>50 kb upstream) or intronic, rather
than promoter proximal regions. Of the 105 STAT5 responsive binding sites
identified, 94% contained the canonical (IFN-<U+03B3> activation site) GAS motifs. A
number of putative target genes identified here are associated with tumor
biology. Here, we identified Fos-related antigen 2 (FRA2) as a transcriptional
target of IL-2 regulated STAT5. FRA2 is a basic -leucine zipper (bZIP) motif
'Fos' family transcription factor that is part of the AP-1 transcription factor
complex and is also known to play a critical role in the progression of human
tumours and more recently as a determinant of T cell plasticity. The binding site
mapped to an internal intron within the FRA2 gene. The epigenetic architecture of
FRA2, characterizes a transcriptionally active promoter as indicated by
enrichment for histone methylation marks H3K4me1, H3K4me2, H3K4me3, and
transcription/elongation associated marks H2BK5me1 and H4K20me1. FRA2 is
regulated by IL-2 in activated CD4 T cells. Consistently, STAT5 bound to GAS
sequence in the internal intron of FRA2 and reporter gene assays confirmed IL-2
induced STAT5 binding and transcriptional activation. Furthermore, addition of
JAK3 inhibitor (R333) or Daclizumab inhibited the induction in TCR stimulated
cells. Taken together, our data suggest that FRA2 is a novel STAT5 target gene,
regulated by IL-2 in activated CD4 T cells.

PMCID: PMC3938719
PMID: 24587342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 19;9(2):e88896. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088896. eCollection
2014.

Long-term effects of gestational nicotine exposure and food-restriction on gene
expression in the striatum of adolescent rats.

Ilott NE(1), Schneider T(2), Mill J(3), Schalkwyk L(4), Brolese G(5), Bizarro
L(5), Stolerman IP(6), Dempster E(3), Asherson P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC), Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry
(SGDP) centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom ; Computational Genomics Analysis and Training (CGAT), Medical Research
Council (MRC) Functional Genomics Unit, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (2)Department of
addictions, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom, ; Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Medical Research Council (MRC), Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry
(SGDP) centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United
Kingdom ; University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom. (4)Medical
Research Council (MRC), Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry (SGDP)
centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Departamento de Psicologia do Desenvolvimento e da Personalidade, Instituto de
Psicologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre-RS, Brazil.
(6)Department of addictions, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom.

Gestational exposure to environmental toxins such as nicotine may result in
detectable gene expression changes in later life. To investigate the direct toxic
effects of prenatal nicotine exposure on later brain development, we have used
transcriptomic analysis of striatal samples to identify gene expression
differences between adolescent Lister Hooded rats exposed to nicotine in utero
and controls. Using an additional group of animals matched for the reduced food
intake experienced in the nicotine group, we were also able to assess the impact 
of imposed food-restriction on gene expression profiles. We found little evidence
for a role of gestational nicotine exposure on altered gene expression in the
striatum of adolescent offspring at a significance level of p<0.01 and |log2 fold
change >0.5|, although we cannot exclude the possibility of nicotine-induced
changes in other brain regions, or at other time points. We did, however, find
marked gene expression differences in response to imposed food-restriction.
Food-restriction resulted in significant group differences for a number of
immediate early genes (IEGs) including Fos, Fosb, Fosl2, Arc, Junb, Nr4a1 and
Nr4a3. These genes are associated with stress response pathways and therefore may
reflect long-term effects of nutritional deprivation on the development of the
stress system.

PMCID: PMC3929494
PMID: 24586432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):5025-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.523746. Epub 2013 
Dec 30.

The FOS transcription factor family differentially controls trophoblast migration
and invasion.

Renaud SJ(1), Kubota K, Rumi MA, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160.

Extravillous trophoblast invasion is a fundamental component of human
placentation. Invading trophoblast cells promote blood flow to the conceptus by
actively remodeling the uterine vasculature. The extent of trophoblast invasion
is tightly regulated; aberrant invasion is linked with several obstetrical
complications. However, the transcriptional networks responsible for controlling 
the extent of trophoblast invasion are not well defined. Previous studies have
identified high levels of FOS (FOS, FOSB, FOS-like (FOSL) 1, and FOSL2) proteins 
in extravillous trophoblast cells. These proteins form part of the activating
protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor complex and are implicated in regulating
gene networks controlling cellular invasion in diverse biological systems.
Therefore, we hypothesized that FOS family proteins play a role in regulating
trophoblast invasion. We assessed expression of FOS family proteins in
trophoblast cell lines and human placentae at different gestational ages. FOS,
FOSB, and FOSL1 proteins were robustly increased in trophoblast cells subject to 
wound-based migration assays as well as Matrigel-based invasion assays. FOS
knockdown resulted in cessation of proliferation and an induction of migration
and invasion concomitant with robust expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
1, MMP3, and MMP10. Conversely, FOSL1 knockdown abrogated trophoblast migration
and invasion and inhibited the production of MMP1, MMP3, and MMP10. In human
placenta, FOS was expressed in proximal anchoring villi in conjunction with
phospho-ERK. FOSL1 was temporally expressed only in the distal-most extravillous 
trophoblast cells, which represent a migratory cell population. Therefore, FOS
and FOSL1 exert opposing effects on trophoblast invasion.

PMCID: PMC3931062
PMID: 24379408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Pathol. 2014 May;233(1):7-17. doi: 10.1002/path.4303. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Meprin ß, a novel mediator of vascular remodelling underlying pulmonary
hypertension.

Biasin V(1), Marsh LM, Egemnazarov B, Wilhelm J, Ghanim B, Klepetko W, Wygrecka
M, Olschewski H, Eferl R, Olschewski A, Kwapiszewska G.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Lung Vascular Research, Graz, Austria.

Vascular remodelling is a hallmark of pulmonary hypertension (PH) and is
characterized by enhanced proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells
(PASMCs). Accumulating evidence indicates a crucial role of transcription factors
in the vascular remodelling processes. Here, we characterize the involvement of
meprin ß, a novel activator protein-1 (AP-1) effector molecule, in PH. Fra-2
transgenic (TG) mice exhibited increased right ventricular systolic pressure
(RVSP), accompanied by vascular remodelling and activation of the
pro-proliferative and pro-fibrotic AKT pathway. Microarray studies revealed the
collagen-processing metalloprotease meprin ß as the most up-regulated gene in
Fra-2 TG mice. Its expression, increased at all investigated time points,
preceded the decreased expression of MMPs and increased TGFß, followed by
collagen deposition. Correspondingly, remodelled pulmonary arteries from
explanted idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH) patients' lungs
exhibited pronounced expression of meprin ß. Fra-2 and meprin ß expression in
human PASMCs was regulated by PDGF-BB and TGFß in a complementary fashion.
Importantly, PDGF-BB-dependent proliferation was attenuated by silencing AP-1
expression or by meprin ß inhibition. This study delineates a novel molecular
mechanism underlying PASMCs proliferation and extracellular matrix (ECM)
deposition by identifying meprin ß as an important mediator in regulating
vascular remodelling processes. Thus, meprin ß may represent a new molecule that 
can be targeted in pulmonary hypertension.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24258247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2013 Dec;15(12):382. doi: 10.1007/s11926-013-0382-7.

Animal models of scleroderma: current state and recent development.

Asano Y(1), Sato S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan, yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem connective tissue disease characterized
by three cardinal features: immunological abnormalities, vasculopathy, and
fibrosis of skin and certain internal organs. Although several animal models
recapitulating selected aspects of SSc have been reported, the absence of models 
fulfilling the full clinical picture of SSc has hindered progress in the
development and testing of therapy for this disease. In recent years, three new
inducible animal models have revealed the critical importance of reactive oxygen 
species, angiotensin II, and the combination of DNA topoisomerase I immunization 
and IL-6 induction in fibrosis of SSc. In addition, two genetic animal models
have revealed the potential involvement of transcription factors, Fra-2 and Fli1,
in the fibrosis and vasculopathy of SSc. These new animal models provide
important insights into specific pathological processes of SSc and novel
therapeutic targets that may lead to more effective treatment of this incurable
disease.

PMID: 24150871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Feb;62:179-92. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.09.020. Epub 2013 Oct 
6.

Immediate-early gene expression in structures outside the basal ganglia is
associated to l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia.

Bastide MF(1), Dovero S(1), Charron G(1), Porras G(1), Gross CE(1), Fernagut
PO(1), Bézard E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 33000
Bordeaux, France; CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 33000
Bordeaux, France. (2)Univ. de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives,
UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France; CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives,
UMR 5293, 33000 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
erwan.bezard@u-bordeaux2.fr.

Long-term l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-DOPA) treatment in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) leads to l-DOPA-induced dyskinesia (LID), a condition thought to primarily
involve the dopamine D1 receptor-expressing striatal medium spiny neurons.
Activation of the D1 receptor results in increased expression of several
molecular markers, in particular the members of the immediate-early gene (IEG)
family, a class of genes rapidly transcribed in response to an external stimulus.
However, several dopaminoceptive structures in the brain that are likely to be
affected by the exogenously produced DA have received little attention although
they might play a key role in mediating those l-DOPA-induced abnormal behaviours.
<U+0394>FosB, ARC, FRA2 and Zif268 IEGs expression patterns were thus characterised,
using unbiased stereological methods, in the whole brain of dyskinetic and
non-dyskinetic rats to identify brain nuclei displaying a transcriptional
response specifically related to LID. Within the basal ganglia, the striatum and 
the substantia nigra pars reticulata showed an increased expression of all four
IEGs in dyskinetic compared to non-dyskinetic rats. Outside the basal ganglia,
there was a striking increased expression of the four IEGs in the motor cortex,
the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, the dorsal hippocampus, the pontine
nuclei, the cuneiform nucleus and the pedunculopontine nuclei. Moreover, the zona
incerta and the lateral habenula displayed an overexpression of <U+0394>FosB, ARC and
Zif268. Among these structures, the IEG expression in the striatum, the bed
nucleus of the stria terminalis, the lateral habenula, the pontine nuclei and the
cuneiform nucleus correlate with LID severity. These results illustrate a global 
transcriptional response to a dyskinetic state in the whole brain suggesting the 
possible involvement of these structures in LID.

© 2013.

PMID: 24103779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 1;126(Pt 23):5432-40. doi: 10.1242/jcs.134510. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

Osteoblast-specific expression of Fra-2/AP-1 controls adiponectin and osteocalcin
expression and affects metabolism.

Bozec A(1), Bakiri L, Jimenez M, Rosen ED, Catalá-Lehnen P, Schinke T, Schett G, 
Amling M, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Genes, Development and Disease Group, F-BBVA-CNIO Cancer Cell Biology Program,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Recent studies have established that the skeleton functions as an endocrine organ
affecting metabolism through the osteoblast-derived hormone osteocalcin (Ocn).
However, it is not fully understood how many transcription factors expressed in
osteoblasts regulate the endocrine function. Here, we show that mice with
osteoblast-specific deletion of Fra-2 (Fosl2) have low bone mass but increased
body weight. In contrast, transgenic expression of Fra-2 in osteoblasts leads to 
increased bone mass and decreased body weight accompanied by reduced serum
glucose and insulin levels, improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity.
In addition, mice lacking Fra-2 have reduced levels of circulating Ocn, but high 
adiponectin (Adipoq), whereas Fra-2 transgenic mice exhibit high Ocn and low
Adipoq levels. Moreover, we found that Adipoq was expressed in osteoblasts and
that this expression was transcriptionally repressed by Fra-2. These results
demonstrate that Fra-2 expression in osteoblasts represents a novel paradigm for 
a transcription factor controlling the endocrine function of the skeleton.

PMID: 24046454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Dec;72(12):2039-46. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-203729.
Epub 2013 Sep 7.

Levels of target activation predict antifibrotic responses to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors.

Maurer B(1), Distler A, Dees C, Khan K, Denton CP, Abraham D, Gay RE, Michel BA, 
Gay S, Hw Distler J, Distler O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, , Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Apr;73(4):635-6.

OBJECTIVES: To assess whether the discrepancy between the strong antifibrotic
effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) in animal models and the
inconsistent results in clinical studies might be related to the activation
levels of drug targets.
METHODS: Skin sections of bleomycin, TSK1, Fra-2 transgenic mice, SSc patients
and controls were analysed by histology and immunohistochemistry. Subgroups of
mice were treated with the TKIs nilotinib or imatinib. Differences in the
activation levels of the TKI targets p-PDGFRß (platelet derived growth factor ß) 
and p-c-abl were assessed.
RESULTS: In bleomycin and TSK1 mice, expression of activated p-PDGFRß (platelet
derived growth factor receptor ß) and p-c-abl was ubiquitous with strong
upregulation compared with controls. Treatment with TKIs resulted in successful
target inhibition and consequently reduced dermal fibrosis. In the Fra-2 model,
the activation levels of p-PDGFRß and p-c-abl were much lower than in the
bleomycin and the TSK1 models. Accordingly, nilotinib did not prevent dermal
fibrosis and target inhibition was unsuccessful. Notably, in skin biopsies of SSc
patients, the mean activation levels of TKI targets were only moderate and in the
majority of patients resembled those of the non-responsive Fra-2 model.
CONCLUSIONS: Animal models for proof-of-concept studies should be selected based 
on a similar activation level and expression pattern of drug targets as in human 
SSc.

PMID: 24013728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Jun 27;4:e692. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.221.

Signal-dependent fra-2 regulation in skeletal muscle reserve and satellite cells.

Alli NS(1), Yang EC, Miyake T, Aziz A, Collins-Hooper H, Patel K, McDermott JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Activator protein-1 (AP-1) is a ubiquitous transcription factor that
paradoxically also has some tissue-specific functions. In skeletal muscle cells, 
we document that the AP-1 subunit, Fra-2, is expressed in the resident stem cells
(Pax7-positive satellite cells) and also in the analogous undifferentiated
'reserve' cell population in myogenic cultures, but not in differentiated
myofiber nuclei. Silencing of Fra-2 expression enhances the expression of
differentiation markers such as muscle creatine kinase and myosin heavy chain,
indicating a possible role of Fra-2 in undifferentiated myogenic progenitor
cells. We observed that Fra-2 is a target of cytokine-mediated extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-1/2 signaling in cultured muscle cells, and extensive
mass spectrometry and mutational analysis identified S320 and T322 as regulators 
of Fra-2 protein stability. Interestingly, Fra-2 S320 phosphorylation occurs
transiently in activated satellite cells and is extinguished in myogenin-positive
differentiating cells. Thus, cytokine-mediated Fra-2 expression and stabilization
is linked to regulation of myogenic progenitor cells having implications for the 
molecular regulation of adult muscle stem cells and skeletal muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3702306
PMID: 23807221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Adipocyte. 2012 Jul 1;1(3):168-172.

New insights into adipocyte-specific leptin gene expression.

Wrann CD(1), Rosen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism; Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center; Boston, MA USA ; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of
Cell Biology; Harvard Medical School; Boston, MA USA.

The adipocyte-derived hormone leptin is a critical regulator of many
physiological functions, ranging from satiety to immunity. Surprisingly, very
little is known about the transcriptional pathways that regulate
adipocyte-specific expression of leptin. In a recent published study, we pursued 
a strategy integrating BAC transgenic reporter mice, in vitro reporter assays,
and chromatin state mapping to locate an adipocyte-specific cis-element upstream 
of the LEP gene in human fat cells. Quantitative proteomics (stable isotope
labeling by amino acids in cell culture, SILAC) with affinity enrichment of
protein-DNA complexes identified the transcription factor FOSL2 as a specific
binder to the identified region. We confirmed that FOSL2 is an important
regulator of LEP gene expression in vitro and in vivo using cell culture models
and genetic mouse models. In this commentary, we discuss the transcriptional
regulation of LEP gene expression, our strategy to identify an adipocyte-specific
cis-regulatory element and the transcription factor(s) responsible for LEP gene
expression. We also discuss our data on FOSL2 and leptin levels in physiology and
pathophysiology. We speculate on unanswered questions and future directions.

PMCID: PMC3609097
PMID: 23700528  [PubMed]


28. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Jul;112:106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 May 
3.

JUN regulates early transcriptional responses to axonal injury in retinal
ganglion cells.

Fernandes KA(1), Harder JM, Kim J, Libby RT.

Author information: 
(1)Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY,
USA.

The AP1 family transcription factor JUN is an important molecule in the neuronal 
response to injury. In retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), JUN is upregulated soon
after axonal injury and disrupting JUN activity delays RGC death. JUN is known to
participate in the control of many different injury response pathways in neurons,
including pathways controlling cell death and axonal regeneration. The role of
JUN in regulating genes involved in cell death, ER stress, and regeneration was
tested to determine the overall importance of JUN in regulating RGC response to
axonal injury. Genes from each of these pathways were transcriptionally
controlled following axonal injury and Jun deficiency altered the expression of
many of these genes. The differentially expressed genes included, Atf3, Ddit3,
Ecel1, Gadd45a, Gal, Hrk, Pten, Socs3, and Sprr1a. Two of these genes, Hrk and
Atf3, were tested for importance in RGC death using null alleles of each gene.
Disruption of the prodeath Bcl2 family member Hrk did not affect the rate or
amount of RGC death after axonal trauma. Deficiency in the ATF/CREB family
transcription factor Atf3 did lessen the amount of RGC death after injury, though
it did not provide long term protection to RGCs. Since JUN's dimerization partner
determines its transcriptional targets, the expression of several candidate AP1
family members were examined. Multiple AP1 family members were induced by axonal 
injury and had a different expression profile in Jun deficient retinas compared
to wildtype retinas (Fosl1, Fosl2 and Jund). Overall, JUN appears to play a
multifaceted role in regulating RGC response to axonal injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700614
PMID: 23648575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(12):2388-401. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00036-13. Epub 2013 Apr
9.

LOXL4 is induced by transforming growth factor ß1 through Smad and JunB/Fra2 and 
contributes to vascular matrix remodeling.

Busnadiego O(1), González-Santamaría J, Lagares D, Guinea-Viniegra J,
Pichol-Thievend C, Muller L, Rodríguez-Pascual F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa and Laboratorio Mixto Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas/Fundación Renal Iñigo Alvarez de Toledo, 
Madrid, Spain.

Transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) is a pleiotropic factor involved in the
regulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis and remodeling. In search for 
novel genes mediating the action of TGF-ß1 on vascular ECM, we identified the
member of the lysyl oxidase family of matrix-remodeling enzymes, lysyl
oxidase-like 4 (LOXL4), as a direct target of TGF-ß1 in aortic endothelial cells,
and we dissected the molecular mechanism of its induction. Deletion mapping and
mutagenesis analysis of the LOXL4 promoter demonstrated the absolute requirement 
of a distal enhancer containing an activator protein 1 (AP-1) site and a Smad
binding element for TGF-ß1 to induce LOXL4 expression. Functional cooperation
between Smad proteins and the AP-1 complex composed of JunB/Fra2 accounted for
the action of TGF-ß1, which involved the extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)-dependent phosphorylation of Fra2. We furthermore provide evidence that
LOXL4 was extracellularly secreted and significantly contributed to ECM
deposition and assembly. These results suggest that TGF-ß1-dependent expression
of LOXL4 plays a role in vascular ECM homeostasis, contributing to vascular
processes associated with ECM remodeling and fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3700097
PMID: 23572561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Oral Sci. 2013 Mar;55(1):63-70.

Transcriptional regulation of the human bone sialoprotein gene by fibroblast
growth factor 2.

Zhou L(1), Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Matsudo, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), a member of the FGF family, positively
regulates bone formation and osteoblast differentiation. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) 
is highly expressed during early bone formation and may play a role in primary
mineralization of bone. In the present study, FGF2 (10 ng/mL) was found to
increase the levels of Runx2 and BSP mRNA at 3 and 12 h in human osteoblast-like 
Saos2 cells. Transient transfection assays were performed using chimeric
constructs of the human BSP gene promoter ligated with a luciferase reporter
gene. FGF2 (10 ng/mL, 12 h) induced the luciferase activities of the -84LUC and
-927LUC constructs in Saos2 cells. The results of gel shift assays showed that
FGF2 (10 ng/mL) increased the binding of nuclear protein to the FGF2 response
element (FRE) and the activator protein 1 (AP1) binding site. Antibodies against 
Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2 and Smad1 blocked FRE-protein complex formation, and antibodies
against CREB1, c-Jun and Fra2 interrupted AP1-protein complex formation. These
results indicate that FGF2 increases BSP transcription by targeting the FRE and
AP1 elements in the proximal promoter of the human BSP gene. Moreover, the
transcription factors Dlx5, Msx2, Runx2, Smad1, CREB1, c-Jun and Fra2 could be
key regulators of the effects of FGF2 on human BSP transcription.

PMID: 23485603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2013 May 2;121(18):3640-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-441022. Epub 2013
Mar 12.

SOX4 is a direct target gene of FRA-2 and induces expression of HDAC8 in adult
T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.

Higuchi T(1), Nakayama T, Arao T, Nishio K, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka,
Japan.

Previously, we have shown that an AP-1 family member, FRA-2, is constitutively
expressed in adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATL) and, together with JUND,
upregulates CCR4 and promotes ATL cell growth. Among the identified potential
target genes of FRA-2/JUND was SOX4. Here, we examine the expression and function
of SOX4 in ATL. SOX4 was indeed consistently expressed in primary ATL cells.
FRA-2/JUND efficiently activated the SOX4 promoter via an AP-1 site. Knockdown of
SOX4 expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA) strongly suppressed cell growth 
of ATL cell lines. Microarray analyses revealed that SOX4 knockdown reduced the
expression of genes such as germinal center kinase related (GCKR), NAK-associated
protein 1 (NAP1), and histone deacetylase 8 (HDAC8). We confirmed consistent
expression of GCKR, NAP1, and HDAC8 in primary ATL cells. We also showed direct
activation of the HDAC8 promoter by SOX4. Furthermore, siRNA knockdown of GCKR,
NAP1, and HDAC8 each significantly suppressed cell growth of ATL cell lines.
Taken together, we have revealed an important oncogenic cascade involving
FRA-2/JUND and SOX4 in ATL, which leads to the expression of genes such as GCKR, 
NAP1, and HDAC8.

PMID: 23482931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Mar;11(3):272-81. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0395. Epub
2013 Jan 21.

Microenvironmental regulation of BRCA1 gene expression by c-Jun and Fra2 in
premalignant human ovarian surface epithelial cells.

Zhou L(1), Graves M, MacDonald G, Cipollone J, Mueller CR, Roskelley CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Reduced BRCA1 gene expression is common in the sporadic form of ovarian
carcinoma. The spread of this highly lethal cancer often begins when tumor cell
clusters are shed into the fluid of the abdominopelvic cavity such that they can 
float freely before seeding distant sites on the peritoneal walls and organs.
Thus, the microenvironment that tumor cells find themselves in changes
dramatically during these early shedding and floating stages of transperitoneal
metastasis. To mimic this microenvironmental change in vitro, we released
premalignant human ovarian surface epithelial cells from the substratum and
forced them to cluster in suspension. Under these conditions, steady state levels
of BRCA1 mRNA and protein fell significantly and the transcriptional activation
state of the BRCA1 promoter was suppressed. Analysis of the promoter indicated
that the previously identified "CRE" element located within the "positive
regulatory region" (PRR) contributed to this suppression. More specifically, we
show that the suppression was mediated, at least in part, by a suspension
culture-driven decrease in the levels of two members of the AP1 transcription
factor complex, c-Jun and Fra2, that bind to the CRE element. Therefore, a
microenvironmental change that is manifested during the initial stages of ovarian
carcinoma dissemination may, potentially, help suppress BRCA1 expression in
sporadic tumors and thus promote their progression.

PMID: 23339184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Vascul Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;58(3):194-201. doi: 10.1016/j.vph.2012.12.001. Epub
2012 Dec 8.

The Fra-2 transgenic mouse model of systemic sclerosis.

Maurer B(1), Distler JH, Distler O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Center of Experimental Rheumatology, University
Hospital Zurich, Gloriastrasse 25, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

In systemic sclerosis, microvascular injury often precedes the development of
fibrosis. Whereas the development of digital ulcers and skin fibrosis causes high
morbidity, the affection of internal organs, in particular complications such as 
interstitial lung disease and pulmonary (arterial) hypertension, account for the 
high disease-associated mortality of these patients. Vascular animal models of
systemic sclerosis are of utmost importance to study pathophysiological aspects, 
to identify molecular key players, and to perform interventional proof of
concept-studies. So far, animal models of systemic sclerosis have mainly
reflected the pro-fibrotic features of the human disease. The Fra-2 (Fos-related 
antigen-2) transgenic mouse model simultaneously displays both pro-fibrotic and
vascular characteristics of human systemic sclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23232070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Neuroscience. 2013 Mar 1;232:216-25. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.11.018.
Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Effects of intermittent hypoxia on leptin signalling in the carotid body.

Messenger SA(1), Ciriello J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5C1.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada N6A 5C1. Electronic 
address: john.ciriello@schulich.uwo.ca.

Glomus cells in the carotid body are responsible for detecting changes in the
partial pressure of blood oxygen (PO2). These glomus cells have recently been
found to express leptin receptors and are activated by intermittent hypoxia (IH) 
and systemic leptin injections, although the function of leptin within the
carotid body remains unknown. The present study was done to investigate whether
IH activates leptin signalling pathways within leptin-expressing carotid body
glomus cells. Rats were subjected to IH (120-s normoxia, 80-s hypoxia for 8 h) or
normoxia (8 h). Exposure to IH increased plasma leptin levels almost sixfold
compared to normoxic controls. Additionally, IH was found to increase leptin,
ERK1/2 and Fra-1/2 immunoreactivity within glomus cells. Systemic leptin
injections evoked similar effects on leptin, ERK1/2 and Fra-1/2 immunoreactivity 
within the glomus cells. Furthermore, using Western blot analysis, IH was found
to increase protein expression of leptin, the short form of the leptin receptor
(Ob-R100 kDa) and suppressor of cytokine signalling 3. On the other hand, IH
induced a decrease in long form of leptin receptors (Ob-Rb) protein expression.
Taken together, these data suggest that the increased levels of leptin within the
circulation and those within the glomus cells induced by IH may alter carotid
bodies chemosensitivity to hypoxic stimuli.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23201827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2013 Feb;44(2):98-108. doi:
10.1016/j.domaniend.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Prostaglandin F2a regulation of mRNA for activating protein 1 transcriptional
factors in porcine corpora lutea (CL): lack of induction of JUN and JUND in CL
without luteolytic capacity.

Diaz FJ(1), Luo W, Wiltbank MC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology-Reproductive Physiology Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Porcine corpora lutea (CL) develop sensitivity to regression by prostaglandin F2a
(PGF2a), termed luteolytic capacity, about 13 d after estrus. We postulated that 
PGF2a regulation of activating protein 1 (AP-1) transcriptional factor expression
underlies acquisition of luteolytic capacity. CL were collected from gilts on day
9 (estrous cycle) or day 17 (pseudopregnancy) before or after PGF2a treatment
with mRNA measured for FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB, and JUND and the AP-1 
target genes CCL2 and SERPINE1. At 0.5 h after PGF2a, both day-9 and day-17 CL
had increased (P < 0.01) mRNA for FOS (2,225% and 1,817%), JUNB (237% and 358%), 
and FOSB (1,060% and 925%). Intriguingly, at 0.5 h after PGF2a there was
increased (P < 0.01) mRNA encoding JUN (1,099%) and JUND (300%) in day-17 but not
day-9 CL. At 10 h after PGF2a there was elevated FOSB mRNA in day-17 (771%) but
not day-9 CL and no PGF2a-induced change in FOS, JUN, JUND, and JUNB mRNA in
day-9 or day-17 CL. Treatment with PGF2a increased mRNA for AP-1-responsive
genes, CCL2 at 0.5 h (202%) and CCL2 and SERPINE1 at 10 h (719% and 1,515%), only
in day-17 CL. Thus, many of the fos family of transcription factors are
dramatically induced by PGF2a in CL with or without luteolytic capacity. However,
PGF only induced JUN and JUND expression in CL with luteolytic capacity, a
finding that may be key for understanding the acquisition of luteolytic capacity,
given that JUN is the only AP-1 family member with strong N-terminal
trans-activation activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23089279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jan;27(1):133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.10.004. Epub
2012 Oct 13.

CD40 activation induces NREM sleep and modulates genes associated with sleep
homeostasis.

Gast H(1), Müller A, Lopez M, Meier D, Huber R, Dechent F, Prinz M, Emmenegger Y,
Franken P, Birchler T, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Berne, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The T-cell derived cytokine CD40 ligand is overexpressed in patients with
autoimmune diseases. Through activation of its receptor, CD40 ligand leads to a
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor 1 (TNFR1) dependent impairment of locomotor 
activity in mice. Here we report that this effect is explained through a
promotion of sleep, which was specific to non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
while REM sleep was suppressed. The increase in NREM sleep was accompanied by a
decrease in EEG delta power during NREM sleep and by a decrease in the expression
of transcripts in the cerebral cortex known to be associated with homeostatic
sleep drive, such as Homer1a, Early growth response 2, Neuronal pentraxin 2, and 
Fos-like antigen 2. The effect of CD40 activation was mimicked by peripheral TNF 
injection and prevented by the TNF blocker etanercept. Our study indicates that
sleep-wake dysregulation in autoimmune diseases may result from CD40 induced
TNF:TNFR1 mediated alterations of molecular pathways, which regulate sleep-wake
behavior.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23072727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Oncol Rep. 2012 Dec;28(6):1959-67. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2057. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Molecular and genomic approach for understanding the gene-environment interaction
between Nrf2 deficiency and carcinogenic nickel-induced DNA damage.

Kim HL(1), Seo YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Dongguk University, Jung-gu, Seoul 100-715,
Republic of Korea.

Nickel (<U+2161>) is a toxic and carcinogenic metal which induces a redox imbalance
following oxidative stress. Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) is
a redox factor that regulates oxidation/reduction status and consequently
mediates cytoprotective responses against exposure to environmental toxicants. In
this study, we investigated the protective roles of the Nrf2 gene against
oxidative stress and DNA damage induced by nickel at sub-lethal doses. Under
nickel exposure conditions, we detected significantly increased intracellular ROS
generation, in addition to higher amounts of DNA damage using comet assay and
<U+03B3>-H2AX immunofluorescence staining in Nrf2 lacking cells, as compared to Nrf2
wild-type cells. In addition, we attempted to identify potential nickel and
Nrf2-responsive targets and the relevant pathway. The genomic expression data
were analyzed using microarray for the selection of synergistic effect-related
genes by Nrf2 knockdown under nickel treatment. In particular, altered
expressions of 6 upregulated genes (CAV1, FOSL2, MICA, PIM2, RUNX1 and SLC7A6)
and 4 downregulated genes (APLP1, CLSPN, PCAF and PRAME) were confirmed by
qRT-PCR. Additionally, using bioinformatics tool, we found that these genes
functioned principally in a variety of molecular processes, including oxidative
stress response, necrosis, DNA repair and cell survival. Thus, we describe the
potential biomarkers regarded as molecular candidates for Nrf2-related cellular
protection against nickel exposure. In conclusion, these findings indicate that
Nrf2 is an important factor with a protective role in the suppression of
mutagenicity and carcinogenicity by environmental nickel exposure in terms of
gene-environment interaction.

PMCID: PMC3583472
PMID: 23023193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cell. 2012 Oct 12;151(2):289-303. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.09.016. Epub 2012 Sep 
25.

A validated regulatory network for Th17 cell specification.

Ciofani M(1), Madar A, Galan C, Sellars M, Mace K, Pauli F, Agarwal A, Huang W,
Parkurst CN, Muratet M, Newberry KM, Meadows S, Greenfield A, Yang Y, Jain P,
Kirigin FK, Birchmeier C, Wagner EF, Murphy KM, Myers RM, Bonneau R, Littman DR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathogenesis Program, The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of 
the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Res. 2014 Aug;24(8):901-3.

Th17 cells have critical roles in mucosal defense and are major contributors to
inflammatory disease. Their differentiation requires the nuclear hormone receptor
ROR<U+03B3>t working with multiple other essential transcription factors (TFs). We have 
used an iterative systems approach, combining genome-wide TF occupancy,
expression profiling of TF mutants, and expression time series to delineate the
Th17 global transcriptional regulatory network. We find that cooperatively bound 
BATF and IRF4 contribute to initial chromatin accessibility and, with STAT3,
initiate a transcriptional program that is then globally tuned by the
lineage-specifying TF ROR<U+03B3>t, which plays a focal deterministic role at key loci. 
Integration of multiple data sets allowed inference of an accurate predictive
model that we computationally and experimentally validated, identifying multiple 
new Th17 regulators, including Fosl2, a key determinant of cellular plasticity.
This interconnected network can be used to investigate new therapeutic approaches
to manipulate Th17 functions in the setting of inflammatory disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3503487
PMID: 23021777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Immunol. 2013 Mar;53(3):295-301. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.08.004. Epub 2012
Sep 16.

Transcriptional regulation of the mouse CD11c promoter by AP-1 complex with JunD 
and Fra2 in dendritic cells.

Hara M(1), Yokoyama H, Fukuyama K, Kitamura N, Shimokawa N, Maeda K, Kanada S,
Ito T, Usui Y, Ogawa H, Okumura K, Nishiyama M, Nishiyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy Research Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8421, Japan.

CD11c, a member of the ß(2) integrin family of adhesion molecule, is expressed on
the surface of myeloid lineages and activated lymphoid cells and forms a
heterodimeric receptor with CD18. We analyzed the mouse CD11c promoter structure 
to elucidate the transcriptional regulation in dendritic cells (DCs). By reporter
assay, the -84/-65 region was identified to be essential for activity of the
mouse CD11c promoter in the mouse bone marrow-derived (BM) DCs and monocyte cell 
line RAW264.7. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay using a number of
antibodies against transcription factors revealed that the target region was
recognized by a complex including JunD and Fra2, which are transcription factors 
belonging to the AP-1 family. The direct interaction of JunD and Fra2 with the
CD11c promoter was further confirmed by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
using CD11c-positive cells purified from BMDCs. Finally, mouse JunD and/or Fra2
siRNA was introduced into BMDCs to evaluate the involvement of these factors
against CD11c transcription and found that Fra2 siRNA reduced cell surface
expression level of CD11c. These results indicate that AP-1 composed with JunD
and Fra2 protein plays a primary role in enhancing the transcription level of the
CD11c gene in DC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22990073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Apr;72(4):614-20. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201615. Epub 
2012 Aug 21.

Inhibition of H3K27 histone trimethylation activates fibroblasts and induces
fibrosis.

Krämer M(1), Dees C, Huang J, Schlottmann I, Palumbo-Zerr K, Zerr P, Gelse K,
Beyer C, Distler A, Marquez VE, Distler O, Schett G, Distler JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3 and Institute for Clinical Immunology,
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Ulmenweg 18, Erlangen D-91054, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Epigenetic modifications such as DNA methylation and histone
acetylation have been implicated in the pathogenesis of systemic sclerosis.
However, histone methylation has not been investigated so far. We therefore aimed
to evaluate the role of the trimethylation of histone H3 on lysine 27 (H3K27me3) 
on fibroblast activation and fibrosis.
METHODS: H3K27me3 was inhibited by 3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) in cultured
fibroblasts and in two murine models of dermal fibrosis. Fibrosis was analysed by
assessment of the dermal thickening, determination of the hydroxyproline content 
and by quantification of the numbers of myofibroblasts. The expression of
fos-related antigen 2 (fra-2) was assessed by real-time PCR, western blot and
immunohistochemistry and modulated by siRNA.
RESULTS: Inhibition of H3K27me3 stimulated the release of collagen in cultured
fibroblasts in a time and dose-dependent manner. Treatment with DZNep exacerbated
fibrosis induced by bleomycin or by overexpression of a constitutively active
transforming growth factor ß receptor type I. Moreover, treatment with DZNep
alone was sufficient to induce fibrosis. Inhibition of H3K27me3 induced the
expression of the profibrotic transcription factor fra-2 in vitro and in vivo.
Knockdown of fra-2 completely prevented the profibrotic effects of DZNep.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a novel role of H3 Lys27 histone methylation 
in fibrosis. In contrast to other epigenetic modifications such as DNA
methylation and histone acetylation, H3 Lys27 histone methylation acts as a
negative regulator of fibroblast activation in vitro and in vivo by repressing
the expression of fra-2.

PMID: 22915621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Immunotoxicol. 2013 Jan-Mar;10(1):32-9. doi: 10.3109/1547691X.2012.686929. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Role of AP-1 family proteins in regulation of inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) in human neutrophils.

Ratajczak-Wrona W(1), Jablonska E, Garley M, Jablonski J, Radziwon P, Iwaniuk A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical University of Bialystok, Waszyngtona 15A,
15-269 Bialystok, Poland. rwioletta@umb.edu.pl

The aim of the study was to assess the activity of AP-1 family proteins, e.g.
Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB, JunD, and FosB, engaged in the regulation of inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) expression and the production of NO by neutrophils (PMN)
exposed to N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) xenobiotic. Isolated human PMN were
incubated in the presence of NDMA. iNOS mRNA expression was then analyzed using
Northern blot and the expression of other proteins in the cytoplasmic and nuclear
fractions were assessed using Western blot. The obtained results indicate that
NDMA increased iNOS mRNA and protein expression in human PMN. Furthermore, it
increased the expression of Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB, and JunD in the cytoplasmic
fraction, and FosB expression in the fractions of analyzed cells. As a
consequence of inhibiting p38 pathway and JNK, reduced iNOS expression and NO
production was noted in PMN exposed to NDMA. Inhibition of the p38 pathway
resulted in reduced expression of all analyzed proteins in the cytoplasmic
fraction of PMN exposed to NDMA. Furthermore, increased Fra-2 expression and
reduced FosB expression were found in the nuclear fraction of those cells.
Inhibiting ERK5 pathway resulted in increased JunB expression in both fractions
of the analyzed cells. Therefore, no changes in the expression of analyzed
proteins in the presence of NDMA were observed in PMN pre-incubated with JNK
pathway inhibitor. In conclusion, the results here indicate a role of Fra-1,
Fra-2, JunB, JunD, and FosB transcription factors in the regulation of iNOS
expression and NO production by human neutrophils exposed to NDMA.

PMID: 22734893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Aug;71(8):1382-7. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200940. Epub 
2012 Apr 20.

Fra-2 transgenic mice as a novel model of pulmonary hypertension associated with 
systemic sclerosis.

Maurer B(1), Reich N, Juengel A, Kriegsmann J, Gay RE, Schett G, Michel BA, Gay
S, Distler JH, Distler O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension differs 
from idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension with respect to histopathology,
treatment responses and survival. Medical progress on PAH is hampered by the lack
of human biosamples and suitable animal models. In this study, the authors
evaluated fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) transgenic mice as a novel model for
systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension.
METHODS: Lung sections of Fra-2 transgenic (n=12) and wild-type mice (n=6) were
analysed at 16 weeks by histology using Dana Point criteria. Cellular and
molecular key players were assessed by immunohistochemistry. To test the model's 
sensitivity to change over treatment, a subgroup of Fra-2 transgenic mice (n=6)
was treated with the tyrosine kinase inhibitor nilotinib twice daily 37.5 mg
orally from 8 weeks of age.
RESULTS: Fra-2 transgenic mice developed severe vascular remodelling of pulmonary
arteries and non-specific interstitial pneumonia-like interstitial lung disease
resembling human systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary hypertension.
Histological features typical for systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary
arterial hypertension, such as intimal thickening with concentric laminar
lesions, medial hypertrophy, perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, adventitial
fibrosis, but not pulmonary occlusive venopathy were frequently detected.
Platelet-derived growth factor signalling pathways were activated in pulmonary
vessels of Fra-2 transgenic compared with wild-type mice. Since treatment with
nilotinib strongly prevented the development of proliferative vasculopathy and
lung fibrosis, the model proved to be sensitive to treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that Fra-2 transgenic mice as an animal model of
systemic sclerosis-associated pulmonary arterial hypertension display main
characteristic features of the human disease. It therefore allows studying
pathophysiological aspects and might serve as a preclinical model for
interventional proof-of-concept studies.

PMID: 22523431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Anticancer Res. 2012 Apr;32(4):1367-73.

Expression and function of FRA2/JUND in cutaneous T-cell lymphomas.

Nakayama T(1), Higuchi T, Oiso N, Kawada A, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) and cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs) are 
known to frequently express CC chemokine receptor 4 (CCR4). Previously, we
investigated the transcriptional control of CCR4 expression in ATLL and have
found that an activating protein 1 (AP1) family member, FBJ murine osteosarcoma
viral oncogene homolog (FOS)-related antigen 2 (FRA2), is consistently expressed 
at high levels in ATLL and, together with v-JUN avian sarcoma virus 17 oncogene
homolog D (JUND), up-regulates the expression of CCR4 as well as that of several 
proto-oncogenes such as v-MYB myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MYB), murine
double minute 2 homolog (MDM2), and B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6). Here, we examined
the expression of these genes in clinical samples of CTCLs. We detected the
transcripts of FRA2, JUND, CCR4, MYB, MDM2, and BCL6 at high levels in CTCL skin 
lesions. Except for BCL6, we confirmed protein expression of FRA2, JUND, CCR4,
MYB, and MDM2 in CTCL skin lesions. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of FRA2
or JUND suppressed cell growth and the expression of CCR4, MYB, MDM2, and BCL6 in
CTCL cell lines. Our results, thus, demonstrate the presence of a common
oncogenic cascade initiated by FRA2/JUND in CCR4-expressing mature T-cell
malignancies such as ATLL and CTCLs.

PMID: 22493372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Pathol. 2012 May;180(5):2108-19. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.01.040. Epub
2012 Mar 20.

The tumor microenvironment strongly impacts master transcriptional regulators and
gene expression class of glioblastoma.

Cooper LA(1), Gutman DA, Chisolm C, Appin C, Kong J, Rong Y, Kurc T, Van Meir EG,
Saltz JH, Moreno CS, Brat DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine, Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2012 May;180(5):1768-71.

The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project has generated gene expression data that
divides glioblastoma (GBM) into four transcriptional classes: proneural, neural, 
classical, and mesenchymal. Because transcriptional class is only partially
explained by underlying genomic alterations, we hypothesize that the tumor
microenvironment may also have an impact. In this study, we focused on necrosis
and angiogenesis because their presence is both prognostically and biologically
significant. These features were quantified in digitized histological images of
TCGA GBM frozen section slides that were immediately adjacent to samples used for
molecular analysis. Correlating these features with transcriptional data, we
found that the mesenchymal transcriptional class was significantly enriched with 
GBM samples that contained a high degree of necrosis. Furthermore, among 2422
genes that correlated with the degree of necrosis in GBMs, transcription factors 
known to drive the mesenchymal expression class were most closely related,
including C/EBP-ß, C/EBP-d, STAT3, FOSL2, bHLHE40, and RUNX1. Non-mesenchymal
GBMs in the TCGA data set were found to become more transcriptionally similar to 
the mesenchymal class with increasing levels of necrosis. In addition, high
expression levels of the master mesenchymal factors C/EBP-ß, C/EBP-d, and STAT3
were associated with a poor prognosis. Strong, specific expression of C/EBP-ß and
C/EBP-d by hypoxic, perinecrotic cells in GBM likely account for their tight
association with necrosis and may be related to their poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3354586
PMID: 22440258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Clin Invest. 2012 Mar;122(3):1010-21. doi: 10.1172/JCI58431. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

FOSL2 promotes leptin gene expression in human and mouse adipocytes.

Wrann CD(1), Eguchi J, Bozec A, Xu Z, Mikkelsen T, Gimble J, Nave H, Wagner EF,
Ong SE, Rosen ED.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The adipocyte-derived hormone leptin is a critical regulator of many
physiological functions, ranging from satiety to immunity. Surprisingly, very
little is known about the transcriptional pathways that regulate
adipocyte-specific expression of leptin. Here, we report studies in which we
pursued a strategy integrating BAC transgenic reporter mice, reporter assays, and
chromatin state mapping to locate an adipocyte-specific cis-element upstream of
the leptin (LEP) gene in human fat cells. Quantitative proteomics with affinity
enrichment of protein-DNA complexes identified the transcription factor FOS-like 
antigen 2 (FOSL2) as binding specifically to the identified region, a result that
was confirmed by ChIP. Knockdown of FOSL2 in human adipocytes decreased LEP
expression, and overexpression of Fosl2 increased Lep expression in mouse
adipocytes. Moreover, the elevated LEP expression observed in obesity correlated 
well with increased FOSL2 levels in mice and humans, and adipocyte-specific
genetic deletion of Fosl2 in mice reduced Lep expression. Taken together, these
data identify FOSL2 as a critical regulator of leptin expression in adipocytes.

PMCID: PMC3322535
PMID: 22326952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Apoptosis. 2011 Sep;16(9):889-901. doi: 10.1007/s10495-011-0624-y.

The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs Sulindac sulfide and Diclofenac induce 
apoptosis and differentiation in human acute myeloid leukemia cells through an
AP-1 dependent pathway.

Singh R(1), Cadeddu RP, Fröbel J, Wilk CM, Bruns I, Zerbini LF, Prenzel T,
Hartwig S, Brünnert D, Schroeder T, Lehr S, Haas R, Czibere A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology, Heinrich
Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Acute myeloid leukemia is a heterogeneous disease with varying genetic and
molecular pathologies. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have been
proven to possess significant anti-proliferative potential in various cancer
cells in vitro and in vivo. Hence, treatment with these agents can be utilized to
study disease specific anti-proliferative pathways. In this study, a total number
of 42 bone marrow derived CD34(+) selected de novo AML patient samples and the
AML cell lines THP-1 and HL-60 were treated with the NSAIDs Sulindac sulfide and 
Diclofenac. We analyzed viability, apoptosis, differentiation and addressed the
molecular mechanisms involved. We found a consistent induction of apoptosis and
to some extent an increased myeloid differentiation capacity in NSAID treated AML
cells. Comprehensive protein and gene expression profiling of Diclofenac treated 
AML cells revealed transcriptional activation of GADD45a and its downstream
MAPK/JNK pathway as well as increased protein levels of the caspase-3 precursor. 
This pointed towards a role of the c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK) in NSAID
mediated apoptosis that we found indeed to be dependent on JNK activity as
addition of a specific JNK-inhibitor abrogated apoptosis. Furthermore, the AP-1
transcription factor family members' c-Jun, JunB and Fra-2 were transcriptionally
activated in NSAID treated AML cells and re-expression of these transcription
factors led to activation of GADD45a with induction of apoptosis.
Mechanistically, we demonstrate that NSAIDs induce apoptosis in AML through a
novel pathway involving increased expression of AP-1 heterodimers, which by
itself is sufficient to induce GADD45a expression with consecutive activation of 
JNK and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 21739277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 22;343(1-2):63-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.007. 
Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Histone modifications on the adrenergic induction of type II deiodinase in rat
pinealocytes.

Chik CL(1), Price DM, Ho AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (CLC) and Department of Physiology (DMP, AKH), Faculty 
of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
cchik@ualberta.ca

Histone modifications have been shown to play an important role in regulating
gene expression. In this study, we investigated the impact of histone
modifications on the adrenergic-regulated transcription of type 2 deiodinase
(Dio2), a CREB-target gene in the rat pinealocyte. Treatment of pinealocytes with
inhibitors of aurora C, a histone kinase, resulted in an inhibitory effect on the
adrenergic-stimulated histone H3 Ser10 phosphorylation and Dio2 transcription.
Given the established link between histone phosphorylation and acetylation, the
role of histone acetylation on the adrenergic-induced Dio2 transcription was
investigated. Treatment of pinealocytes with histone deacetylase inhibitors
inhibited the adrenergic-induced Dio2 transcription. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation with antibodies against acetylated Lys14 of H3 showed an
increase in DNA recovery of the promoter region of Dio2 following treatment with 
trichostatin A. Together, our results indicate that, beside activation of CREB,
epigenetic factors such as histone modifications also play an important role in
regulating Dio2 transcription.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 21704117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 29;286(17):15227-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.201996. Epub
2011 Mar 2.

Selective genomic targeting by FRA-2/FOSL2 transcription factor: regulation of
the Rgs4 gene is mediated by a variant activator protein 1 (AP-1) promoter
sequence/CREB-binding protein (CBP) mechanism.

Davies JS(1), Klein DC, Carter DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, Wales, United
Kingdom.

FRA-2/FOSL2 is a basic region-leucine zipper motif transcription factor that is
widely expressed in mammalian tissues. The functional repertoire of this factor
is unclear, partly due to a lack of knowledge of genomic sequences that are
targeted. Here, we identified novel, functional FRA-2 targets across the genome
through expression profile analysis in a knockdown transgenic rat. In this model,
a nocturnal rhythm of pineal gland FRA-2 is suppressed by a genetically encoded, 
dominant negative mutant protein. Bioinformatic analysis of validated sets of
FRA-2-regulated and -nonregulated genes revealed that the FRA-2 regulon is
limited by genomic target selection rules that, in general, transcend core
cis-sequence identity. However, one variant AP-1-related (AP-1R) sequence was
common to a subset of regulated genes. The functional activity and protein
binding partners of a candidate AP-1R sequence were determined for a novel
FRA-2-repressed gene, Rgs4. FRA-2 protein preferentially associated with a
proximal Rgs4 AP-1R sequence as demonstrated by ex vivo ChIP and in vitro EMSA
analysis; moreover, transcriptional repression was blocked by mutation of the
AP-1R sequence, whereas mutation of an upstream consensus AP-1 family sequence
did not affect Rgs4 expression. Nocturnal changes in protein complexes at the
Rgs4 AP-1R sequence are associated with FRA-2-dependent dismissal of the
co-activator, CBP; this provides a mechanistic basis for Rgs4 gene repression.
These studies have also provided functional insight into selective genomic
targeting by FRA-2, highlighting discordance between predicted and actual
targets. Future studies should address FRA-2-Rgs4 interactions in other systems, 
including the brain, where FRA-2 function is poorly understood.

PMCID: PMC3083148
PMID: 21367864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jan;84(1):189-99. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085779. Epub 2010
Sep 23.

Comparative gene expression analysis of somatic cell nuclear transfer-derived
cloned pigs with normal and abnormal umbilical cords.

Park JY(1), Park MR, Hwang KC, Chung JS, Bui HT, Kim T, Cho SK, Kim JH, Hwang S, 
Park SB, Nguyen VT, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Seoul, Republic of
Korea.

Gene expression profiling of compromised umbilical cords (CUCs) derived from
somatic cell nuclear transfer (scNT) clones was performed to determine why
scNT-derived clones often exhibit malformed umbilical arteries. Umbilical cord
samples were obtained from 65 scNT piglets, and of these, nine displayed a CUC.
Microscopic analyses of the scNT clones with CUCs (scNT-CUCs) revealed complete
occlusive thrombi that were not detected in the arteries of scNT clones with
normal umbilical cords (scNT-Ns). Moreover, whereas the allantoic ducts of the
scNT-Ns contained columnar epithelium, the scNT-CUCs lacked this epithelial
layer. Compared to scNT-Ns, the scNT-CUCs exhibited severe histological damage,
including tissue swelling and vein and arterial damage with complete occlusive
thrombi. To investigate functional abnormality, gene expression profiles were
created in duplicate using the Platinum Pig 13K oligonucleotide microarray, which
contains 13,610 probes of 70 bp in length and is capable of interrogating 13,297 
targets with up to one probe per target. Probe sets were selected according to a 
2-fold or greater increase or decrease of gene expression in scNT-CUCs compared
to scNT-Ns. Most genes expressed in scNT-Ns were also expressed by scNT-CUCs.
However, most genes involved in transcriptional regulation, such as JUN, JUNB,
and FOSL2, showed a significant decrease in expression in the scNT-CUCs, which
may produce a ripple effect capable of altering the transcriptomes of many other 
cellular processes, including angiogenesis, antioxidation, and apoptosis. The
scNT-CUCs with thrombosis showed extensive apoptosis leading to placental
insufficiency and related pathology. Considering that the umbilical cord plays a 
role in the transportation of metabolites to the fetus, placental insufficiency
in scNT-CUCs may be caused by an increase in apoptotic protein expression from
scNT-derived umbilical cords with hypoplastic arteries, and our results provide
evidence that porcine oligonucleotide microarray analysis is a useful tool for
screening scNT-derived abnormalities in pigs.

PMID: 20864643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Cell Biol. 2010 Sep 20;190(6):1093-106. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201002111. Epub 2010
Sep 13.

Fra-2/AP-1 controls bone formation by regulating osteoblast differentiation and
collagen production.

Bozec A(1), Bakiri L, Jimenez M, Schinke T, Amling M, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Genes, Development, and Disease Group, BBVA Foundation, Cancer Cell Biology
Program, Spanish National Cancer Center, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

The activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor complex, in particular the
Fos proteins, is an important regulator of bone homeostasis. Fra-2 (Fosl2), a
Fos-related protein of the AP-1 family, is expressed in bone cells, and newborn
mice lacking Fra-2 exhibit defects in chondrocytes and osteoclasts. Here we show 
that Fra-2-deficient osteoblasts display a differentiation defect both in vivo
and in vitro. Moreover, Fra-2-overexpressing mice are osteosclerotic because of
increased differentiation of osteoblasts, which appears to be cell autonomous.
Importantly, the osteoblast-specific osteocalcin (Oc) gene and collagen1a2
(col1a2) are transcriptional targets of Fra-2 in both murine and human bone
cells. In addition, Fra-2, Oc, and col1 are expressed in stromal cells of human
chondroblastic and osteoblastic osteosarcomas (Os's) as well as during osteoblast
differentiation of human Os cell lines. These findings reveal a novel function of
Fra-2/AP-1 as a positive regulator of bone and matrix formation in mice and
humans.

PMCID: PMC3101588
PMID: 20837772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2010 Jan;48(2):197-201. doi: 10.2478/v10042-008-0110-8.

Immunoreactivity of ATF-2 and Fra-2 in human dental follicle.

Bolat I(1), Keklikoglu N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Histology and Embryology, Istanbul
University, Istanbul, Turkey. nkeklik@istanbul.edu.tr

It is asserted that epithelial rests in dental follicle (DF) existing around the 
impacted teeth in adults are effective in cyst formation. In this study, it is
intended for determining and comparing the immunoreactivity (IR) ratio of ATF-2
and Fra-2 proteins, the members of Activator Protein-1 (AP-1) family which
regulates important cellular activities such as growth, proliferation and
differentiation, in DF epithelial cells (EC) and connective tissue cells (CC). In
this study, ATF-2 and Fra-2 immunoreactivity (ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR) in EC and CC
in DF tissues obtained from 30 patients were analyzed by using
immunohistochemical method. Ratios of ATF-2-IR positive cells were found
17.36+/-9.55% in EC, 27.27+/-14.86% in CC and ratios of Fra-2-IR positive cells
were found 20.04+/-11.47% in EC, 16.71+/-9.05% in CC. In the statistically
comparison performed; significant differences were found between EC and CC in
terms of both ATF-2-IR (p<0.001) and Fra-2-IR (p<0.05). In EC, no significant
difference was found between ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR (p>0.05), whereas significant 
difference was found between ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR in CC (p<0.001). According to 
these data, it can be suggested that Fra-2 protein may be more effective than
ATF-2 protein in cyst formation originated from EC of DF. Besides, finding that
ATF-2-IR and Fra-2-IR are different in CC although similar in EC shows that AP-1 
members can be expressed at different ratios in same tissues.

PMID: 20675274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Oral Sci. 2010 Jun;52(2):221-9.

Endothelin-1 regulates rat bone sialoprotein gene transcription.

Li X(1), Wang Z, Yang L, Li Z, Ogata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Endothelin-1 (ET-1) was originally discovered as a vasoconstrictor protein
excreted by vascular endothelial cells. Recently, tumor-produced ET-1 has been
considered to stimulate osteoblasts to form new bone, and to be an important
mediator of osteoblastic bone metastasis. ET-1 has high affinity for two
different membrane receptors, ET(A)R and ET(B)R, which are expressed by many
types of cells including osteoblasts. Bone sialoprotein (BSP) is a phosphorylated
and sulfated glycoprotein associated with mineralized connective tissues. To
investigate the effects of ET-1 on BSP transcription, we used rat osteoblast-like
ROS17/2.8 cells. Levels of BSP and osteopontin mRNA were increased at 12 h after 
treatment with ET-1 (10 ng/ml), and ET-1 at the same concentration induced
luciferase activity of a -116 to +60 BSP promoter construct at 6 h.
Transcriptional activity of -84BSPLUC, which contains the cAMP response element
(CRE), was increased by ET-1. Furthermore, at 6 h, ET-1 (10 ng/ml) increased the 
binding of nuclear protein to CRE, the FGF2 response element (FRE) and the
homeodomain protein-binding site (HOX). Antibodies against CREB1, JunD and Fra2
disrupted the formation of CRE-protein complexes, while antibodies against Runx2 
and Dlx5 reduced the formation of FRE- and HOX-protein complexes. These findings 
indicate that ET-1 increases BSP transcription via the CRE, FRE and HOX sites in 
the rat BSP gene promoter.

PMID: 20587945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;6(8):453-60. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.102. Epub 2010
Jun 29.

Cellular and molecular aspects of vascular dysfunction in systemic sclerosis.

Trojanowska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Arthritis Center, Boston, MA 02118, USA.
trojanme@bu.edu

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is characterized by vascular alterations, activation of 
the immune system and tissue fibrosis. Vascular insufficiency manifests early in 
the disease, and although there is evidence of an active repair process,
capillaries deteriorate and regress. Factors that contribute to the failure of
vascular regeneration might include persistent injury, an imbalance between
proangiogenic and antiangiogenic mediators, intrinsic abnormal properties of the 
cellular components of the vessels, and the presence of fibroblast-derived
antiangiogenic factors. In addition, circulating dysfunctional endothelial
progenitor cells might further exacerbate vessel deterioration. Abnormal
expression of transcription factors, including Fra2 and Fli1, has been proposed
to contribute to SSc vasculopathy. Fli1 regulates genes that are involved in
vessel maturation and stabilization, suggesting that reduced levels of Fli1 in
SSc vasculature could contribute to the development of unstable vessels that are 
prone to regression. Conversely, proliferating endothelial cells and pericytes,
in the presence of an appropriate stimulus, might transdifferentiate into
collagen-producing cells, and thus contribute to the initiation of fibrosis.
Despite progress in treating the symptoms of vascular disease in SSc, the
underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. An improved knowledge of the
molecular and cellular pathways that contribute to SSc vasculopathy could help in
the design of effective therapies in the future.

PMCID: PMC3824624
PMID: 20585340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cardiovasc Res. 2010 Sep 1;87(4):647-55. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq123. Epub 2010 Apr
28.

Fra-2 mediates oxygen-sensitive induction of transforming growth factor beta in
cardiac fibroblasts.

Roy S(1), Khanna S, Azad A, Schnitt R, He G, Weigert C, Ichijo H, Sen CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Ohio State University Medical Center, 513 Davis
Heart and Lung Research Institute, 473 West 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

AIMS: In the ischaemia-reperfused heart, transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta) proteins trigger the differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts (CFs)
contributing to fibrosis. Reoxygenation of the heart, in addition to being a
trigger for reperfusion injury, induces tissue remodelling by hyperoxia-sensitive
signalling processes involving TGFbeta. Here, we sought to characterize the
molecular mechanisms responsible for the O(2)-sensitive transcriptional induction
of TGFbeta in murine CF and to test the significance of such findings in the
infarcted myocardium in vivo using laser capture microdissection.
METHODS AND RESULTS: All three isoforms of TGFbeta were induced in the CF-rich
peri-infarct tissue as well as in CF exposed to hyperoxic challenge. Reporter
studies demonstrated that TGFbeta transcription is hyperoxia inducible. Deletion 
of any one or both of the activating protein-1 (AP-1) binding sites in the
TGFbeta reporter construct resulted in loss of O(2) sensitivity, demonstrating
that AP-1 confers O(2) sensitivity to TGFbeta transcription. Fos-related AP-1
transcription factor (Fra-2) and Ask-1 (apoptosis signal-regulating kinase-1)
were identified as key mediators of AP-1-dependent O(2)-sensitive TGFbeta
transcription. Knockdown of Fra-2 significantly blunted O(2)-induced expression
of TGFbeta1 as well as TGFbeta3 in CF. Knockdown of Ask-1 blunted
hyperoxia-induced Fra-2 gene expression and nuclear localization in CF.
Collectively, these observations point towards a central role of Ask-1 and Fra-2 
in O(2)-inducible AP-1 activation and induction of TGFbeta.
CONCLUSION: Taken together with the observation that Fra-2-regulated genes are
implicated in fibrosis, identification of Fra-2 as an O(2)-sensitive
transcriptional regulator of inducible TGFbeta expression positions Fra-2 as an
important player in reoxygenation-induced fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC2920807
PMID: 20427335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mycotoxin Res. 2010 Feb;26(1):9-14. doi: 10.1007/s12550-009-0035-x. Epub 2010 Jan
12.

Induction of MAPK-dependent transcription factors by deoxynivalenol in human cell
lines.

Casteel M(1), Nielsen C, Didier A, Dietrich R, Märtlbauer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Sciences, Ludwig Maximilians-Universität München,
Schönleutnerstraße 8, 85764, Oberschleißheim, Germany,
m.casteel@mh.vetmed.uni-muenchen.de.

Contamination of cereals with the trichothecene deoxynivalenol (DON) is a global 
problem in agriculture. DON-related cytotoxicity results from inhibition of
translation preceded by a ribotoxic stress response, which is characterized by
phosphorylation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases and activation of
downstream transcription factors. In this study, we measured the expression of
AP-1 associated transcription factor mRNA levels in six human cell lines (Hep-G2,
A549, U937, A204, Jurkat, and CaCo-2) by using real-time RT-PCR. Previous work
suggested that transcription factors mRNA and protein levels are affected by DON 
in Hep-G2 cells. In this study, we found significant cell-specific differences in
mRNA levels for the transcription factors JUN, JUND, FOS, FOSL2, ATF3, and EGR1. 
After exposure to 1 µmol/l DON for 3 h, the induction of the transcription factor
JUN was highest in the Jurkat (342-fold) and Hep-G2 (84-fold) cell lines. JUND
expression was mainly affected in the immunocompetent cell-lines U937 (11-fold)
and Jurkat (12-fold), whereas significant FOSL2 induction (5-fold) was only found
in Jurkat cells. DON-induced expression of FOS was mainly observed in Hep-G2
(96-fold) and U937 cells (59-fold). In contrast, response of A549 cells to DON
was characterized by a distinct induction of ATF3 (44-fold) and EGR1 (92-fold).
Time- and concentration-dependent induction of the transcription factors by DON
was studied in detail for Hep-G2, A549, A204, and U937 cells. Considering the
chronic dietary exposure of humans, broader investigations on DON influence on
cell signaling pathways are required to understand the impact of this mycotoxin
on human health.

PMID: 23605236  [PubMed]


56. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Jun 15;135(3-4):208-17. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.11.016. Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Differentially expressed genes associated with Staphylococcus aureus mastitis in 
dairy goats.

Pisoni G(1), Moroni P, Genini S, Stella A, Boettcher PJ, Cremonesi P,
Scaccabarozzi L, Giuffra E, Castiglioni B.

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Milano, Dipartimento di Patologia Animale, Igiene e 
Sanità Pubblica Veterinaria, via Celoria 10, 20133 Milan, Italy.
giuliano.pisoni@unimi.it

To study gene expression within the mammary glands of dairy goats with mastitis, 
mRNA was collected from milk somatic cells (MSCs) of left udder halves challenged
with Staphylococcus aureus and right udder halves infused with PBS, as control,
at different time points (0, 12, 24 and 48h post-infection). Transcriptional
profiles were investigated using bovine cDNA microarrays; of the total 288
differentially expressed genes identified with ANOVA analysis (False Discovery
Rate=0.05, 1.5-fold change), 26, 36 and 16 genes were down-regulated at 12, 24
and 48h post-infection, respectively, while 60, 141 and 9 genes were up-regulated
at the same corresponding time points. The expression profiles clearly changed at
24h post-infection with 177 genes significantly altered, corresponding to a
10-fold increase of S. aureus bacterial count in milk from infected udders.
Differential expression of selected genes (CD2BP2, BCAP31, MHCII, FOSL2, MAPK13, 
ILT5 and JUNB) was also confirmed by real-time PCR at the different time points
considered, showing high correlation with the microarray measurements and high
reliability of the microarray analyses. The most readily inducible classes of
genes in caprine MSCs infected with S. aureus were pro-inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines and their receptors; IL-1alpha, lymphotoxin alpha, granulocyte
chemotactic protein (CXCL6), and IL-2 receptor gamma were all up-regulated in
infected udders versus healthy controls. This study identified a number of
differentially expressed genes induced by S. aureus intramammary infection and
demonstrates the intricacy of the patterns of gene expression that influence host
response to a complex pathogen of significant relevance to both human and
veterinary medicine.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Brain Res. 2010 Mar 8;1318:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.083. Epub 2010
Jan 6.

Differential effects of methamphetamine and SCH23390 on the expression of members
of IEG families of transcription factors in the rat striatum.

Beauvais G(1), Jayanthi S, McCoy MT, Ladenheim B, Cadet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry Research Branch, NIH/NIDA Intramural Research
Program, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Methamphetamine (METH) is a psychostimulant that can cause long-lasting
neurodegenerative effects in humans and animals. These toxic effects appear to
occur, in part, via activation of dopamine (DA) D1 receptors. This paper assessed
the possibility that the DA D1 receptor antagonist, SCH23390, might inhibit
METH-induced changes in the expression of several members of immediate early
genes (IEGs) which are known to control more delayed expression of other genes.
We found that injections of METH (4x10 mg/kg, given at 2 h intervals) caused
significant increases in c-fos and fra-2 expression which lasted from 30 min to 4
h. Pre-treatment with SCH23390, given 30 min before each METH injection,
completely blocked METH-induced expression of c-fos, but only partially inhibited
fra-2 mRNA expression. These results were confirmed by Western blot analysis
which showed METH-induced changes in c-Fos protein expression that were blocked
by pretreatment with SCH23390. There were also delayed METH-induced DA D1
receptor-dependent effects on fosB mRNA expression. Even though fra-1 expression 
was not affected by pretreatment with METH alone, the repeated injections of
SCH23390 caused substantial decreases in fra-1 mRNA expression in both the
presence and absence of METH. The repeated injections of METH caused no changes
in the mRNAs for c-jun, junB or junD. However, there were significant increases
in the phosphorylation of c-Jun protein (ser63). Phosphorylation of c-Jun
occurred in a delayed fashion (16 and 24 h after the last METH injections) and
was attenuated by SCH23390 pretreatment. Interestingly, SCH23390 given alone
caused significant decreases in phospho-c-Jun at all time-points. The METH
injections also caused delayed induction in the expression of members of the Egr 
family of transcription factors in a DA D1 receptor-dependent fashion. Repeated
injections of SCH23390 caused substantial suppression of basal striatal egr-1 and
egr-2 mRNA expression but not of that of egr-3. Both crem and arc mRNA levels
were induced by METH in a SCH23390-sensitive fashion. Moreover, multiple
injections of SCH23390 given alone caused marked inhibition of basal arc
expression. These results show that multiple injections of METH can
differentially affect the expression of several IEGs, some of which occurred in a
DA D1 receptor dependent fashion. The SCH23390-mediated suppression of basal
fra-1, egr-1, and egr-2 mRNA levels suggests that their basal expression in the
striatum might be dependent on tonic stimulation of the DA D1 receptor.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC2826565
PMID: 20059987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Jan;62(1):280-90. doi: 10.1002/art.25056.

The transcription factor Fra-2 regulates the production of extracellular matrix
in systemic sclerosis.

Reich N(1), Maurer B, Akhmetshina A, Venalis P, Dees C, Zerr P, Palumbo K,
Zwerina J, Nevskaya T, Gay S, Distler O, Schett G, Distler JH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Fra-2 belongs to the activator protein 1 family of transcription
factors. Mice transgenic for Fra-2 develop a systemic fibrotic disease with
vascular manifestations similar to those of systemic sclerosis (SSc). The aim of 
the present study was to investigate whether Fra-2 plays a role in the
pathogenesis of SSc and to identify the molecular mechanisms by which Fra-2
induces fibrosis.
METHODS: Dermal thickness and the number of myofibroblasts were determined in
skin sections from Fra-2-transgenic and wild-type mice. The expression of Fra-2
in SSc patients and in animal models of SSc was analyzed by real-time polymerase 
chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. Fra-2, transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta), and ERK signaling in SSc fibroblasts were inhibited using small
interfering RNA, neutralizing antibodies, and small-molecule inhibitors.
RESULTS: Fra-2-transgenic mice developed a skin fibrosis with increases in dermal
thickness and increased myofibroblast differentiation starting at age 12 weeks.
The expression of Fra-2 was up-regulated in SSc patients and in different mouse
models of SSc. Stimulation with TGFbeta and platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
significantly increased the expression of Fra-2 in SSc fibroblasts and induced
DNA binding of Fra-2 in an ERK-dependent manner. Knockdown of Fra-2 potently
reduced the stimulatory effects of TGFbeta and PDGF and decreased the release of 
collagen from SSc fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that Fra-2 is overexpressed in SSc and acts as a novel
downstream mediator of the profibrotic effects of TGFbeta and PDGF. Since
transgenic overexpression of Fra-2 causes not only fibrosis but also vascular
disease, Fra-2 might be an interesting novel candidate for molecular-targeted
therapies for SSc.

PMID: 20039427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Immunol. 2009 Aug 15;183(4):2575-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803577. Epub 2009
Jul 20.

Aberrant selection and function of invariant NKT cells in the absence of AP-1
transcription factor Fra-2.

Lawson VJ(1), Maurice D, Silk JD, Cerundolo V, Weston K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom.

The transcription factors mediating the development of CD1d-restricted invariant 
NKT (iNKT) cells remain incompletely described. Here, we show that loss of the
AP-1 transcription factor Fra-2 causes a marked increase in the number of both
thymic and peripheral iNKT cells, without affecting the development of other
T-lineage cells. The defect is cell-autonomous and is evident in the earliest
iNKT precursors. We find that iNKT cells expressing the lower affinity TCRVbeta8 
are proportionally overrepresented in the absence of Fra-2, indicating altered
selection of iNKT cells. There is also widespread dysregulation of AP-1-directed 
gene expression. In the periphery, mature Fra-2-deficient iNKT cells are able to 
participate in an immune response, but they have an altered response to Ag,
showing increased expansion and producing increased amounts of IL-2 and IL-4
compared with their wild-type counterparts. Unusually, naive Fra-2-deficient T
cells also rapidly produce IL-2 and IL-4 upon activation. Taken together, these
data define Fra-2 as necessary for regulation of normal iNKT cell development and
function, and they demonstrate the central role played by the AP-1 family in this
lineage.

PMID: 19620306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Androl. 2009 Aug;32(4):399-410. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2008.00930.x. Epub
2008 Oct 21.

Inflammation and epithelial alterations in rat prostate: impact of the androgen
to oestrogen ratio.

Yatkin E(1), Bernoulli J, Talvitie EM, Santti R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Institute of Biomedicine, University
of Turku, Turku, Finland. emrah.yatkin@utu.fi

Chronic non-bacterial prostatitis may offer new insights into the pathogenesis of
human benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate cancer and the strategies for
their treatment and prevention. The potential significance of androgen
replacement therapy in terms of the reversal of oestradiol (E(2))-induced
inflammatory reaction was studied in the dorsolateral prostate (DLP) of the Noble
rat. Castrated Noble rats were treated with E(2) and different doses of androgens
[dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and testosterone (T)] to achieve an elevated
concentration of E(2) and a wide range of the androgen-to-oestradiol ratios in
serum. After the 3-week treatment, inflammatory changes in the DLP were
classified and counted. Oestrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha), progesterone
receptor (PR), fos-related antigen-2 (Fra2), Ki-67 and P63 were
immunocytochemically stained. T, E(2) and prolactin concentrations in serum were 
measured and the relative weights of the seminal vesicles and pituitary glands
and microscopic structures of the DLP and seminal vesicle ducts were determined. 
Hypoandrogenic doses of DHT (judged on the basis of seminal vesicle weight gain),
dose-dependently increased the number of perivascular and stromal inflammatory
infiltrates. T and DHT were anti-inflammatory at the doses which normalized or
over stimulated the growth of the seminal vesicles. As signs of
anti-oestrogenicity, androgens dose-dependently decreased the number and
distribution of the ER alpha and PR-positive cells at proinflammatory
concentrations. Anti-inflammatory concentrations were needed to reduce the
expression of Fra2, E(2)-increased prolactin concentration in serum and pituitary
weight. The androgen concentrations required to prevent proinflammatory and
epithelial responses to E(2) in the presence of elevated E(2) concentrations may 
subject the accessory sex glands to more intense androgenic stimulation than is
normal for the male. The androgen-resistant endpoints of oestrogen action (body
weight reduction and hyperplasia of seminal vesicle ducts) further indicate
limitations in the possible preventive effects of androgen-replacement therapy.

PMID: 19515173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncol Rep. 2009 Jul;22(1):177-83.

Expression of Jun and Fos proteins in ovarian tumors of different malignant
potential and in ovarian cancer cell lines.

Hein S(1), Mahner S, Kanowski C, Löning T, Jänicke F, Milde-Langosch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Gynecologic Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Jun and Fos proteins form the transcription factor activating protein 1 (AP-1).
They play a role in cell proliferation, malignant transformation and invasion in 
various tumors. The aim of the current study was to characterize the role of AP-1
in ovarian cancer. Fifty-six ovarian tumors of different invasive potential
including 13 metastases as well as 5 ovarian cancer cell lines were analyzed by
Western blot analysis regarding their expression of pc-Jun, Jun B, Jun D, c-Fos, 
Fos B, Fra-1 and Fra-2. In addition, invasion, cell proliferation and migration
assays were performed. The expression of pc-Jun, Jun B, Jun D and Fra-2 was
higher in invasive cancer compared to benign tumors. In metastases, c-Fos and Fos
B expression was significantly lower than in the respective primary ovarian
carcinomas. The invasive and proliferative potential of the cells was not
associated with AP-1 protein expression. These results suggest that AP-1 proteins
are differentially expressed in benign ovarian tumors, tumors with low malignant 
potential and epithelial ovarian carcinomas and metastases. No correlation with
the proliferative and invasive potential of ovarian cancer cell lines could be
found.

PMID: 19513521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Apr 7;106(14):5831-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900912106. Epub 2009 Mar 25.

Gene deregulation and spatial genome reorganization near breakpoints prior to
formation of translocations in anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Mathas S(1), Kreher S, Meaburn KJ, Jöhrens K, Lamprecht B, Assaf C, Sterry W,
Kadin ME, Daibata M, Joos S, Hummel M, Stein H, Janz M, Anagnostopoulos I,
Schrock E, Misteli T, Dörken B.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle-Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin, Germany. stephan.mathas@charite.de

Although the identification and characterization of translocations have rapidly
increased, little is known about the mechanisms of how translocations occur in
vivo. We used anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) with and without the
characteristic t(2;5)(p23;q35) translocation to study the mechanisms of formation
of translocations and of ALCL transformation. We report deregulation of several
genes located near the ALCL translocation breakpoint, regardless of whether the
tumor contains the t(2;5). The affected genes include the oncogenic transcription
factor Fra2 (located on 2p23), the HLH protein Id2 (2p25), and the oncogenic
tyrosine kinase CSF1-receptor (5q33.1). Their up-regulation promotes cell
survival and repression of T cell-specific gene expression programs that are
characteristic for ALCL. The deregulated genes are in spatial proximity within
the nuclear space of t(2;5)-negative ALCL cells, facilitating their translocation
on induction of double-strand breaks. These data suggest that deregulation of
breakpoint-proximal genes occurs before the formation of translocations, and that
aberrant transcriptional activity of genomic regions is linked to their
propensity to undergo chromosomal translocations. Also, our data demonstrate that
deregulation of breakpoint-proximal genes has a key role in ALCL.

PMCID: PMC2667034
PMID: 19321746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2009 Feb;2(2):175-84. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-08-0104. Epub 2009 Jan 27.

Identification of modulated genes by three classes of chemopreventive agents at
preneoplastic stages in a p53-null mouse mammary tumor model.

Abba MC(1), Hu Y, Levy CC, Gaddis S, Kittrell FS, Hill J, Bissonnette RP, Brown
PH, Medina D, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Genetically engineered mouse cancer models are among the most useful tools for
testing the in vivo effectiveness of the various chemopreventive approaches. The 
p53-null mouse model of mammary carcinogenesis was previously characterized by us
at the cellular, molecular, and pathologic levels. In a companion article, Medina
et al. analyzed the efficacy of bexarotene, gefitinib, and celecoxib as
chemopreventive agents in the same model. Here we report the global gene
expression effects on mammary epithelium of such compounds, analyzing the data in
light of their effectiveness as chemopreventive agents. SAGE was used to profile 
the transcriptome of p53-null mammary epithelium obtained from mice treated with 
each compound versus controls. This information was also compared with SAGE data 
from p53-null mouse mammary tumors. Gene expression changes induced by the
chemopreventive treatments revealed a common core of 87 affected genes across
treatments (P < 0.05). The effective compounds, bexarotene and gefitinib, may
exert their chemopreventive activity, at least in part, by affecting a set of 34 
genes related to specific cellular pathways. The gene expression signature
revealed various genes previously described to be associated with breast cancer, 
such as the activator protein-1 complex member Fos-like antigen 2 (Fosl2), early 
growth response 1 (Egr1), gelsolin (Gsn), and tumor protein translationally
controlled 1 (Tpt1), among others. The concerted modulation of many of these
transcripts before malignant transformation seems to be conducive to
predominantly decrease cell proliferation. This study has revealed candidate key 
pathways that can be experimentally tested in the same model system and may
constitute novel targets for future translational research.

PMCID: PMC3023963
PMID: 19174580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Br J Cancer. 2008 Oct 21;99(8):1269-75. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604650.

C-Fos expression is a molecular predictor of progression and survival in
epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

Mahner S(1), Baasch C, Schwarz J, Hein S, Wölber L, Jänicke F, Milde-Langosch K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Gynecologic Oncology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.
s.mahner@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Members of the Fos protein family dimerise with Jun proteins to form the AP-1
transcription factor complex. They have a central function in proliferation and
differentiation of normal tissue as well as in oncogenic transformation and
tumour progression. We analysed the expression of c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2 to
investigate the function of Fos transcription factors in ovarian cancer. A total 
of 101 patients were included in the study. Expression of Fos proteins was
determined by western blot analysis, quantified by densitometry and verified by
immunohistochemistry. Reduced c-Fos expression was independently associated with 
unfavourable progression-free survival (20.6, 31.6 and 51.2 months for patients
with low, moderate and high c-Fos expression; P=0.003) as well as overall
survival (23.8, 46.0 and 55.5 months for low, moderate and high c-Fos levels;
P=0.003). No correlations were observed for FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2. We conclude
that loss of c-Fos expression is associated with tumour progression in ovarian
carcinoma and that c-Fos may be a prognostic factor. These results are in
contrast to the classic concept of c-Fos as an oncogene, but are supported by the
recently discovered tumour-suppressing and proapoptotic function of c-Fos in
various cancer types.

PMCID: PMC2570515
PMID: 18854825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neuroendocrinology. 2008;88(4):276-86. doi: 10.1159/000150977. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Estrogen reduces aldosterone, upregulates adrenal angiotensin II AT2 receptors
and normalizes adrenomedullary Fra-2 in ovariectomized rats.

Macova M(1), Armando I, Zhou J, Baiardi G, Tyurmin D, Larrayoz-Roldan IM,
Saavedra JM.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Pharmacology, Division of Intramural Research Programs, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health
and Human Services, Bethesda, Md, USA.

We studied the effect of ovariectomy and estrogen replacement on expression of
adrenal angiotensin II AT1 and AT2 receptors, aldosterone content, catecholamine 
synthesis, and the transcription factor Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2).
Ovariectomy increased AT1 receptor expression in the adrenal zona glomerulosa and
medulla, and decreased adrenomedullary catecholamine content and Fra-2 expression
when compared to intact female rats. In the zona glomerulosa, estrogen
replacement normalized AT1 receptor expression, decreased AT1B receptor mRNA, and
increased AT2 receptor expression and mRNA. Estrogen treatment decreased adrenal 
aldosterone content. In the adrenal medulla, the effects of estrogen replacement 
were: normalized AT1 receptor expression, increased AT2 receptor expression, AT2 
receptor mRNA, and tyrosine hydroxylase mRNA, and normalized Fra-2 expression and
catecholamine content. We demonstrate that the constitutive adrenal expression of
AT1 receptors, catecholamine synthesis and Fra-2 expression are partially under
the control of reproductive hormones. Our results suggest that estrogen treatment
decreases aldosterone production through AT1 receptor downregulation and AT2
receptor upregulation. AT2 receptor upregulation and modulation of Fra-2
expression may participate in the estrogen-dependent normalization of
adrenomedullary catecholamine synthesis in ovariectomized rats. The AT2 receptor 
upregulation and the decrease in AT1 receptor function and in the production of
the fluid-retentive, pro-inflammatory hormone aldosterone partially explain the
protective effects of estrogen therapy.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2677380
PMID: 18679017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Oct;327(1):187-95. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.141051. Epub 
2008 Jun 30.

Alterations in fos-related antigen 2 and sigma1 receptor gene and protein
expression are associated with the development of cocaine-induced behavioral
sensitization: time course and regional distribution studies.

Liu Y(1), Matsumoto RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Repeated exposure to cocaine results in neuroadaptations that can alter the way
the brain responds to subsequent stimuli. Earlier studies demonstrated that acute
administration of cocaine up-regulates the immediate-early gene fos-related
antigen 2 (fra-2) followed by a later up-regulation of sigma(1) receptor gene and
protein levels in brain regions involved in addiction and reward. To test whether
such alterations could have long-term consequences on behavior, the present study
was undertaken. Using a cocaine-induced behavioral sensitization model coupled
with gene and protein expression studies in mice, the results show that cocaine
induces the expression of fra-2, which leads to a progressive increase in
sigma(1) receptor gene and protein expression over a period of days. This
progressive increase in sigma(1) expression corresponds to the steady increase in
the locomotor response to repeated cocaine administration in mice. The
cocaine-induced changes in fra-2 and sigma(1) receptor gene and protein
expression occur in brain regions that subserve drug abuse, such as the cortex,
striatum, and hippocampus, but not the cerebellum. Moreover, the prototypic
sigma(1) receptor antagonist 1-[2-(3,4-dichloropheny)ethyl]-4-methylpiperazine
(BD1063) significantly attenuates both the molecular adaptations and behavioral
sensitization induced by cocaine. These data suggest that repeated exposure to
cocaine elicits alterations in fra-2 and sigma(1) receptor-mediated mechanisms,
which ultimately manifest as altered behavioral responses to cocaine.

PMID: 18591217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Oct;327(1):58-67. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.139501. Epub
2008 Jun 26.

Fispemifene
[Z-2-{2-[4-(4-chloro-1,2-diphenylbut-1-enyl)-phenoxy]ethoxy}-ethanol], a novel
selective estrogen receptor modulator, attenuates glandular inflammation in an
animal model of chronic nonbacterial prostatitis.

Yatkin E(1), Bernoulli J, Lammintausta R, Santti R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Turku, Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Cell Biology and 
Anatomy, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520, Turku, Finland. emrah.yatkin@utu.fi

The anti-inflammatory and antiestrogenic action of fispemifene
[Z-2-{2-[4-(4-chloro-1,2-diphenylbut-1-enyl)phenoxy]ethoxy}-ethanol], a novel
selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), was tested on the Noble rat model
of chronic nonbacterial prostatic inflammation with cellular composition and
inflammation patterns similar to those described in human prostatitis.
Inflammation was assessed by counting perivascular and stromal infiltrates and
the number of inflamed acini. Furthermore, the aggressiveness of inflammation was
assessed on the basis of the relation of lymphocytes to the acinar epithelium.
The immunohistochemical expression of progesterone receptor (PR) and Fos-related 
antigen 2 (Fra2), prolactin concentration in serum, and the weights of the
seminal vesicles and pituitary glands were used as endpoints of estrogen action. 
Fispemifene significantly attenuated the glandular form of inflammation induced
in the dorsolateral prostatic lobes (DLP) in the hormonal milieu of the decreased
androgen/estrogen ratio. The anti-inflammatory action was seen in the decreased
number of acini containing intraluminal neutrophils. As signs of antiestrogenic
action, fispemifene blocked estrogen-induced expression of PR and Fra2 in the
acinar epithelium of the DLP, and it decreased prolactin concentration in serum
and the relative weights of the seminal vesicles and pituitary glands. Because
fispemifene exhibited both antiestrogenic and anti-inflammatory action in the
prostate, this experimental study suggests that SERMs could be considered as a
new therapeutic option in the treatment and prevention of prostatic inflammation.

PMID: 18583549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nature. 2008 Jul 10;454(7201):221-5. doi: 10.1038/nature07019. Epub 2008 Jun 11.

Osteoclast size is controlled by Fra-2 through LIF/LIF-receptor signalling and
hypoxia.

Bozec A(1), Bakiri L, Hoebertz A, Eferl R, Schilling AF, Komnenovic V, Scheuch H,
Priemel M, Stewart CL, Amling M, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (I.M.P.), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 7, A-1030
Vienna, Austria.

Osteoclasts are multinucleated haematopoietic cells that resorb bone. Increased
osteoclast activity causes osteoporosis, a disorder resulting in a low bone mass 
and a high risk of fractures. Increased osteoclast size and numbers are also a
hallmark of other disorders, such as Paget's disease and multiple myeloma. The
protein c-Fos, a component of the AP-1 transcription factor complex, is essential
for osteoclast differentiation. Here we show that the Fos-related protein Fra-2
controls osteoclast survival and size. The bones of Fra-2-deficient newborn mice 
have giant osteoclasts, and signalling through leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) 
and its receptor is impaired. Similarly, newborn animals lacking LIF have giant
osteoclasts, and we show that LIF is a direct transcriptional target of Fra-2 and
c-Jun. Moreover, bones deficient in Fra-2 and LIF are hypoxic and express
increased levels of hypoxia-induced factor 1alpha (HIF1alpha) and Bcl-2.
Overexpression of Bcl-2 is sufficient to induce giant osteoclasts in vivo,
whereas Fra-2 and LIF affect HIF1alpha through transcriptional modulation of the 
HIF prolyl hydroxylase PHD2. This pathway is operative in the placenta, because
specific inactivation of Fra-2 in the embryo alone does not cause hypoxia or the 
giant osteoclast phenotype. Thus placenta-induced hypoxia during embryogenesis
leads to the formation of giant osteoclasts in young pups. These findings offer
potential targets for the treatment of syndromes associated with increased
osteoclastogenesis.

PMID: 18548006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Exp Hematol. 2008 Jul;36(7):786-98. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 
Apr 8.

Socs3 maintains the specificity of biological responses to cytokine signals
during granulocyte and macrophage differentiation.

Croker BA(1), Mielke LA, Wormald S, Metcalf D, Kiu H, Alexander WS, Hilton DJ,
Roberts AW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Haematology Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) play key
roles in regulating emergency granulopoiesis and inflammation, and are both
negatively regulated by the inducible intracellular protein suppressor of
cytokine signaling-3 (Socs3). Mice with Socs3 deleted specifically in
hematopoietic cells succumb to severe neutrophil and macrophage-driven
inflammation by 1 year of age, and responses to G-CSF are grossly exacerbated. In
order to determine which elements of cellular responses to cytokines require
Socs3, we have examined the differentiative and proliferative capacity of
hematopoietic progenitor cells stimulated by G-CSF and IL-6. The differentiation 
of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is skewed toward macrophage production in
response to G-CSF or IL-6, whereas wild-type progenitor cells produce mainly
neutrophils. The proliferative capacity of Socs3-deficient progenitor cells is
greatly enhanced in response to G-CSF at all concentrations, but only at low
concentrations for IL-6. Strikingly, synergistic responses to costimulation with 
stem cell factor and IL-6 (but not G-CSF) are lost at higher concentrations in
Socs3-deficient progenitor cells. Cytokine-induced expression of transcriptional 
regulators including cebpb, Ets2, Bcl3, c-Myc, Jun, and Fosl2 are differentially 
regulated in Socs3-deficient cells. The tight regulation by Socs3 of signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 phosphorylation and gene
transcription after cytokine receptor ligation significantly influences the fate 
of myeloid progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2556307
PMID: 18400361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cytokine. 2008 May;42(2):205-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2008.02.001. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

Cigarette smoke extract induced cytokine and chemokine gene expression changes in
COPD macrophages.

Kent L(1), Smyth L, Clayton C, Scott L, Cook T, Stephens R, Fox S, Hext P, Farrow
S, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Education and Research Centre, South Manchester University Hospitals
Trust/University of Manchester, Wythenshawe Hospital, Southmoor Road, Manchester 
M23 9LT, UK. lauren_m_kent@yahoo.co.uk

Macrophages are key inflammatory cells in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The transcriptional regulation of inflammatory signalling pathways by
cigarette smoke (CS) in COPD macrophages is not well understood. We have studied 
the effects of acute CS exposure on COPD macrophage cytokine, chemokine and
signal transduction gene expression profiles. Monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs)
from whole blood from patients with COPD (n=6) were stimulated with 1%, 10% and
25% CS extract (CSE) for 6h for microarray and quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (Q-PCR) analysis. We observed a CSE dose dependant increase in the
numbers of significantly regulated genes; 24, 340 and 627 genes at 1%, 10% and
25% CSE, respectively. IL-8 mRNA levels were up-regulated by 10% CSE (2.25-fold
increase, 95% CI 1.28-4.00). In contrast a range of other cytokines and
chemokines were down-regulated at both 10% and 25% CSE, including IL-1beta, -6,
-10 and -18, chemokine ligands CCL-2, -3, -4, -5, -8, -15, -20 and CXCL-1, -2 and
-10. Q-PCR and microarray data were highly correlated (r=0.95, p=0.0001).
NF-kappaB component p50 and IkappaBalpha expression were suppressed by CSE, while
there was up-regulation of the AP-1 components c-Jun, FOSL1 and FOSL2. Acute CSE 
exposure decreased macrophage inflammatory gene expression, with the exception of
increased IL-8. There was diverse regulation of key inflammatory signal pathway
genes. The effects of acute CS exposure appear to encompass both up-regulation of
chemotaxis mechanisms through IL-8, but also down-regulation of innate immunity.

PMID: 18358739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dig Dis Sci. 2008 Oct;53(10):2680-6. doi: 10.1007/s10620-008-0218-x. Epub 2008
Mar 5.

c-Jun, Fra-2, and ATF-2 immunoreactivity in the jejunal tissues of the healthy
rat.

Keklikoglu N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Histology and Embryology, Istanbul
University, Capa, Istanbul, Turkey. nkeklik@istanbul.edu.tr

The aim of this study was to compare the localization of some activator protein-1
(AP-1) proteins in healthy rat jejunum. For this purpose, the AP-1 members c-Jun,
Fra-2, and ATF-2 immunoreactivity (c-Jun-IR, Fra-2-IR, ATF-2-IR) in villus
epithelial cells (ECs), intravillous lamina propria cells (LPCs), crypt cells
(CCs), and smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were analyzed by immunohistochemical
methods. Among all the cell groups, the lowest positivity ratio was found in
c-Jun-IR and the highest positivity ratio was found in ATF-2-IR. For each group
of ECs, LPCs, CCs, and SMCs, c-Jun-IR, Fra-2-IR, and ATF-2-IR were compared and
statistically significant differences found. There were no significant
differences among the cell groups with respect to c-Jun-IR and Fra-2-IR, but
there was a statistically significant difference in ATF-2-IR. These findings
suggest that each member of AP-1 is expressed differently and that ATF-2 is more 
active than c-Jun and Fra-2 in physiological conditions in healthy rat jejunum.

PMID: 18320311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Mar 12;284(1-2):28-37. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2007.12.017. 
Epub 2008 Jan 8.

Activation of the cAMP pathway synergistically increases IL-1-induced IL-6 gene
expression in FRTL-5 thyroid cells: involvement of AP-1 transcription factors.

Szabo-Fresnais N(1), Blondeau JP, Pomérance M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 486, Faculté de Pharmacie, F-92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a multifunctional cytokine involved in autoimmune thyroid
diseases such as Hashimoto's thyroiditis and Graves' disease. IL-6 is produced by
infiltrating immune cells and by thyrocytes. In the latter cell type, secretion
of IL-6 is stimulated notably by interleukin-1 (IL-1), thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH) or forskolin (Fk), a cAMP elevating agent. We report here that Fk
and IL-1 synergistically enhance IL-6 mRNA expression in FRTL-5 thyroid cells by 
mechanisms involving the cAMP/PKA pathway, and both stabilization of the IL-6
mRNA and activation of the IL-6 promoter. Point mutations or deletions of the
main transcription factor binding sites in the IL-6 promoter indicated that the
synergistic effect was mainly mediated by the AP-1 site, and that the CRE site
contributed to this effect. The DNA binding activity of AP-1 transcription
factors and the expression of c-Fos and Fra-2 proteins, were all enhanced when
the cAMP and IL-1 signalling pathways were both stimulated. These findings
contribute to elucidating the synergistic mechanisms that regulate IL-6 secretion
by thyroid cells, and suggest that such mechanisms may be involved in the
development of thyroid autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 18280640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Carcinog. 2008 Jul;47(7):485-91.

Common and distinct mechanisms of different redox-active carcinogens involved in 
the transformation of mouse JB6P+ cells.

Yang S(1), Misner B, Chiu R, Meyskens FL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Irvine,
Orange, California 92868, USA.

We transformed JB6P+ cells with prolonged intermittent low-dose UVB radiation or 
prolonged exposure to low-dose H(2)O(2) or CdCl(2). Stable transformation was
confirmed by an anchorage-independence assay. The JB6P+ transformants formed more
colonies (approximately six folds) in soft agar as compared to their JB6P+ parent
cells and were associated with increased intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS) levels. Activating protein-1 (AP-1) is a family of transcription factors
that are rapidly activated by elevated intracellular ROS levels, and their
composition is important in the process of cellular transformation and/or tumor
progression. To investigate if carcinogenesis induced by distinct carcinogens was
via similar molecular mechanisms in these transformants, gel mobility shift and
immunoblot analyses were utilized to determine the distinct AP-1 compositions.
Compared to parent JB6P+ cells, the gain of JunB and Fra-1 in AP-1 DNA binding
complexes was markedly increased in all transformed cells, which might contribute
to a more proliferative phenotype, while loss of Fra-2 occurred in JB6P+/H(2)O(2)
and JB6P+/Cd cells. Differential AP-1 components in the transformants suggested
that their transformations might be mediated by distinct transcription signalings
with distinct AP-1 dimer compositions. However, all three transformants exhibited
increased activation of pathways involved in cell proliferation (ERK/Fra-1/AP-1
and JNK/c-jun/AP-1) and anti-apoptosis (Bcl-xl). The development of the JB6P+
transformants (JB6P+/UVB; JB6P+/H(2)O(2); JB6P+/Cd) provides a unique tool to
study the mechanisms that contribute to different redox-active carcinogens in a
single model.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4587534
PMID: 18092320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Oncogene. 2008 May 22;27(23):3221-32. Epub 2007 Dec 10.

Aberrant expression of Fra-2 promotes CCR4 expression and cell proliferation in
adult T-cell leukemia.

Nakayama T(1), Hieshima K, Arao T, Jin Z, Nagakubo D, Shirakawa AK, Yamada Y,
Fujii M, Oiso N, Kawada A, Nishio K, Yoshie O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kinki University School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) is a mature CD4+ T-cell malignancy etiologically
associated with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1). Primary ATL cells
frequently express CCR4 at high levels. Since HTLV-1 Tax does not induce CCR4
expression, transcription factor(s) constitutively active in ATL may be
responsible for its strong expression. We identified an activator protein-1
(AP-1) site in the CCR4 promoter as the major positive regulatory element in ATL 
cells. Among the AP-1 family members, Fra-2, JunB and JunD are highly expressed
in fresh primary ATL cells. Consistently, the Fra-2/JunB and Fra-2/JunD
heterodimers strongly activated the CCR4 promoter in Jurkat cells. Furthermore,
Fra-2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) or JunD siRNA, but not JunB siRNA,
effectively reduced CCR4 expression and cell growth in ATL cells. Conversely,
Fra-2 or JunD overexpression promoted cell growth in Jurkat cells. We identified 
49 genes, including c-Myb, BCL-6 and MDM2, which were downregulated by Fra-2
siRNA in ATL cells. c-Myb, BCL-6 and MDM2 were also downregulated by JunD siRNA. 
As Fra-2, these proto-oncogenes were highly expressed in primary ATL cells but
not in normal CD4+ T cells. Collectively, aberrantly expressed Fra-2 in
association with JunD may play a major role in CCR4 expression and oncogenesis in
ATL.

PMID: 18071306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neuroscience. 2007 Dec 5;150(2):478-86. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Restraint-induced fra-2 and c-fos expression in the rat forebrain: relationship
to stress duration.

Weinberg MS(1), Girotti M, Spencer RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado at Boulder, 345 UCB,
Muenzinger D244, Boulder, CO 80303, USA. marc.weinberg@gmail.com

The protein product of the fra-2 gene (Fra-2), a fos-family member, can compete
with Fos protein for participation in activating protein-1 (AP-1) transcription
factor complexes and each protein can contribute different transactivational
consequences to an AP-1 complex. To date, there is limited characterization of
fra-2 mRNA expression in the rat forebrain. We examined basal and
restraint-induced mRNA expression (in situ hybridization) of fra-2 in the rat
forebrain and compared its temporal-spatial pattern to c-fos. In contrast to the 
very low basal expression of c-fos, fra-2 basal expression was moderately high
throughout cortex and some subcortical structures, including prominent basal
expression in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN). Restraint-induced
fra-2 expression was quantified in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), lateral septum
(LS) and PVN. Maximal fra-2 gene induction in the PFC and LS was delayed (60 min)
after restraint onset with respect to c-fos (15 min), whereas in the PVN, fra-2
mRNA increased within 15 min of restraint. Additionally we compared c-fos and
fra-2 gene expression in rats given shorter or longer restraint durations, but
equal total time from stress onset to sample collection, to determine the extent 
to which the kinetics of gene induction matched that of a
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hormone response. Rats given 45 min recovery 
after 15 min restraint showed less c-fos expression in the PVN, less fra-2
expression in the prelimbic and infralimbic PFC, and no difference in the LS
compared with rats restrained for 60 min. Thus, the expression of both genes was 
sensitive to stressor duration, but this sensitivity varied with brain region.
Differential basal and stress-induced expression patterns of the fra-2 and c-fos 
genes are likely to have important functional consequences for AP-1 transcription
factor dependent regulation of neural plasticity.

PMCID: PMC2189738
PMID: 17936518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genesis. 2007 Jul;45(7):447-51.

Simultaneous generation of fra-2 conditional and fra-2 knock-out mice.

Eferl R(1), Zenz R, Theussl HC, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, Vienna, Austria.
robert.eferl@lbicr.lbg.ac.at

Loss of function mouse models comprise knock-out mice, where a gene is deleted in
the germline, and conditional knock-out mice with somatic deletion of a floxed
allele in defined tissues. Both types of mice are used for comprehensive studies 
of gene functions in vivo. Here, we describe a simple method for simultaneous
generation of mice with conditional or knock-out alleles for the transcription
factor fra-2 (Fos-related antigen 2) using a single embryonic stem (ES) cell
clone. ES cells with a floxed fra-2 allele were transiently transfected with a
Cre-recombinase expression plasmid and plated at low density. Most of the
resulting ES cell colonies consisted of a mixture of cells that have either
retained or lost the conditional allele. We demonstrate that these mixed ES cell 
clones can be directly used for generation of chimeras that give rise to
offspring with conditional or knock-out alleles simultaneously. This strategy
shortens the time and reduces the number of germline transmission events to
generate genetically modified mice.

PMID: 17607691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Feb;107(3):337-47. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Role of Fra-2 in breast cancer: influence on tumor cell invasion and motility.

Milde-Langosch K(1), Janke S, Wagner I, Schröder C, Streichert T, Bamberger AM,
Jänicke F, Löning T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Gynecology, University Clinics Hamburg-Eppendorf (UKE), Martinistr. 
52, Hamburg 20246, Germany. milde@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Fra-2 (Fos-related antigen 2) is a member of the Fos family of AP-1 transcription
factors which is often up-regulated in mammary carcinomas. Previous results
suggested that it might be involved in the regulation of breast cancer invasion
and metastasis. In order to analyze the role of Fra-2 in breast cancer cells, it 
was silenced in the highly invasive MDA-MB231 cells using RNA interference. On
the other hand, stable transfectants of the weakly invasive MCF7 cell line were
established in order to analyze the effects of Fra-2 overexpression. In both
approaches, cell proliferation was not or only weakly influenced by Fra-2. In
contrast, the invasive potential of the cells was increased, and a weaker effect 
on motility was observed. By cDNA microarray analysis of the MCF7 transfectants
followed by validation on a protein level, we identified several Fra-2 target
genes which might be involved in cell invasion and migration, i.e., ALCAM and
connexin 43. Additionally, mRNA expression levels of various genes which are
associated with a more malignant behavior of the tumors in vivo were up- or
downregulated, i.e., members of the MAGE family, S100P, TIMP2, IL24 etc. These
results show that Fra-2 overexpression is associated with a more aggressive tumor
phenotype and is probably involved in breast cancer progression in vivo.

PMID: 17393299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2007 Mar;86(3):505-10. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

Rotation and immediate-early gene expression in rats treated with the atypical D1
dopamine agonist SKF 83822.

Wirtshafter D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, M/C 285,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607-7137, USA. davew@uic.edu

Classical agonists of the dopamine D1 receptor activate both adenylyl cyclase and
phospholipase C (PLC) signaling pathways. As a result, the extent to which these 
two pathways are essentially involved in various effects produced by D1 receptor 
agonists is currently uncertain. In the present report we examined the effects of
SKF 83822, a dopamine D1 agonist which has been reported to activate adenylyl
cyclase, but not PLC, on behavior and immediate early gene (IEG) expression in
rats with unilateral 6-hydroxydopamine lesions. SKF 83822 (25-100 microg/kg)
induced dose dependent contralateral rotation in these subjects, and,
additionally, stimulated strong expression of the IEG products c-Fos, Fra2,
Zif/268 and Arc in the deinnervated striatum. All of these effects could be
antagonized by pretreatment with the selective D1 dopamine antagonist SCH 23390
(0.5 mg/kg). Although PLC may be involved in many effects mediated through
dopamine D1 receptors, these results suggest that direct activation of PLC is not
necessary for the induction of either rotation or IEG expression in dopamine
depleted rats.

PMCID: PMC1913484
PMID: 17306871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):948-62. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450
gene (CYP11A1) revisited: binding of GATA, cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate
response element-binding protein and activating protein (AP)-1 proteins to a
distal novel cluster of cis-regulatory elements potentiates AP-2 and
steroidogenic factor-1-dependent gene expression in the rodent placenta and
ovary.

Sher N(1), Yivgi-Ohana N, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

The first and key enzyme controlling the synthesis of steroid hormones is
cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc, CYP11A1). This study
sought to elucidate overlooked modes of regulation of P450scc transcription in
the rodent placenta and ovary. Transcription of P450scc requires two clusters of 
cis-regulatory elements: a proximal element (-40) known to bind either activating
protein 2 (AP-2) in the placenta, or steroidogenic factor 1 in the ovary, and a
distal region of the promoter (-475/-447) necessary for potentiation of the
AP-2/steroidogenic factor 1-dependent activity up to 7-fold. In primary cultures 
of mouse trophoblast giant cells and rat ovarian granulosa cells, binding of
trans-factors to the distal regulatory sequences generated transcriptional
activity in a tissue-specific pattern: in the placenta, cAMP response element
(CRE)-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) and GATA-2 binding generates promoter activity
in a cAMP-independent manner, whereas in ovarian cells, CREB-1 and GATA-4 are
required for FSH responsiveness. However, as ovarian follicles advance toward
ovulation, elevated Fra-2 expression replaces CREB-1 function by binding the same
CRE(1/2) motif. Our findings suggest that upon onset of follicular recruitment,
CREB-1 mediates FSH/cAMP signaling, which switches to cAMP-independent expression
of P450scc in luteinizing granulosa cells expressing Fra-2. In the placenta, the 
indispensable role of CREB-1 was demonstrated by use of dominant-negative CREB-1 
mutant, but neither cAMP nor Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB-1 is required for
P450scc transcription. These observations suggest that placental regulation of
P450scc expression is subjected to alternative signaling pathway(s) yet to be
found.

PMID: 17213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Cell Physiol. 2007 Feb;210(2):538-48.

Mitogen activated protein kinase-dependent activation of c-Jun and c-Fos is
required for neuronal differentiation but not for growth and stress response in
PC12 cells.

Eriksson M(1), Taskinen M, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, HUCH, Finland.

MAPK-dependent activation of AP-1 protein c-Jun is involved in PC12 cell
differentiation and apoptosis. However, the role of other AP-1 proteins and their
connection to MAPKs during growth, differentiation and apoptosis has remained
elusive. Here we studied the activation of AP-1 proteins in response to ERK, JNK,
and p38 signaling upon NGF, EGF and anisomycin exposures. All treatments caused
different kinetics and strength of MAPK and AP-1 activities. NGF induced
persistent ERK and AP-1 activities, whereas upon EGF and anisomycin exposures,
their activities were only weakly and transiently induced. The sustained AP-1
activity was associated with concomitant c-Fos and c-Jun expression and
phoshorylation, which were JNK and ERK dependent. While inhibition of the ERK,
JNK, and p38 activities partially prevented AP-1 activity and suppressed
differentiation, none of them was required for anisomycin-induced apoptosis. The 
importance of c-Fos and c-Jun as mediators of differentiation was demonstrated by
the findings that the corresponding siRNAs suppressed NGF-induced neurite
outgrowth. However, the capacity of c-Fos to promote differentiation required
cooperation with Jun proteins. In contrast, Fra-2 expression was not required for
the differentiation response. Together, the results show that sustained c-Jun and
c-Fos activities mediate MAPK signaling and are essential for differentiation of 
PC12 cells.

PMID: 17111371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2006;27(4):345-52.

Jun and Fos family protein expression in human breast cancer: correlation of
protein expression and clinicopathological parameters.

Langer S(1), Singer CF, Hudelist G, Dampier B, Kaserer K, Vinatzer U, Pehamberger
H, Zielinski C, Kubista E, Schreibner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Senology, Medical
University of Vienna, Austria.

OBJECTIVES: The activator protein-1 (AP-1) is a dimeric transcription factor
formed by members of the Jun and Fos protein family. AP-1 plays a role in a
variety of physiological functions including cell proliferation and
differentiation, although both c-Jun and c-Fos have also been implicated in
oncogenic transformation and tumor progression. To further elucidate the role of 
AP-1 in breast cancer, we have investigated the expression of the AP-1 proteins
c-Jun, JunB, JunD, phosphorylated c-Jun, c-Fos, Fral, Fra2 and the tumor
supressor protein p53.
METHODS: Protein expression was evaluated on a breast cancer tissue microarray
with 58 lymph node positive or negative breast cancer specimens, 29 corresponding
lymph node metastases, and 11 tissue samples from surrounding tumor-free tissue, 
each cored as triplicate. Jun and Fos protein family expression was evaluated by 
immunohistochemistry and was correlated with clinicopathological parameters.
RESULTS: High expression levels were observed for c-Jun, JunD, c-Fos and Fra2,
whereas JunB and Fral exhibited lower staining. c-Jun protein expression was
correlated to Fral staining (p = 0.007, Kendall's Tau) and Fral was further
associated with c-Fos (p < 0.001), JunD (p = 0.001) and Fra2 (p = 0.011)
expression. JunD expression correlated with c-Fos (p < 0.001), JunB (p = 0.035)
and c-Jun (p = 0.05). Activated c-Jun correlated with c-Fos expression (p =
0.041). JunB was negatively correlated to tumor stage, (p = 0.093, corr coeff. = 
-0.293, Spearman's correlation) but was significantly increased in nodal negative
tumors (p = 0.004, Mann Whitney test). In addition, increased Fral expression
showed a trend towards an increased overall survival (p = 0.077, RR = 0.534, Cox 
regression).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest an important role for JunB and Fral in the
biological behavior of malignant breast tumors.

PMID: 17009623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Med Microbiol. 2006 Aug;55(Pt 8):1009-15.

Gene-expression profiles in gastric epithelial cells stimulated with spiral and
coccoid Helicobacter pylori.

Liu ZF(1), Chen CY, Tang W, Zhang JY, Gong YQ, Jia JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Experimental Teratology, Ministry of Education, Shandong
University, 44 WenhuaXi Road, Jinan, China.

Human gastric epithelial immortalized GES-1 cells were infected with spiral and
coccoid Helicobacter pylori. Scanning electron microscopy was used to determine
the ability of the two forms of H. pylori to adhere to GES-1 cells. GES-1 cell
apoptosis induced by coccoid and spiral H. pylori was analysed using flow
cytometry. A cDNA microarray for 22,000 human genes was used to identify the
gene-expression differences in GES-1 cells infected with the two forms of H.
pylori, and the gene expression identified by the cDNA microarray was confirmed
by RT-PCR. Scanning electron microscope observation showed that both coccoid and 
spiral bacteria can adhere to GES-1 cells. After 4 h infection, apoptosis
induction was 27.4% for spiral-form infection and 10.2% for coccoid-form
infection. Of 268 differentially expressed genes identified by cDNA microarray,
166 showed higher expression with the spiral H. pylori infection than with the
coccoid H. pylori infection. To the best of the authors' knowledge, this is the
first report that GES-1 cells infected with spiral H. pylori have higher
expression of cxcl10, ccl11, ccl5, groalpha, TLR5, ATF3, fos, fosl2, gadd45a and 
myc. The cells infected with coccoid H. pylori had higher expression of survivin.
The global profile of gene expression in GES-1 cells infected with coccoid and
spiral H. pylori is described for the first time.

PMID: 16849720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2006 Jul-Aug;26(4-6):845-56. Epub 2006 May 12.

Stress triggered changes in gene expression in adrenal medulla: transcriptional
responses to acute and chronic stress.

Sabban EL(1), Liu X, Serova L, Gueorguiev V, Kvetnansky R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, New York 10595, USA. sabban@nymc.edu

1. Stress elicits activation of several transcription factors involved in the
regulation of catecholamine biosynthetic enzyme gene expression depending on its 
duration or repetition. However, the dynamic of the conversion of transient
transcriptional activation with acute stress to sustained changes in
transcription in response to repeated exposure to stress in adrenomedullary
catecholaminergic systems is not clear. 2. Here, we analyzed changes in levels of
phospho-CREB (P-CREB), phospho-ERK1/2 (P-ERK1/2) and Fra-2 by Western Blot
analysis in adrenal medulla of Sprague Dawley male rats exposed to single or
repeated immobilization stress (IMO). For single stress, rats were immobilized
for 5 min, 30 min, or 2 h and sacrificed immediately afterwards. In the repeated 
stress conditions, animals were immobilized for 2 h daily on each consecutive day
prior to the final day (day 2 for 2x IMO, day 6 for 6x IMO) in which the rats
were immobilized for a session lasting 5 min, 30 min or 2 h. There were two
control groups, an absolute control (AC) not exposed to stress, and a handled
control (HC) gently handled daily for 6 days. 3. Phosphorylation of CREB was
rapid and elevated at the earliest time examined, even with single stress.
However, with a second daily episode of stress the increase in P-CREB was
observed for at least the entire duration of the stress. In contrast,
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was only significant after brief exposure to a single
IMO. The elevation of Fra-2 protein level was slower, but was significant after 2
h of a single IMO. With repeated IMO, there were marked elevations of Fra-2
throughout the 2 h IMO, which were especially pronounced at the end of the
immobilization. 4. The transient nature of the phosphorylation of CREB may be
responsible for the short-lived induction of transcription of catecholamine
biosynthetic enzymes after brief exposure to a single immobilization stress. The 
sustained phosphorylation of CREB throughout the repeated stress coupled with
induction of Fra-2 may mediate the longer lasting responses to repeated stress.

PMID: 16691439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Eur J Orthod. 2006 Feb;28(1):20-6. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Fos- and Jun-related transcription factors are involved in the signal
transduction pathway of mechanical loading in condylar chondrocytes.

Papachristou D(1), Pirttiniemi P, Kantomaa T, Agnantis N, Basdra EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina, Greece.

The chondrocytes of the articular condylar cartilage proliferate, hypertrophy and
ultimately undergo apoptosis (programmed cell death), being replaced by
osteoblasts. Converging results consolidate activator protein-1 (AP-1)
transcription factor as the pivotal downstream effector in the early response of 
stress-sensitive cells to mechanical loading, and the Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB and JunD
members of the AP-1 transcription factor family, as mediators in bone remodelling
and apoptotic phenomena. The aim of the present study was to examine the
involvement of the Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB and JunD proteins in the biochemical
response of functionally loaded mandibular condylar cartilage, and the subsequent
initiation of cartilage maturation and apoptotic phenomena. Thirty, female,
14-day-old Wistar rats were assigned to two groups: one group was fed a soft diet
and the other a hard diet. At day 21 after weaning, experimental animals from
both groups were killed at 6, 12 and 48 hours and their condyles harvested. The
condylar cartilage of both groups was immunostained using specific antibodies
against Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB and JunD. Statistical analysis of the data revealed
over-expression of Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB and JunD proteins in all stages of
differentiation of chondrocytes derived from the mandibular condylar cartilage of
animals fed on a hard diet. Moreover, the involvement of these proteins
significantly increased with time in both groups. Since the aforementioned
proteins play key roles in remodelling phenomena of bone and cartilage tissue,
influencing pivotal cellular functions such as maturation, differentiation and
apoptosis, the results of the present study suggest that mandibular condylar
chondrocytes sense functional loading changes and respond by induction of
proteins associated with biological phenomena that ultimately influence the
growth of the condylar cartilage.

PMID: 16373449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38544-55. Epub 2005 Sep 2.

A novel role for GADD45beta as a mediator of MMP-13 gene expression during
chondrocyte terminal differentiation.

Ijiri K(1), Zerbini LF, Peng H, Correa RG, Lu B, Walsh N, Zhao Y, Taniguchi N,
Huang XL, Otu H, Wang H, Wang JF, Komiya S, Ducy P, Rahman MU, Flavell RA,
Gravallese EM, Oettgen P, Libermann TA, Goldring MB.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, New England Baptist Bone and Joint
Institute, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible 45beta (GADD45beta) gene product has
been implicated in the stress response, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis. Here we
demonstrated the unexpected expression of GADD45beta in the embryonic growth
plate and uncovered its novel role as an essential mediator of matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) expression during terminal chondrocyte
differentiation. We identified GADD45beta as a prominent early response gene
induced by bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) through a Smad1/Runx2-dependent
pathway. Because this pathway is involved in skeletal development, we examined
mouse embryonic growth plates, and we observed expression of Gadd45beta mRNA
coincident with Runx2 protein in pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes, whereas
GADD45beta protein was localized prominently in the nucleus in late stage
hypertrophic chondrocytes where Mmp-13 mRNA was expressed. In Gadd45beta(-/-)
mouse embryos, defective mineralization and decreased bone growth accompanied
deficient Mmp-13 and Col10a1 gene expression in the hypertrophic zone.
Transduction of small interfering RNA-GADD45beta in epiphyseal chondrocytes in
vitro blocked terminal differentiation and the associated expression of Mmp-13
and Col10a1 mRNA in vitro. Finally, GADD45beta stimulated MMP-13 promoter
activity in chondrocytes through the JNK-mediated phosphorylation of JunD,
partnered with Fra2, in synergy with Runx2. These observations indicated that
GADD45beta plays an essential role during chondrocyte terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3937966
PMID: 16144844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Int J Exp Pathol. 2005 Aug;86(4):205-12.

Overexpression of Fos-related antigen-1 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Mangone FR(1), Brentani MM, Nonogaki S, Begnami MD, Campos AH, Walder F, Carvalho
MB, Soares FA, Torloni H, Kowalski LP, Federico MH.

Author information: 
(1)Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, Departamento de
Radiologia, Disciplina de Oncologia, 01246-903 São Paulo, Brazil.

The activating protein-1 (AP-1) family of transcription factors has been
implicated in the control of proliferation and differentiation of keratinocytes, 
but its role in malignant transformation is not clear. The aim of this study is
to assess the pattern of mRNA expression of jun-fos AP-1 family members in 45
samples of head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and matched adjacent
mucosa by means of Northern blot analysis. Transcripts of all family members were
identified, except for JunB that was detected only by means of reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. Neither c-Fos nor JunD or FosB mRNA
differed between tumours and normal tissues. We observed a strong Fos-related
antigen-1 (Fra-1) and Fra-2 expression, but only Fra-1 mRNA densitometric values 
were higher in tumour, compared to normal adjacent mucosa (t-test, P = 0.006). A 
direct relationship between the positive expression of Fra-1 mRNA, above tumour
median, was associated with the presence of compromised lymph nodes (Fischer
exact test, P = 0.006). In addition, Fra-1 protein staining was assessed in a
collection of 180 tumours and 29 histologically normal samples adjacent to
tumours in a tissue array. Weak reactivity, restricted to the basal cell layer,
was detected in 79% of tumour adjacent normal tissues, opposed to the intense
reactivity of cancer tissues. In the subgroup of oral cancers, we have observed a
shift in Fra-1 immunoreactivity, as long as the number of patients in each
category, cytoplasmic or nuclear/cytoplasmic staining, was analysed (Fischer
exact test, P = 0.0005). Thus, Fra-1 gene induction and accumulation of Fra-1
protein may contribute to the neoplastic phenotype in HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC2517431
PMID: 16045542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Exp Dermatol. 2005 Jul;14(7):519-27.

Epidermal growth factor (EGF)-mediated DNA-binding activity of AP-1 is attenuated
in senescent human epidermal keratinocytes.

Shi B(1), Isseroff RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis School of Medicine, 
Davis, CA, USA.

The proliferative responses of cells to mitogens decrease during aging, and this 
may result from age-related defects in signal transduction in response to
mitogens. In this study, we have investigated the age-related alteration of
responses to epidermal growth factor (EGF) in cultured human keratinocytes that
were senesced in vitro by repeated passage. The stimulation with EGF increased
the DNA-binding activity of activator protein 1 (AP-1), an important
transcription factor for cell proliferation, in young keratinocytes, whereas the 
binding activity showed little or slight change in the senescent cells. The
induced DNA-binding activity of AP-1 in young cells was inhibited by PD 98059, an
inhibitor of MEK, and partially inhibited by GF 109203X, an inhibitor of protein 
kinase C. Western blot analysis demonstrated that EGF induced dramatic increase
in the phosphorylation of EGF receptor (EGFR) and extracellular signal-regulated 
kinases (ERK) in young cells, while this phosphorylation was much less profound
in senescent cells. Finally, the application of EGF to young cells resulted in
increased phosphorylation of Fra-2, a Fos protein component of the Jun/Fos
heterodimer AP-1 complex. This EGF-induced Fra-2 phosphorylation was attenuated
in senescent cells. Taken together, our study suggests that the signal
transduction mediated by EGF/ERK pathway is altered in senescent human
keratinocytes, and this change may be attributed, in part, to the decreased AP-1 
transcription activity observed in senescent keratinocytes.

PMID: 15946240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gene Expr. 2005;12(2):61-7.

The transcriptional response to hypoxic insult controlled by FRA-2.

Butler TL(1), Pennypacker KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

FRA-2 is involved in cellular differentiation and is also upregulated in response
to ischemic injury to the brain. To shed light on the function of this
transcription factor, a novel microarray analysis was utilized to identify
FRA-2-dependent gene expression increased in the hypoxic response. Genes were
identified that were upregulated by exposure of neuronally differentiated PC12
cells to hypoxia. Using a dominant negative construct to block FRA-2, a second
subset of genes that were FRA-2 dependent was found. Cross comparison then
allowed isolation of a list of genes that were induced in response to hypoxia in 
a FRA-2-dependent manner. These data suggest that FRA-2 is involved in the
transcriptional control of neuroprotective genes and in the switch from aerobic
to anaerobic metabolism.

PMID: 15892448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 Aug;314(2):770-9. Epub 2005 May 5.

Cocaine up-regulates Fra-2 and sigma-1 receptor gene and protein expression in
brain regions involved in addiction and reward.

Liu Y(1), Chen GD, Lerner MR, Brackett DJ, Matsumoto RR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Mississippi, Department of Pharmacology, 303 Faser Hall,
University, MS 38677, USA.

Sigma receptors have recently been implicated in the actions of cocaine, and
antagonists of these receptors prevent many acute and subchronic cocaine effects.
A previous study revealed that the immediate early gene fra-2 is up-regulated
after cocaine administration, and this effect is prevented by the sigma-1
receptor antagonist BD1063 [1-[2-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)ethyl]-4-methylpiperazine]. 
In the present study, the effects of cocaine and BD1063 on the expression of six 
fos and jun genes were evaluated in mouse brains using cDNA microarrays. Several 
of these genes were altered by cocaine, but only the alteration in fra-2 was
prevented by BD1063. The time courses of fra-2 and sigma-1 receptor gene and
protein expression in different brain regions were also determined. Cocaine
up-regulated fra-2, which was followed by a later up-regulation of sigma-1
receptors. The cocaine-induced up-regulation of fra-2 and sigma-1 receptor genes 
and proteins were detected in whole brain, striatum, and cortex, but not in
cerebellum. All of these cocaine-induced effects were prevented by BD1063. The
interaction between cocaine, fra-2, and sigma-1 receptors involves brain regions 
that are established components of the neural circuit for reward, suggesting that
they may contribute to the enduring changes that underlie the cellular basis of
drug abuse.

PMID: 15879001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neuropharmacology. 2005 Apr;48(5):673-84.

Effect of acute and chronic psychostimulant drugs on redox status, AP-1
activation and pro-enkephalin mRNA in the human astrocyte-like U373 MG cells.

Malaplate-Armand C(1), Becuwe P, Ferrari L, Masson C, Dauça M, Visvikis S,
Lambert H, Batt AM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U525, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Henri Poincaré-Nancy I, France. 
malarmand@free.fr

In order to approach the astroglial implication of addictive and neurotoxic
processes associated with psychostimulant drug abuse, the effects of amphetamine 
or cocaine (1-100 microM) on redox status, AP-1 transcription factor and
pro-enkephalin, an AP-1 target gene, were investigated in the human
astrocyte-like U373 MG cells. We demonstrated an early increase in the generation
of radical oxygen species and in the formation of 4-hydroxynonenal-adducts
reflecting the pro-oxidant action of both substances. After 1 h or 96 h of
treatment, Fos and Jun protein levels were altered and the DNA-binding activity
of AP-1 was increased in response to both substances. Using supershift
experiments, we observed that the composition of AP-1 dimer differed according to
the substance and the duration of treatment. FRA-2 protein represented the main
component of the chronic amphetamine- or cocaine-activated complexes, which
suggests its relevance in the long-term effects of psychostimulant drugs.
Concomitantly, the pro-enkephalin gene was differently regulated by either 6 h or
96 h of treatment. Because astrocytes interact extensively with the neurons in
the brain, our data led us to conclude that oxidation-regulated AP-1 target genes
may represent one of the molecular mechanisms underlying neuronal adaptation
associated with psychostimulant dependence.

PMID: 15814102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Neuroscience. 2005;132(2):511-8.

Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) memorizes photoperiod in the rat pineal gland.

Engel L(1), Gupta BB, Lorenzkowski V, Heinrich B, Schwerdtle I, Gerhold S,
Holthues H, Vollrath L, Spessert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Johannes Gutenberg University, Saarstrasse 19-21,
D-55099 Mainz, Germany.

As the physiological role of fos-related antigen-2 (Fra-2) is largely unknown and
since the pineal plays an important role in the photoperiodic control of the
body, we have tested the hypothesis that Fra-2 expression is
photoperiod-dependent and may be involved in imprinting photoperiod on the pineal
gland and the body as a whole. To this end, we have investigated Fra-2 mRNA
expression and Fra-2 protein expression under various light/dark (LD) cycles. A
clear nocturnal increase occurs for both monitored parameters under all
photoperiodic conditions studied. The level of Fra-2 protein expression clearly
depends on photoperiod, because the amount of protein at dark onset and during
the night negatively correlates with the length of the photoperiod. Further,
high-phosphorylated Fra-2 isoforms are abundant under all photoperiods tested,
with the exception of LD 20:4. Because Fra-2 phosphorylation depends on cGMP, a
depressed cGMP response to adrenergic stimulation under LD 20:4 appears to
explain this finding. We conclude that photoperiod is imprinted on Fra-2 in terms
of both protein amount and protein phosphorylation in the rat pineal gland. This 
imprinting becomes fully manifest after about 7 days only, suggesting that a
number of altered photoperiodic cycles are required for pineal Fra-2 to "learn"
that the photoperiod has changed. Reportedly, Fra-2 limits expression of the
enzyme iodothyronine deiodinase type II, which catalyzes the intracellular
deiodination of thyroxine prohormone to the active 3,3',5-triiodothyronine. We
have found that the extent of Fra-2 expression inversely correlates with the dII 
gene response to cAMP; hence the photoperiodic regulation of Fra-2 may affect the
body by changing pineal thyroid hormone metabolism.

PMID: 15802201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Virol. 2005 Jan;79(1):95-105.

Induction of the RelB NF-kappaB subunit by the cytomegalovirus IE1 protein is
mediated via Jun kinase and c-Jun/Fra-2 AP-1 complexes.

Wang X(1), Sonenshein GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

We recently demonstrated that the cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate-early 1 (IE1)
protein induces transcription of the gene encoding the RelB NF-kappaB subunit.
The mechanism of this activation has been explored here. We report that the
induction of the relB promoter by IE1 protein is mediated via activation of JNK
and AP-1. The region controlling relB promoter induction was mapped to the
upstream approximately 600-bp region between -1694 and -1096 bp. IE1 stimulated
AP-1 activity in NIH 3T3 cells. Competition electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
(EMSA) confirmed the presence of one bona fide AP-1 element centered at -1503 bp.
Introduction of a G-to-C mutation in the AP-1 binding site within the distal
region of the relB promoter eliminated its activation by IE1 in both NIH 3T3
fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs). Supershift EMSA identified
c-Jun, Fra-2, and c-Fos in AP-1 binding complexes in IE1 transfected NIH 3T3
cells. IE1 induced c-Jun phosphorylation, and treatment with SP600125, a
selective JNK inhibitor, as well as overexpression of JNK-binding domain of JIP1,
blocked IE1-mediated induction of AP-1 and relB promoter activity in NIH 3T3
cells and SMCs. Ectopic expression of c-Jun plus Fra-2, but not c-Fos, induced
relB promoter activity. The relB promoter has two proximal NF-kappaB elements,
and c-Jun/Fra-2 worked in synergy with p50/p65 NF-kappaB complexes. Overall,
these findings demonstrate for the first time the role of AP-1 in transcriptional
regulation of a gene encoding an NF-kappaB subunit, and its involvement in
induction of RelB activity by the CMV IE1 protein.

PMCID: PMC538727
PMID: 15596805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 27;24(5):801-9.

MEKK1 regulates the AP-1 dimer repertoire via control of JunB transcription and
Fra-2 protein stability.

Cuevas BD(1), Uhlik MT, Garrington TP, Johnson GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7365, USA.
bruce_cuevas@med.unc.edu

Activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factor dimers are composed of Jun, Fos, 
and ATF member proteins, but the mechanisms that determine AP-1 composition are
not clearly defined and the function of specific dimers is not well understood.
MEKK1 is a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase and an ubiquitin
ligase that regulates both the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 and the 
c-Jun amino-terminal kinase. Herein, we demonstrate that MEKK1 regulates the AP-1
protein repertoire. Both FGF-2 and phorbol ester-inducible urokinase-type
plasminogen activator (uPA) expression requires AP-1 binding to an enhancer
element in the uPA promoter, and we have previously shown that FGF-2 or PMA
induction of uPA expression is strongly dependent on MEKK1. JunB mRNA is
significantly increased in MEKK1-/- cells, demonstrating that MEKK1 suppresses
JunB mRNA expression. Upregulation of JunB expression in MEKK1-/- cells forms an 
inhibitory AP-1 complex that binds to the uPA promoter and inhibits uPA
transcription. MEKK1 also regulates Fra-2 protein stability by inducing Fra-2
ubiquitination and degradation. MEKK1 regulates AP-1-dependent gene expression by
regulating the expression, activity and degradation of component members of the
AP-1 complex. Controlling the repertoire of a transcription factor complex is a
newly defined function for an MAPK kinase kinase.

PMID: 15558021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Neurochem. 2004 Nov;91(4):946-55.

NGFI-B (Nurr77/Nr4a1) orphan nuclear receptor in rat pinealocytes: circadian
expression involves an adrenergic-cyclic AMP mechanism.

Humphries A(1), Weller J, Klein D, Baler R, Carter DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

NGFI-B (Nur77/Nr4a1) is a member of a nuclear steroid receptor subgroup that
includes the related factors Nurr1 (Nr4a2) and NOR-1 (Nr4a3). These proteins do
not have recognized ligands and in fact function independently as orphan
receptors with transcriptional regulatory activity. In the present study,
expression of the NGFI-B gene in the rat pineal gland was found to exhibit a
robust circadian rhythm, with elevated levels of NGFI-B mRNA occurring at night. 
The rhythm of NGFI-B mRNA is translated into a circadian rhythm of NGFI-B
protein, which accumulates in the nucleus of pinealocytes. In addition, there is 
a parallel marked nocturnal increase in pineal DNA binding activity to a NGFI-B
response element (NBRE, AAAGGTCA). Pharmacological studies indicate that NGFI-B
mRNA and protein levels are elevated via activation of adrenergic receptors.
NGFI-B protein levels are also elevated by dibutyryl cyclic AMP, as in other
systems. In the pineal gland, regulation of NGFI-B expression also involves the
AP-1 protein Fra-2, based on studies with a transgenic Fra-2 knockdown rat, in
which pineal NGFI-B expression increases. This set of observations extends the
number of pineal genes that are known to be regulated by Fra-2, and also provides
the first indication that a member of the NGFI-B group of nuclear receptors is
involved in controlling gene expression in the pineal gland.

PMID: 15525348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5717-25.

The AP1 transcription factor Fra2 is required for efficient cartilage
development.

Karreth F(1), Hoebertz A, Scheuch H, Eferl R, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology (I.M.P. Vienna, Austria.

The Fos-related AP1 transcription factor Fra2 (encoded by Fosl2) is expressed in 
various epithelial cells as well as in cartilaginous structures. We studied the
role of Fra2 in cartilage development. The absence of Fra2 in embryos and
newborns leads to reduced zones of hypertrophic chondrocytes and impaired matrix 
deposition in femoral and tibial growth plates, probably owing to impaired
differentiation into hypertrophic chondrocytes. In addition, hypertrophic
differentiation and ossification of primordial arches of the developing vertebrae
are delayed in Fra2-deficient embryos. Primary Fosl2-/- chondrocytes exhibit
decreased hypertrophic differentiation and remain in a proliferative state longer
than wild-type cells. As pups lacking Fra2 die shortly after birth, we generated 
mice carrying 'floxed' Fosl2 alleles and crossed them to coll2a1-Cre mice,
allowing investigation of postnatal cartilage development. The coll2a1-Cre,
Fosl2f/f mice die between 10 and 25 days after birth, are growth retarded and
display smaller growth plates similar to Fosl2-/- embryos. In addition, these
mice suffer from a kyphosis-like phenotype, an abnormal bending of the spine.
Hence, Fra2 is a novel transcription factor important for skeletogenesis by
affecting chondrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 15509771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Prostate. 2005 May 1;63(2):155-68.

Induction of AP-1 activity by androgen activation of the androgen receptor in
LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cells.

Church DR(1), Lee E, Thompson TA, Basu HS, Ripple MO, Ariazi EA, Wilding G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, USA.

BACKGROUND: The androgen receptor and activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription
factors affect growth regulation in normal and cancerous prostate cells. Effects 
of androgen-activated androgen receptor on AP-1 activity were determined in the
LNCaP human prostate carcinoma cell model.
METHODS: Cells were exposed to 1 nM androgen +/- antiandrogen bicalutamide.
Cellular growth and cell cycle effects were determined by DNA, viability, and
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) fluorescence activated cell sorter (FACS) assays. AP-1
effects were determined by an AP-1-luciferase enzyme reporter vector for
transcriptional activity, electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)/antibody
supershift for DNA-binding, quantitative RT-PCR for mRNA, and immunoblot for
protein.
RESULTS: Androgen induced G(1) growth arrest. This growth arrest was abrogated by
treatment with bicalutamide, demonstrating that growth arrest by androgen was due
to androgen receptor activation. Concurrently, AP-1 DNA-binding and
transcriptional activity was induced over 96 hr androgen exposure, which was also
inhibited by bicalutamide. Interestingly, although no change in AP-1
transcriptional activity was observed 24 hr after androgen exposure, there was an
increase in Fra-2 expression and AP-1 DNA-binding. Paradoxically, while Fra-2
mRNA and protein levels continued to increase, binding of Fra-2 to the AP-1 site 
decreased over 96 hr, with a concomitant increase in JunD AP-1-binding and a
marked increase in expression of the 35 kDa form of JunD. Enhanced expression of 
this short form of JunD is a novel effect of androgen exposure that occurred
during the 24-96 hr time period, as growth effects emerged.
CONCLUSION: Activation of androgen receptor by androgen induces changes in AP-1
activity and AP-1 factor DNA-binding that may contribute significantly to
androgen-induced changes in prostate cancer cell growth.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15486991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):42438-44. Epub 2004 Aug 6.

Fos-related antigen 2 controls protein kinase A-induced CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta expression in osteoblasts.

Chang W(1), Rewari A, Centrella M, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Plastic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Transcription factor CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) plays an
important role in hormone-dependent gene expression. In osteoblasts C/EBPbeta can
increase insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) transcription following treatment
with hormones that activate protein kinase A, but little is known as yet about
the expression of C/EBPbeta itself in these cells. We initially showed that
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) rapidly enhances C/EBPbeta mRNA and protein expression,
and in this study we identified a 3'-proximal region of the C/EBPbeta promoter
containing a 541-bp upstream sequence that could account for this effect.
PGE2-dependent activation of C/EBPbeta was blocked by expression of a mutated
regulatory subunit of protein kinase A or by mutation of two previously
identified cAMP-sensitive cis-acting regulatory elements within the promoter
between bp -111 and -61. Nuclear protein binding to these elements was induced by
PGE2, required new protein synthesis, and was sensitive to antibody to the
transcription factor termed Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2). Fra-2 cDNA generated
from rat osteoblasts by reverse transcriptase PCR was 95% homologous to human
Fra-2, and PGE2 rapidly induced Fra-2 mRNA and protein expression. Consistent
with these findings, over-expression of Fra-2 significantly increased C/EBPbeta
promoter activity in PGE2-induced osteoblasts, whereas expression of Fra-2
lacking its activation domain had a dominant negative inhibitory effect.
Together, these results reveal a significant, hormone-dependent role for Fra-2 in
osteoblast function, both directly, through its ability to increase new C/EBPbeta
gene expression, and indirectly, through downstream C/EBP sensitive genes.

PMID: 15299028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 10;279(37):39085-93. Epub 2004 Jul 15.

Tobacco smoke control of mucin production in lung cells requires oxygen radicals 
AP-1 and JNK.

Gensch E(1), Gallup M, Sucher A, Li D, Gebremichael A, Lemjabbar H, Mengistab A, 
Dasari V, Hotchkiss J, Harkema J, Basbaum C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cardiovascular Research Institute and Biomedical
Sciences Graduate Program, University of California, San Francisco, California
94143, USA.

In smokers' lungs, excessive mucus clogs small airways, impairing respiration and
promoting recurrent infection. A breakthrough in understanding this pathology was
the realization that smoke could directly stimulate mucin synthesis in lung
epithelial cells and that this phenomenon was dependent on the cell surface
receptor for epidermal growth factor, EGFR. Distal steps in the smoke-triggered
pathway have not yet been determined. We report here that the predominant airway 
mucin (MUC5AC) undergoes transcriptional up-regulation in response to tobacco
smoke; this is mediated by an AP-1-containing response element, which binds JunD 
and Fra-2. These transcription factors require phosphorylation by upstream
kinases JNK and ERK, respectively. Whereas ERK activation results from the
upstream activation of EGFR, JNK activation is chiefly EGFR-independent. Our
experiments demonstrated that smoke activates JNK via a Src-dependent,
EGFR-independent signaling cascade initiated by smoke-induced reactive oxygen
species. Taken together with our earlier results, these data indicate that the
induction of mucin by smoke is the combined effect of mutually independent,
reactive oxygen species activation of both EGFR and JNK.

PMID: 15262961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2004 Jun 18;125(1-2):76-85.

Roles of adenosine receptors in the regulation of kainic acid-induced neurotoxic 
responses in mice.

Lee HK(1), Choi SS, Han KJ, Han EJ, Suh HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Institute of Natural Medicine, College of
Medicine, Hallym University, 1 Okchun-Dong, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do 200-702, South
Korea.

Kainic acid (KA) is a well-known excitatory and neurotoxic substance. In ICR
mice, morphological damage of hippocampus induced by KA administered
intracerebroventricularly (i.c.v.) was markedly concentrated on the hippocampal
CA3 pyramidal neurons. In the present study, the possible role of adenosine
receptors in hippocampal cell death induced by KA (0.1 microg) administered
i.c.v. was examined. It has been shown that 3,7-dimethyl-1-propargylxanthine
(DMPX; A2 adenosine receptors antagonist, 20 microg) reduced KA-induced CA3
pyramidal cell death. KA dramatically increased the phosphorylated extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) immunoreactivities (IR) in dentate gyrus (DG) and
mossy fibers. In addition, c-Jun, c-Fos, Fos-related antigen 1 (Fra-1) and
Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) protein levels were increased in hippocampal area
in KA-injected mice. DMPX attenuated KA-induced p-ERK, c-Jun, Fra-1 and Fra-2 IR.
However, 1,3-dipropyl-8-(2-amino-4-chlorophenyl)-xanthine (PACPX; A1 adenosine
receptor antagonist, 20 microg) did not affect KA-induced p-ERK, c-Jun, Fra-1 and
Fra-2 IR. KA also increased the complement receptor type 3 (OX-42) IR in CA3
region of hippocampus. DMPX, but not PACPX, blocked KA-induced OX-42 IR. Our
results suggest that p-ERK and c-Jun may function as important regulators
responsible for the hippocampal cell death induced by KA administered i.c.v. in
mice. Activated microglia, which was detected by OX-42 IR, may be related to
phagocytosis of degenerated neuronal elements by KA excitotoxicity. Furthermore, 
it is implicated that A2, but not A1, adenosine receptors appear to be involved
in hippocampal CA3 pyramidal cell death induced by KA administered i.c.v. in
mice.

PMID: 15193424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Neurosci. 2004 Jun 9;24(23):5346-55.

Day-night changes in downstream regulatory element antagonist modulator/potassium
channel interacting protein activity contribute to circadian gene expression in
pineal gland.

Link WA(1), Ledo F, Torres B, Palczewska M, Madsen TM, Savignac M, Albar JP,
Mellström B, Naranjo JR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento Biologia Molecular y Celular, Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia,
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

The molecular mechanisms controlling the oscillatory synthesis of melatonin in
rat pineal gland involve the rhythmic expression of several genes including
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT), inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER), and Fos-related antigen-2 (fra-2). Here we show that the calcium sensors 
downstream regulatory element antagonist modulator/potassium channel interacting 
protein (DREAM/KChIP)-3 and KChIP-1, -2 and -4 bind to downstream regulatory
element (DRE) sites located in the regulatory regions of these genes and repress 
basal and induced transcription from ICER, fra-2 or AA-NAT promoters.
Importantly, we demonstrate that the endogenous binding activity to DRE sites
shows day-night oscillations in rat pineal gland and retina but not in the
cerebellum. The peak of DRE binding activity occurs during the day period of the 
circadian cycle, coinciding with the lowest levels of fra-2, ICER, and AA-NAT
transcripts. We show that a rapid clearance of DRE binding activity during the
entry in the night period is related to changes at the posttranscriptional level 
of DREAM/KChIP. The circadian pattern of DREAM/KChIP activity is maintained under
constant darkness, indicating that an endogenous clock controls DREAM/KChIP
function. Our data suggest involvement of the family of DREAM repressors in the
regulation of rhythmically expressed genes engaged in circadian rhythms.

PMID: 15190107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29121-9. Epub 2004 May 5.

Impact of the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway on parathyroid
hormone-related protein actions in osteoblasts.

Chen C(1), Koh AJ, Datta NS, Zhang J, Keller ET, Xiao G, Franceschi RT, D'Silva
NJ, McCauley LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics Prevention Geriatrics, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) regulates proliferation and
differentiation of osteoblastic cells via binding to the parathyroid hormone
receptor (PTH-1R). The cAMP-dependent protein kinase A pathway governs the
majority of these effects, but recent evidence also implicates the MAPK pathway. 
MC3T3-E1 subclone 4 cells (MC4) were treated with the MAPK inhibitor U0126 and
PTHrP. In differentiated MC4 cells, osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein gene
expression were both down-regulated by PTHrP and also by inhibition of the MAPK
pathway. PTHrP-mediated down-regulation of PTH-1R mRNA and up-regulation of c-fos
mRNA were MAPK-independent, whereas PTHrP stimulation of fra-2 and interleukin-6 
(IL-6) mRNA was MAPK-dependent. Luciferase promoter assays revealed that
regulation of IL-6 involved the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A and MAPK pathways
with a potential minor role of the protein kinase C pathway, and a promoter
region containing an activator protein-1 site was necessary for PTHrP-induced
IL-6 gene transcription. An alternative pathway, through cAMP/Epac/Rap1/MAPK,
mediated ERK phosphorylation but was not sufficient for IL-6 promoter activation.
Phosphorylation of the transcription factor CREB was also necessary but not
sufficient for PTHrP-mediated IL-6 promoter activity. Most interesting, a
bidirectional effect was found with PTHrP increasing phosphorylated ERK in
undifferentiated MC4 cells but decreasing phosphorylated ERK in differentiated
cells. These data indicate that inactivation of the MAPK pathway shows
differential regulation of PTHrP-stimulated activator protein-1 members, blocks
PTHrP-stimulated IL-6, and synergistically down-regulates certain osteoblastic
markers associated with differentiation. These novel findings indicate that the
MAPK pathway plays a selective but important role in the actions of PTHrP.

PMID: 15128746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Brain Res Bull. 2004 Mar 1;63(1):65-73.

Temporal and regional expression of Fos-related proteins in response to ischemic 
injury.

Butler TL(1), Pennypacker KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of South Florida,
12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, MDC 9, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

The AP-1 transcription factor family has been widely studied in the response to
ischemic brain injury. The data to date have demonstrated a complex involvement
that depends on stimulus, subunit composition and brain region. One member in
particular, the Fos-related antigen FRA-2, has demonstrated a potential for
controlling neuroprotective gene expression. This study characterized the
temporal and regional expression of a variety of proteins following ischemic
injury induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in rats. The results
demonstrated upregulation of both c-Fos and FRA-2 in penumbral regions that
preceded upregulation of the classic injury-associated proteins expressed by
astrocytes and microglia and, in the case of FRA-2, appeared to correlate with
neuronal survival. A further, previously undescribed, expression of FRA-2 in
endothelial cells of the core ischemic region was also demonstrated.

PMID: 15121240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Apr;45(4):1080-7.

Regulation of involucrin expression in normal human corneal epithelial cells: a
role for activator protein one.

Adhikary G(1), Crish J, Lass J, Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology and Biophysics, Case School of Medicine, Cleveland, 
Ohio 44106-4970, USA.

PURPOSE: Understanding the mechanisms that regulate gene expression in the human 
cornea is an important goal. In the present study, the involucrin gene was used
as a model to study this regulation. Human involucrin (hINV) is a structural
protein that is selectively expressed in surface epithelia, including corneal
epithelial cells.
METHODS: Regulation of involucrin gene expression was monitored in cultures of
normal human primary corneal epithelial cells.
RESULTS: The studies revealed that an activator protein (AP)-1 DNA-binding site
is essential for appropriate basal and stimulus-dependent hINV promoter activity.
Mutation of this site, AP1-1, results in a loss of hINV promoter activity. A gel 
mobility supershift analysis revealed interaction of the AP1 factors, Fra-1,
Fra-2, and JunB, with this element. Inhibition of AP1 function with a
dominant-negative form of AP1 also inhibited expression. Treatment with
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), a protein kinase C activator,
increased hINV gene expression, a response that correlates with increased nuclear
AP1 factor level and binding to the hINV gene AP1-1 response element. Expression 
of the endogenous hINV gene is also increased by TPA treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings point to an important role for AP1 transcription
factors in the regulation of human corneal epithelial cell involucrin gene
expression.

PMID: 15037572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):144-53.

A network of immediate early gene products propagates subtle differences in
mitogen-activated protein kinase signal amplitude and duration.

Murphy LO(1), MacKeigan JP, Blenis J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The strength and duration of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling
have been shown to regulate cell fate in different cell types. In this study, a
general mechanism is described that explains how subtle differences in signaling 
kinetics are translated into a specific biological outcome. In fibroblasts, the
expression of immediate early gene (IEG)-encoded Fos, Jun, Myc, and early growth 
response gene 1 (Egr-1) transcription factors is significantly extended by
sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 and 2 (ERK1 and -2) signaling. 
Several of these proteins contain functional docking site for ERK, FXFP (DEF)
domains that serve to locally concentrate the active kinase, thus showing that
they can function as ERK sensors. Sustained ERK signaling regulates the
posttranslational modifications of these IEG-encoded sensors, which contributes
to their sustained expression during the G(1)-S transition. DEF domain-containing
sensors can also interpret the small changes in ERK signal strength that arise
from less than a threefold reduction in agonist concentration. As a result,
downstream target gene expression and cell cycle progression are significantly
changed.

PMCID: PMC303364
PMID: 14673150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2004 Feb;286(2):L427-36. Epub 2003 Oct 17.

DEP-induced fra-1 expression correlates with a distinct activation of
AP-1-dependent gene transcription in the lung.

Zhang Q(1), Kleeberger SR, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University, Department of Environmental Health Sciences,
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Recent studies indicate a potential role for Fra-1, a heterodimeric partner of
activator protein (AP)-1, in toxicant-induced epithelial injury, repair, and
cellular transformation. Here we have investigated the effects of diesel exhaust 
particles (DEP) on fra-1 expression in C10 cells, a murine lung epithelial cell
line. DEP markedly upregulated fra-1, but not fra-2, expression. The increase in 
fra-1 mRNA expression correlated well with its protein- and DNA-binding activity.
DNA-binding assays also revealed a predominant presence of Jun-B and Jun-D in the
AP-1 complex. Interestingly, DEP did not alter Jun-B and Jun-D protein levels.
Transcriptional analysis revealed that fra-1 induction is regulated in part at
the transcriptional level. The -379 to +32 bp 5'-flanking region mediated this
induction. Furthermore, inhibitors of ERK1/2, JNK1, and p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPKs) significantly suppressed DEP-stimulated fra-1
transcription, suggesting their involvement in the induction process. Consistent 
with this finding, DEP stimulated phosphorylation of ERK1/2, JNK1, and p38 MAPKs 
with a distinct activation pattern. Overexpression of Fra-1 downregulated c-Jun
and Nrf2 enhanced AP-1- and ARE-mediated reporter gene expression, respectively. 
In contrast, Fra-1 had the opposite effect on matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9
promoter activity. In particular, it bound to the functional AP-1 site of the
MMP-9 promoter after DEP stimulation. Consistent with this result, DEP also
markedly upregulated MMP-9 promoter activity. Collectively, these findings
suggest that fra-1 induction by DEP may play a role in selectively regulating
gene expression involved in alveolar epithelial cell injury and repair.

PMID: 14565943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47423-33. Epub 2003 Sep 17.

Multiple cis-elements mediate the transcriptional activation of human fra-1 by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in bronchial epithelial cells.

Adiseshaiah P(1), Papaiahgari SR, Vuong H, Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 2;279(1):820.

Recent studies indicate a potential role for Fra-1, a heterodimeric partner of
activator protein 1 (AP1), in toxicant-induced epithelial injury, repair, and
cellular transformation. Here, we have investigated the transcriptional
regulation of fra-1 by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, which are the direct targets of inhaled
toxins/carcinogens. In contrast to a transient induction by H2O2, TPA
persistently activated fra-1 transcription, principally at the transcriptional
level. A deletion analysis of the fra-1 promoter revealed that several
cis-elements located between -105/+32 and -283/-105 bp mediate minimal and basal 
promoter activities, respectively. A region between -379 and -283 bp, which
harbors a putative TPA response element, a GC box, and an Ets-like binding site, 
was required for high level TPA-inducible expression. Mutations in any of these
cis-elements markedly reduced both basal and TPA-inducible expression. Thus,
cooperative interactions between factors binding to multiple cis-elements of the 
-379/-283 promoter region appear to regulate TPA-induced fra-1 transcription in
HBE cells. Consistent with this finding, electrophoretic mobility shift assays
indicated the formation of multiple complexes consisting of the AP1-, Sp-, and
ETS-specific family of transcription factors with the -379/-283 fragment. Members
of the AP1 family distinctly regulated the fra-1 promoter. In particular,
coexpression of c-Jun, Jun-D, and Fra-2 up-regulated fra-1 transcription.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed an enhanced recruitment of c-Jun,
Jun-D, and Fra-2 to the endogenous fra-1 promoter upon TPA stimulation. These
results underscore the regulatory role of c-Jun, Jun-D, and Fra-2 in
TPA-inducible fra-1 expression in HBE cells in vivo.

PMID: 13679379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncogene. 2003 Aug 7;22(32):5045-54.

Role of the Fos family members, c-Fos, Fra-1 and Fra-2, in the regulation of cell
motility.

Tkach V(1), Tulchinsky E, Lukanidin E, Vinson C, Bock E, Berezin V.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Pathology, School of Medicine,
Copenhagen University, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

The AP-1 transcription factor is composed of members of the Fos, Jun and ATF
families, and plays a key role in tumor progression. We investigated whether Fos 
proteins regulate cell motility, and if so, whether this capacity is related to
their transactivation potential. Two cell lines with different expression
profiles of AP-1 were employed focusing on the Fos-family members c-Fos, Fra-1
and Fra-2. Transactivation motifs are found in c-Fos, but not in Fra-1 or Fra-2. 
The adenocarcinoma CSML0 cells display a low motility and do not express Fra-1 or
Fra-2, and only very little c-Fos. In contrast, the fibroblastoid L929 cells
express both Fra-1 and Fra-2, but no c-Fos, and these cells display a high
motility. Transfection with Fra-1 or c-Fos, but not with Fra-2, strongly enhanced
the motility of CSML0 cells. The effect of Fra-1 required the presence of the
N-terminal domain of this protein. Conversely, transfection with a Fos
dominant-negative mutant or with anti-sense fra-1 or fra-2, strongly reduced the 
motility of L929 cells. Changes in cell motility correlated with the
morphological appearance and the degree of contact with the substratum. We
conclude that Fos proteins have distinct roles in the regulation of cell
motility.

PMID: 12902987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Jun;44(6):2798-802.

The genetic modifier Rpe65Leu(450): effect on light damage susceptibility in
c-Fos-deficient mice.

Wenzel A(1), Grimm C, Samardzija M, Remé CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Retinal Cell Biology, Eye Clinic, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. awenzel@opht.unizh.ch

PURPOSE: To test whether introduction of the Rpe65Leu(450) variant can overcome
protection against light-induced photoreceptor apoptosis in mice without the
activator protein (AP)-1 constituent c-Fos.
METHODS: c-Fos-deficient mice (c-fos(-/-)) carrying the Leu(450) variant of RPE65
were compared with c-fos(-/-) mice with Rpe65Met(450). Expression of RPE65 was
analyzed by Western blot analysis. Rhodopsin regeneration was determined by
measuring rhodopsin after different times in darkness after bleaching.
Susceptibility to light-induced damage was tested by exposure to white light and 
subsequent morphologic analysis. Activation of AP-1 and its complex composition
was analyzed by electromobility shift assay (EMSA) and antibody interference. The
contribution of AP-1 to apoptosis was tested by pharmacological inhibition of
AP-1, using dexamethasone.
RESULTS: Compared with RPE65Met(450), introduction of the RPE65Leu(450) variant
led to increased levels of RPE65 protein, accelerated rhodopsin regeneration,
loss of protection against light-induced damage, and AP-1 responsiveness to toxic
light doses, despite the absence of c-Fos. c-Fos was mainly replaced by Fra-2.
Application of dexamethasone restored resistance to light-induced damage.
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing retinal photon catch capacity by introducing the
Rpe65Leu(450) variant overcomes light damage resistance provided by c-fos
deficiency. Thus, a variation of RPE65 at position 450 is a strong genetic
modifier of susceptibility to light-induced damage in mice. Under conditions of
high rhodopsin availability during exposure to light, Fra-2 and, to a minor
degree, FosB substitute for c-Fos and enable light-induced AP-1 activity and thus
photoreceptor apoptosis. Regardless of the AP-1 complex's composition,
glucocorticoid receptor activation inhibits AP-1 and prevents apoptosis. Thus,
not the absence of c-Fos per se, but rather impairment of AP-1 DNA binding is
protective against light-induced damage. This impairment may result from the
absence of c-Fos or glucocorticoid receptor-mediated transrepression.

PMID: 12766089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Apr 10;112(1-2):61-9.

Interactions between Egr1 and AP1 factors in regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase
transcription.

Nakashima A(1), Ota A, Sabban EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Several treatments which regulate tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) transcription, such
as stress in vivo, or 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) in cell culture,
induce both Egr1 and AP1 factors. Previously, we identified a functional Egr1
motif overlapping with Sp1 site in the rat TH promoter. Its response to Egr1 also
required the presence of an AP1/Ebox motif. Here, we further examined the
cross-talk between these sites. Insertion of 10- or 20-bp between the Sp1/Egr1
and AP1/Ebox elements, reduced the ability of Egr1 to upregulate luciferase
reporter activity controlled by the proximal 272 nucleotides of the rat TH
promoter in PC12 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with nuclear
extracts from TPA treated cells were used to identify the composition of the
factors which bound the AP1/Ebox motif and whether there is competition with
factors which bind the Sp1/Egr1 motif. The complexes formed with labeled AP1/E
box oligonucleotide were reduced or supershifted with antisera to Fos family,
c-Fos, Fra-2, and Jun D. Excess Sp1/Egr1 oligonucleotide or anti Egr1 antisera
did not compete. Fra-2 was a major component of the complex after 2-4 h TPA.
Transfection of PC12 cells with Fra-2 induced reporter activity requiring the
AP1, but not the Egr1 motif. However, when cotransfected with Fra-2, Egr1
expression plasmids elicited lower induction of luciferase activity than observed
with Egr1 alone. Our results suggest that although it does not compete for
binding to the promoter, Egr1 can modulate the regulation of TH transcription by 
AP1 factors.

PMID: 12670703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(7):2329-40.

HMG-I(Y) and the CBP/p300 coactivator are essential for human papillomavirus type
18 enhanceosome transcriptional activity.

Bouallaga I(1), Teissier S, Yaniv M, Thierry F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Gene Expression and Diseases, URA 1644 of CNRS, Institut Pasteur,
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

A strong epithelial specific enhancer drives transcription of the human
papillomavirus type 18 (HPV18) oncogenes. Its activity depends on the formation
of a higher-order nucleoprotein complex (enhanceosome) involving the
sequence-specific JunB/Fra2 transcription factor and the HMG-I(Y) architectural
protein. Here we show that proteins from HeLa cell nuclear extract cover almost
all of the HPV18 enhancer sequences and that it contains seven binding sites for 
the purified HMG-I(Y) protein, providing evidence for a tight nucleoprotein
structure. Binding of HMG-I(Y) and the AP1 heterodimer from HeLa nuclear extract 
to overlapping sites of the core enhanceosome is cooperative. The integrity of
this specific HMG-I(Y) binding site is as essential as the AP1 binding site for
the enhancer function, indicating the fundamental role played by this
architectural protein. We demonstrate that the CBP/p300 coactivator is recruited 
by the HPV18 enhanceosome and that it is limiting for transcriptional activation,
since it is sequestered by the adenovirus E1A protein and by the JunB/Fra2
positive factor in excess. We show the involvement of JunB and p300 in vivo in
the HPV18 transcription by chromatin immunoprecipitation of HPV18 sequences in
HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC150719
PMID: 12640118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Neurochem. 2003 Feb;84(4):767-80.

Possible regulation by N-methyl-d-aspartate receptors of proliferative progenitor
cells expressed in adult mouse hippocampal dentate gyrus.

Kitayama T(1), Yoneyama M, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Natural Science and Technology, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0934,
Japan.

An immunohistochemical technique was employed to analyze mechanisms underlying
modulation by N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors of proliferation of neural
progenitor cells in adult mouse brain. The systemic administration of NMDA at 100
mg/kg resulted in marked expression of c-Fos, Fra-2 and c-Jun proteins in the
granule cell layers of the dentate gyrus in murine hippocampus 2 h later,
followed by a significant reduction of the incorporation of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) in a manner sensitive to the antagonist
dizocilpine 2 days after administration. The administration of NMDA also
suppressed constitutive expression of both nestin and proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen (PCNA) in the dentate granule cells 2 days later, without markedly
affecting cell viability for up to 8 weeks after administration. In the
subventricular zone and olfactory bulb, however, NMDA failed to affect either the
incorporation of BrdU or the expression of nestin and PCNA. The NR1 subunit was
highly expressed in the dentate gyrus in addition to the stratum oriens in the
hippocampus, but not in the subventricular zone and olfactory bulb. These results
suggest that NMDA receptors may play a role crucial for maintenance of the
integrity and function of proliferative neural progenitor cells through
expression of the nuclear transcription factor activator protein-1 in granule
cells of the dentate gyrus in adult mouse brain.

PMID: 12562521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Genetica. 2002 Aug;115(3):269-72.

Cytogenetic mapping of five YAC clones to human chromosome region 2q31 --> q32.1 
in relation to the FRA2G common fragile site.

Pelliccia F(1), Limongi MZ, Gaddini L, Russo MT, Rocchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e Biologia Molecolare, Università La Sapienza, Roma, 
Italy.

In this work, five YAC clones have been mapped by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) to human chromosome region 2q31 --> q32.1 and ordered in
relation to each other and to the FRA2G common fragile site. YAC clones that span
the fragile site have been identified. Moreover a deleted HOXD 13 gene has been
identified on the 942D2 YAC.

PMID: 12440566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Neurochem. 2002 Oct;83(1):157-66.

Adrenergic inducibility of AP-1 binding in the rat pineal gland depends on prior 
photoperiod.

Guillaumond F(1), Becquet D, Bosler O, François-Bellan AM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Fédératif Jean-Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Université de la
Méditerranée, Boulevard Pierre Dramard, 13916 Marseille cedex 20, France.

The main known function of the pineal gland in mammals is the temporal
synchronization of physiological rhythms to seasonal changes of day length
(photoperiod). In rat, the transcription factor activating protein-1 (AP-1)
displays a circadian rhythm in its DNA binding in the pineal gland, which results
from the rhythmic expression of Fra-2. We postulated that, if AP-1 is an
important component of pineal gland functioning, then variations in photoperiodic
conditions should lead to an adaptation of the AP-1 binding rhythm. Here we show 
that AP-1 binding patterns adapt to variations in lighting conditions, in the
same way as the rhythm of arylalkylamine-N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) activity.
This adaptation appeared to result from photoperiodic adaptation of the rhythmic 
fra-2 gene expression and was reflected by an adapted delay between the onset of 
night and the acrophase of the nocturnal peak. We further showed that
photoperiodic adaptation of both the AP-1 binding and AA-NAT activity rhythms
resulted from adapted changes in adrenergic inducibility of both variables at
night onset. We finally provided evidence that AP-1 shared with the CREM gene
encoding the transcriptional repressor protein inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER) the ability to be hypersensitive or subsensitive to adrenergic stimuli,
depending on prior photoperiod.

PMID: 12358739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 6;277(49):47022-7. Epub 2002 Sep 26.

Specific activation of human interleukin-5 depends on de novo synthesis of an
AP-1 complex.

Schwenger GT(1), Kok CC, Arthaningtyas E, Thomas MA, Sanderson CJ, Mordvinov VA.

Author information: 
(1)Western Australian Institute for Medical Research and the School of Biomedical
Sciences, Curtin University of Technology, Perth, Australia.
gretchen@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

It is clear from the biology of eosinophilia that a specific regulatory mechanism
must exist. Because interleukin-5 (IL5) is the key regulatory cytokine, it
follows that a gene-specific control of IL5 expression must exist that differs
even from closely related cytokines such as IL4. Two features of IL5 induction
make it unique compared with other cytokines; first, induction by cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), which inhibits other T-cell-derived cytokines,
and second, sensitivity to protein synthesis inhibitors, which have no effect on 
other cytokines. This study has utilized the activation of different
transcription factors by different stimuli in a human T-cell line to study the
role of conserved lymphokine element 0 (CLE0) in the specific induction of IL5.
In unstimulated cells the ubiquitous Oct-1 binds to CLE0. Stimulation induces de 
novo synthesis of the AP-1 members JunD and Fra-2, which bind to CLE0. The amount
of IL5 produced correlates with the production of the AP-1 complex, suggesting a 
key role in IL5 expression. The formation of the AP-1 complex is essential, but
the rate-limiting step is the synthesis of AP-1, especially Fra-2. This provides 
an explanation for the sensitivity of IL5 to protein synthesis inhibitors and a
mechanism for the specific induction of IL5 compared with other cytokines.

PMID: 12354764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Life Sci. 2002 May 3;70(24):2915-29.

Role of proto-oncogenes in the regulation of proenkephalin mRNA expression
induced by repeated nicotine injections in rat adrenal medulla.

Kim YH(1), Won JS, Won MH, Lee JK, Suh HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Institute of Natural Medicine, College of
Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do, South Korea.

We have studied the effect of repeated systemic administrations of nicotine (3
mg/kg) at 30 min intervals on proenkephalin (proENK) mRNA level in rat adrenal
gland. Northern blot analysis has shown that proENK mRNA expression was enhanced 
by repeated nicotine administrations. Additionally, repeated administrations of
nicotine transiently induced the c-fos and c-jun mRNA levels after the
first-third nicotine administration, and the c-fos and c-jun mRNA levels were
returned to the basal level after the seventh administration of nicotine. c-Fos, 
c-Jun and Fra-2 protein levels were persistently increased until the seventh
administration. The repeated nicotine administrations also elevated phospho-CREB 
without altering total CREB level in all tested groups. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed that the increase of c-Fos and c-Jun proteins by repeated
nicotine administrations is mostly medulla specific, while Fra-2 immuno
reactivity was shown both in medulla and cortex. The repeated nicotine
administrations enhanced the AP-1 and ENKCRE-2 DNA binding activities.
Furthermore, the cross-competition studies revealed that the AP-1 proteins,
rather than CREB, actively bind to ENKCRE-2 DNA domain. These results suggest
that proENK mRNA expression induced by repeated nicotine administrations may be
mediated by AP-1 proteins, such as c-Fos, c-Jun and Fra-2 rather than CREB via
interacting to the ENKCRE-2 DNA binding domain in rat adrenal medulla.

PMID: 12269402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2002 Aug;93(2):463-8.

Effect of exercise on mRNA expression of select adrenal medullary catecholamine
biosynthetic enzymes.

Erdem SR(1), Demirel HA, Broxson CS, Nankova BB, Sabban EL, Tümer N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

The effect of submaximal endurance training (SET) on sympathoadrenal activity is 
not clear. We tested the hypothesis that SET (90 min/day, 5 days/wk, for 12 wk)
elevates mRNA expression of catecholamine (CA) biosynthetic enzymes, tyrosine
hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine-beta-hydroxylase (DbetaH) in the adrenal medullae
of adult, female Sprague-Dawley rats. SET increased TH protein level by 35%, TH
activity by 62%, TH mRNA expression by 40%, and DbetaH mRNA expression by 67%. In
addition, we examined the effect of SET on Fos-related antigens (FRAs), FRA-2
immunoreactivity, and activator protein (AP)-1 binding activity. SET increased
AP-1 binding activity by 78%; however, it did not affect late FRAs and FRA-2
immunoreactivity. Because the regulation of neuropeptide Y (NPY) often parallels 
that of CAs, we also examined the effect of SET on NPY mRNA expression. Indeed,
SET elevated NPY mRNA expression as well. We conclude that 1) SET elicits a
pretranslational stimulatory effect on adrenomedullary CA biosynthetic enzymes,
2) another immediate early mRNA product, rather than FRA-2, may contribute to the
increase in AP-1 binding activity in response to SET, and 3) SET increases NPY
mRNA expression.

PMID: 12133851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncogene. 2002 Jul 18;21(31):4843-8.

The ability of Fos family members to produce phenotypic changes in epithelioid
cells is not directly linked to their transactivation potentials.

Andersen H(1), Mahmood S, Tkach V, Cohn M, Kustikova O, Grigorian M, Berezin V,
Bock E, Lukanidin E, Tulchinsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society, Department of Molecular Cancer Biology,
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100, Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

Numerous studies have revealed distinct functions of Fos proteins in different
mouse tissues and cell lines. Here, we perform a direct comparison of the
features of exogenous c-Fos, Fra-1 and Fra-2 proteins expressed in murine tumor
cells of epithelial origin, CSML0. Although transactivation potential of c-Fos is
much stronger than that of Fra-1 and Fra-2, all three proteins are capable of
modulating transcription of target genes. Moreover, there is a certain degree of 
specificity in the induction of the transcription of AP-1-responsive genes by
different Fos proteins. For instance, c-Fos and Fra-1 but not Fra-2 activated
genes of the urokinase system. Additionally, not only a strong transcriptional
activator c-Fos, but also Fra-1 induced morphological alterations in CSML0 cells.
N-terminal domain of Fra-1 was required for this function. On the other hand,
Fra-2 failed to change morphology of CSML0 cells. We therefore conclude that
c-Fos, Fra-1 and Fra-2 differently activate transcription of target genes and
induce morphological changes in epithelioid carcinoma cells in a manner not
directly linked to their transactivation potentials.

PMID: 12101423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4952-64.

Promoter specificity and biological activity of tethered AP-1 dimers.

Bakiri L(1), Matsuo K, Wisniewska M, Wagner EF, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression Génétique et Maladies, CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur, 75724
Paris Cedex 15, France.

Activator protein 1 (AP-1) is a group of dimeric transcription factors composed
of Jun, Fos, and ATF family proteins. Both gain- and loss-of-function studies
have revealed specific roles for individual AP-1 components in cell
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and other biological processes.
However, little is known about the functions of specific AP-1 dimers. To test the
importance of AP-1 composition in transcriptional activation, AP-1 monomers were 
joined via a flexible polypeptide tether to force specific pairing. The resultant
single-chain AP-1 molecules showed DNA binding specificity and transcriptional
activation potentials similar to those of untethered dimers, even in the presence
of dominant-negative AP-1 monomers. c-Jun-containing dimers showed distinct
promoter specificity in transient-transfection experiments, depending on the Fos,
Fra, or ATF partner. When stably expressed in NIH 3T3 cells, c-Jun tethered dimer
Fra2, but not c-Jun tethered dimer Fra1 and c-Jun tethered dimer cFos (the tilde 
indicates a tethered dimer), inhibited G(0) arrest at confluency and under
low-serum conditions and specifically activated cyclin A expression. These data
suggest that the choice of dimerization partner defines the role of c-Jun in gene
activation and cell cycle regulation and that single-chain AP-1 molecules provide
a powerful tool for assessing the role of specific AP-1 dimers.

PMCID: PMC133900
PMID: 12052899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2002 Mar 28;21(14):2181-90.

AP-1 transrepressing retinoic acid does not deplete coactivators or AP-1 monomers
but may target specific Jun or Fos containing dimers.

Suzukawa K(1), Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Section, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer Institute 
at Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) inhibits tumor promotion in many models in vivo and in vitro, 
among them mouse epidermal JB6 cells. RA treatment suppresses
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) induced AP-1 activity, an activity
that is required for transformation of JB6 P+ cells. The molecular mechanism of
AP-1 transrepression by retinoids is unclear, especially as related to inhibition
of transformation. Overexpression of AP-1 components did not rescue TPA induced
AP-1 activation nor did a GST pull down experiment implicate direct binding, thus
rendering unlikely both a Jun/Fos-RA-RAR direct interaction and a Jun/Fos
sequestration mechanism. Overexpression of p300, SRC-1 or pCAF did not abrogate
AP-1 suppression by RA, thus arguing against coactivator competition.
Overexpression of the corepressor silencing mediator for retinoic acid and
thyroid hormone receptors (SMRT) suppressed AP-1 activity. However, SMRT but not 
RA inhibited cJun transactivation, suggesting SMRT does not mediate RA
transrepression. RA treatment also did not block TPA induced ERK phosphorylation,
Jun/Fos family protein expression except for cFos, or DNA binding of the AP-1
complex. The transcriptional activities of full-length JunB and full-length
Fra-1, but not the transactivation domain fusions, were increased by TPA
treatment and suppressed by RA. Since these full-length fusions have bzip
domains, the results suggest that JunB and/or Fra-1-containing dimers may
constitute one target of RA for transrepression of AP-1.

PMID: 11948401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Neurochem Res. 2002 Feb;27(1-2):131-8.

Nuclear degradation of particular Fos family members expressed following
injections of NMDA and kainate in murine hippocampus.

Nakamichi N(1), Manabe T, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Kanazawa University Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ishikawa, Japan.

Transient glutamate signaling often leads to long lasting and permanent
alterations of a variety of cellular functions through particular membrane
receptors in the brain. For elucidation of mechanisms underlying long-term
consolidation of transient extracellular signals, we have examined expression and
degradation of particular Fos family member proteins required for assembly to the
nuclear transcription factor activator protein-1 in this study. Transcription
factors could modulate the activity of RNA polymerase II responsible for the
formation of mRNA from genomic DNA in the nucleus and therefore regulate de novo 
synthesis of particular target functional proteins. Mice were intraperitoneally
injected with 100 mg/kg N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) or 40 mg/kg kainic acid
(KA), followed by homogenization of hippocampus in the presence of different
protease and phosphatase inhibitors 2 h after administration, and subsequent
preparation of nuclear and cytosolic fractions. The systemic administration of
both NMDA and KA induced marked expression of particular Fos family members,
including c-Fos and Fra-2 proteins, in hippocampal nuclear and cytosolic
fractions. Incubation at 30 degrees C for 1 to 18 h led to differential
degradation profiles of each Fos family member protein in nuclear fractions in a 
manner peculiar to the individual excitants. Degradation rate was also affected
by dialysis and subsequent addition of inhibitors for phosphatases and proteases.
These results suggest that in vivo NMDA and KA signals may additionally modulate 
the activity of heterologous machineries responsible for breakdown of each Fos
family member in a unique manner in nuclear fractions, rather than cytosolic
fractions, of murine hippocampus.

PMID: 11926265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Mar 22;292(1):200-7.

Activator protein-1 complex expressed by magnetism in cultured rat hippocampal
neurons.

Hirai T(1), Nakamichi N, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Kanazawa University Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0934, Japan.

Brief exposure for 15 min to static magnetic filed at 100 mT led to marked but
transient potentiation of binding of a radiolabeled probe for activator protein-1
(AP1) in immature cultured rat hippocampal neurons with high expression of
growth-associated protein-43. Immunoblotting and supershift analyses revealed
that brief exposure to static magnetic field increased AP1 DNA binding through
expression of Fra-2, c-Jun, and Jun-D proteins in immature cultured hippocampal
neurons. Significantly less potent increases were seen in both intracellular free
Ca(2+) concentration and AP1 binding following the addition of
N-methyl-d-aspartate in these immature neurons exposed to magnetism 24 h before. 
These results suggest that brief exposure to weak static magnetic field may lead 
to desensitization of NMDA receptor channels through modulation of de novo
synthesis of particular inducible target proteins at the level of gene
transcription by the AP1 complex expressed in the nucleus of immature cultured
rat hippocampal neurons.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11890693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 3;277(18):15992-6001. Epub 2002 Mar 7.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases and activator protein 1 are required for
proliferation and cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Eriksson M(1), Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cancer Biology Research Program, Biomedicum Helsinki and Haartman
Institute, University of Helsinki, P. O. Box 63, FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) have been implicated as regulators of
differentiation. The biological effect of MAPK signaling in the nucleus is
achieved by signal-responsive transcription factors. Here we have investigated
MAPK signaling and activation of AP-1 transcription factors in P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells undergoing cardiomyocyte differentiation. We show that
aggregation and Me(2)SO treatment, which trigger the differentiation response,
result in sustained activation of JNK1, p38, and ERK1/2 MAPKs and acquisition of 
AP-1 DNA binding activity. The induced AP-1 activity consists of c-Jun, JunD, and
Fra-2 proteins and is accompanied with the increased expression of these
proteins. JNK is involved in c-Jun phosphorylation, whereas ERK and p38
activities are essential for maximal c-Jun and Fra-2 expression, and AP-1 DNA
binding activity. While the inhibition of ERK can partially prevent the formation
of beating cardiomyocytes, the activity of p38 is absolutely required for the
differentiation. Expression of dominant negative c-Jun(bZIP) in P19 cells can
also inhibit the differentiation response. Surprisingly, however, expression of
dominant negative SEK or JNK causes an inhibition of P19 cell proliferation.
Taken together, the results show that ERK, JNK, p38, and AP-1 are activated in a 
coordinated and sustained manner, and contribute to proliferation and
cardiomyocyte differentiation of P19 cells.

PMID: 11884386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16426-32. Epub 2002 Mar 4.

Composition and function of AP-1 transcription complexes during muscle cell
differentiation.

Andreucci JJ(1), Grant D, Cox DM, Tomc LK, Prywes R, Goldhamer DJ, Rodrigues N,
Bédard PA, McDermott JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3, Canada.

The role of activating protein-1 (AP-1) in muscle cells is currently equivocal.
While some studies propose that AP-1 is inhibitory for myogenesis, others
implicate a positive role in this process. We tested whether this variation may
be due to different properties of the AP-1 subunit composition in differentiating
cells. Using Western analysis we show that c-Jun, Fra-2, and JunD are expressed
throughout the time course of differentiation. Phosphatase assays indicate that
JunD and Fra-2 are phosphorylated in muscle cells and that at least two isoforms 
of each are expressed in muscle cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
combined with antibody supershifts indicate the appearance of Fra-2 as a major
component of the AP-1 DNA binding complex in differentiating cells. In this
context it appears that Fra-2 heterodimerizes with c-Jun and JunD. Studying the
c-jun enhancer in reporter gene assays we observed that the muscle transcription 
factors MEF2A and MyoD can contribute to robust transcriptional activation of the
c-jun enhancer. In differentiating muscle cells mutation of the MEF2 site reduces
transactivation of the c-jun enhancer and MEF2A is the predominant MEF2 isoform
binding to this cis element. Transcriptional activation of an AP-1 site
containing reporter gene (TRE-Luc) is enhanced under differentiation conditions
compared with growth conditions in C2C12 muscle cells. Further studies indicate
that Fra-2 containing AP-1 complexes can transactivate the MyoD
enhancer/promoter. Thus, an AP-1 complex containing Fra-2 and c-Jun or JunD is
consistent with muscle differentiation, indicating that AP-1 function during
myogenesis is dependent on its subunit composition.

PMID: 11877423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Lipid Res. 2002 Feb;43(2):297-306.

The E-box motif in the proximal ABCA1 promoter mediates transcriptional
repression of the ABCA1 gene.

Yang XP(1), Freeman LA, Knapper CL, Amar MJ, Remaley A, Brewer HB Jr,
Santamarina-Fojo S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Disease Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1666, USA.

To identify regulatory elements in the proximal human ATP-binding cassette
transporter A1 (hABCA1) gene promoter we transfected RAW cells with plasmids
containing mutations in the E-box, AP1, and liver X receptor (LXR) elements as
well as the two Sp1 motifs. Point mutations in either Sp1 site or in the AP1 site
had only a minor effect whereas mutation of the LXR element decreased promoter
activity. In contrast, mutation or deletion of the E-box motif caused a 3-fold
increase in transcriptional activity under basal conditions. Gel shift and DNaseI
footprint analysis showed binding of a protein or protein complex to this region.
Preincubation of nuclear extracts with antibodies established that USF1, USF2,
and fos related antigen (Fra) 2 bind to DNA sequences in the human ABCA1 promoter
that contains the intact E-box but not the mutant or deleted E-box.
Co-transfection of USF1 and USF2 enhanced, but Fra2 repressed, ABCA1 promoter
activity. Thus, a complex consisting of USF1, USF2, and Fra2 binds the E-box
motif 147 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site and facilitates
repression of the human ABCA1 promoter. These combined studies identify a novel
site in the human ABCA1 promoter involved in the regulation of ABCA1 gene
expression.

PMID: 11861672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Lett. 2002 Mar 8;177(1):83-7.

Altered composition of the AP-1 transcription factor in immortalized compared to 
normal proliferating cells.

Sheerin A(1), Thompson KS, Goyns MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sciences, University of Sunderland, Fleming Building, Wharncliffe
Street, Sunderland, SR1 3SD, UK.

We have investigated the expression of the AP-1 transcription factor proteins,
fos, fosB, fra1, fra2, jun, junB, junD, using Western blot analysis, in several
types of asynchronously proliferating cells. The latter included normal
fibroblasts, immortalized but not tumourigenic fibroblasts, and two immortalized 
tumour cell lines. All cells expressed fos, fra1 and jun proteins and none
expressed fosB. There were, however, interesting qualitative differences between 
the normal fibroblasts and the immortalized cells. Expression of fra2 was
difficult to detect in normal cells, but was very evident in all of the
immortalized cells. The normal cells only expressed a 44 kDa junB species,
whereas the immortalized cells expressed both this and another 34 kDa species.
All of the cells expressed the two junD proteins but the smaller 39 kDa species
was more prominent in the normal cells, whereas the larger 44 kDa protein was
more prominent in the immortalized cells. These data indicate that immortalized
cells are not simply cells in which the ageing process has been prevented or
reversed, but instead exhibit additional characteristics to those associated with
young normal cells.

PMID: 11809534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 Dec 30;97(2):137-48.

Early activation of transcription factor expression in Schwann cells by
progesterone.

Mercier G(1), Turque N, Schumacher M.

Author information: 
(1)U 488 Inserm, 80 rue du Général Leclerc, 94276 Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
mercier@kb.inserm.fr

Progesterone (PROG) promotes the myelination of sciatic nerves during
regeneration after cryolesion. But, little is known about the molecular
mechanisms by which the hormone exerts its effects. This could be initiated by
the regulation of transcription factor expression in Schwann cells, which produce
the myelin sheaths in the peripheral nervous system. We investigated by RT-PCR
whether PROG activated expression of transcription factors: Egr-1 (Krox-24) Egr-2
(Krox-20), Egr-3, c-jun, jun B, jun D, c-Fos, Fos B, Fra-1, Fra-2, CREB, ATF 4,
SCIP and Sox-10 in cultured Schwann cells. PROG triggered a quick (visible as
soon as 15 min), strong (6 to 18-fold) and transient (1-2 h) stimulation of
Egr-1, Egr-2, Egr-3 and Fos B genes expression. Expression of other genes
remained unaffected by PROG treatment. The same expression pattern was obtained
in the MSC 80 line (mouse Schwann cells), but not in the NIH-3T3 and CHO lines.
Estradiol and testosterone induced different patterns of transcription factor
gene activation in Schwann cells. Serum stimulated all genes activated by PROG in
addition c-fos, fra-1 and fra-2. The PROG effects were blocked by Actinomycin D
and by RU 486. This suggests that the activation of these genes occurs at the
transcriptional level via the interaction of the hormone with its cognate
receptor. Thus, PROG can regulate Schwann cell functions and differentiation by
transiently activating specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11750070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 23;289(1):25-33.

Interaction of AP-1 with a cluster of NF-kappa B binding elements in the human
TNF promoter region.

Udalova IA(1), Kwiatkowski D.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 7BN,
United Kingdom. iudalova@molbiol.ox.ac.uk

Transcriptional activation of the human TNF gene involves multiple regulatory
elements whose functional properties vary between stimuli and cell types. Here we
have used a COS-7 expression system to dissect the transactivating potential of
NF-kappa B binding sites in the human TNF promoter region from other regulatory
influences. In this model, NF-kappa B acts largely through a dense cluster of
three binding sites located 600 nt upstream of the transcription start site. We
show that the transcriptional activity of this complex is highly sensitive to the
p65:p50 ratio that is expressed. We demonstrate that the AP-1 complex c-Jun/Fra2 
is capable of binding to this region and that this inhibits the transactivating
effects of NF-kappa B. These results are suggestive of a complex regulatory
element that mediates fine control rather than acting as a simple on-off switch
for TNF gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11708771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mech Ageing Dev. 2001 Oct;122(15):1813-24.

Altered composition and DNA binding activity of the AP-1 transcription factor
during the ageing of human fibroblasts.

Sheerin A(1), Thompson KS, Goyns MH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Molecular Gerontology Unit, University of
Sunderland, Fleming Building, Wharncliffe Street, Sunderland SR1 3SD, UK.

We have investigated the expression of AP-1 transcription factor proteins during 
the in-vitro ageing of human fibroblasts. The numbers of these cells that are in 
the cell cycle gradually decreases up to 45 cumulative population doublings
(cPD), thereafter the decline is steeper, until almost all cells enter a
post-mitotic state by 60 cPD. We observed that a 34 kd junB species began to
replace the 44 kd junB species after 41 cPD. This was followed, after 44 cPD, by 
a loss of fra1 and both junD species. After 49 cPD there was a gradual decline in
the levels of fos and jun proteins, but disproportionately, so that the fos/jun
protein ratio also declined. Although fos and jun proteins were still clearly
present at 60 cPD, utilisation of the AP-1 DNA consensus sequence could not be
demonstrated after 54 cPD. These data indicate that significant changes occur in 
the composition of the AP-1 transcription factor during ageing, but also that
alterations in its DNA binding activity may involve other factors.

PMID: 11557282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neuroendocrinol. 2001 Jul;13(7):581-7.

Serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitors decrease adrenergic arylalkylamine
n-acetyltransferase induction in the rat pineal gland.

Spessert R(1), Rapp M, Vollrath L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
spessert@mail.uni-mainz.de

Adrenergic regulation of the pineal enzyme serotonin N-acetyltransferase
[arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT); EC 2.3.1.87] accounts for the
circadian rhythm in melatonin formation. In the present study, the role of
protein phosphatases in the adrenergic regulation of rat pineal AA-NAT was
investigated using specific inhibitors. In cultured pineals, the serine/threonine
phosphatase type 1 and type 2A inhibitors okadaic acid and calyculin A
significantly decreased adrenergically or cAMP-induced AA-NAT activity, whereas
the serine/threonine phosphatase type 2B inhibitor cypermethrin and tyrosine
phosphatase inhibitor dephostatin were ineffective. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) data indicate that okadaic acid 
exerts its effect on cAMP-dependent AA-NAT induction by downregulating the amount
of AA-NAT transcript. The 'third' messengers, inducible cAMP early repressor
(ICER) and Fos-related antigene-2 (Fra-2), are believed to play a negative role
in pineal AA-NAT transcription. Okadaic acid increased the cAMP responsiveness of
neither ICER mRNA nor Fra-2 mRNA. Therefore, the regulatory role of pineal
serine/threonine phosphatases in adrenergically stimulated AA-NAT expression
probably does not depend on ICER or Fra-2.

PMID: 11442772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Brain Res. 2001 Jun 29;905(1-2):34-43.

Degradation of c-Fos protein expressed by N-methyl-D-aspartic acid in nuclear
fractions of murine hippocampus.

Manabe T(1), Kuramoto N, Nakamichi N, Aramachi K, Baba K, Hirai T, Yoneyama M,
Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Setsunan University, Hirakata, Osaka 573-0101,
Japan.

In both nuclear and cytosolic fractions of murine hippocampus, constitutive
expression was seen with Fra-2 protein, but not with other Fos family members
tested including c-Fos, Fos-B and Fra-1 proteins. Fos-B protein was only detected
in nuclear fractions. The systemic administration of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid
(NMDA) induced marked and transient expression of c-Fos protein, but not other
family members, in both hippocampal fractions 2 h later. In vitro incubation at
30 degrees C led to more rapid degradation of inducible c-Fos protein than
constitutive Fra-2 protein in nuclear fractions obtained 2 h after the
administration of NMDA, without significantly affecting that of both member
proteins in cytosolic fractions. The addition of phosphatase inhibitors
significantly delayed the initial degradation rate of inducible c-Fos protein,
with concomitant facilitation of that of constitutive Fra-2 protein, in nuclear
fractions. The addition of protease inhibitors also delayed the initial
degradation of constitutive Fra-2 protein, without markedly altering that of
inducible c-Fos protein, in nuclear fractions. Immunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that NMDA induced phosphorylation of c-Fos protein on tyrosine residues 
in nuclear fractions to a lesser extent than that on serine residues 2 h after
administration. These results suggest that NMDA signals may be propagated to the 
nucleus to induce both expression and degradation of c-Fos protein through a
molecular mechanism associated with phosphorylation on serine and/or tyrosine
residues in murine hippocampus.

PMID: 11423077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mech Ageing Dev. 2001 Aug;122(11):1169-86.

Impaired activation of AP-1 and altered expression of constituent proteins in rat
adrenal during ageing.

Medicherla R(1), Leers-Sucheta S, Luo Y, Azhar S.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Centre (GRECC), VA Palo Alto Health
Care System (GRECC, 182B), 3801 Miranda Ave, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

Oxidative stress appears to be one of the primary factors contributing to an age 
related decline in steroidogenic response in rat adrenocortical and testicular
Leydig cells. In this report we concentrate on age-related changes in the DNA
binding activity of the transcription factor AP-1 which is particularly
responsive to changes in cellular oxidative conditions: adrenal nuclear extracts 
from young mature (5 months) and old (24 months) rats treated with, and without, 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were studied. AP-1 binding activity, as measured by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), was diminished approximately 70%
with age in unstimulated adrenals. Following LPS treatment, AP-1 binding activity
increased significantly in the adrenals of both young and old animals; however,
the level of AP-1 binding achieved in LPS-stimulated old rats was less than that 
observed for LPS-stimulated young rats. There was no corresponding change in the 
binding activity of housekeeping transcription factors SP-1 and OCT-1. To further
understand these observations, compositional changes in the members of the AP-1
DNA-binding complex were examined by a super-shift assay and Western blot
analysis. In adrenals from old rats, a significant decrease in the amount of Fra2
was noted under basal conditions, whereas, substantial decreases in c-Fos, Jun D 
and c-Jun were observed in response to LPS treatment. In contrast, basal levels
of JunB, an inhibitor of the trans-activating function of c-Jun and repressor of 
AP-1-dependent transcription, were significantly elevated in adrenals from old
rats compared to young rats. Together, these findings suggest that ageing-induced
oxidative stress may contribute to impaired functional expression of AP-1 by
differentially regulating the steady state levels of AP-1 components. The
observed decrease in AP-1 binding activity in ageing adrenals is most likely due 
to decreased expression of the AP-1 activating components (c-Fos, c-Jun, JunD,
etc.) and increased expression of JunB, resulting in a switch from
transcriptionally active AP-1 complexes observed in young rats to less efficient 
JunB containing complexes in old rats.

PMID: 11389931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Cell Physiol. 2001 Jul;188(1):89-97.

Carbonic anhydrase II is an AP-1 target gene in osteoclasts.

David JP(1), Rincon M, Neff L, Horne WC, Baron R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.

c-Fos, a member of the AP-1 family of transcription factors, is necessary for
osteoclast differentiation but to date, none of the osteoclast-phenotypic markers
have been identified as AP-1 target genes. Here, we demonstrate that carbonic
anhydrase II (CA II), an enzyme necessary for osteoclast activity, is
transcriptionally upregulated by c-Fos/AP-1. A functional AP-1 binding site is
present in the CA II promoter and is necessary for this regulation. Furthermore, 
we show that AP-1 binding activity, mainly composed of Fra-2 and JunD, is induced
by treatment of bone marrow cultures with the osteoclastogenic hormone 1,25
dihydroxyvitamin D(3). Fra-2 and JunD are found in mature osteoclasts as well.
Thus, our data demonstrate that cFos/AP-1 can directly regulate the expression of
this osteoclast marker and that AP-1 activity is upregulated in osteoclast
progenitors in response to osteoclastogenic signals.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11382925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2001 May 20;90(1):39-47.

Time course of Fos and Fras expression in the hypothalamic supraoptic neurons
during chronic osmotic stimulation.

Miyata S(1), Tsujioka H, Itoh M, Matsunaga W, Kuramoto H, Kiyohara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Matsugasaki,
Sakyo-ku, 606-8585, Kyoto, Japan. smiyata@ipc.kit.ac.jp

The Fos family comprises Fos and several subtypes of Fos-related proteins (Fras) 
such as FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2, DeltaFosB, and chronic Fras. Changes in the
expression of Fos family proteins with time are not well elucidated, particularly
during chronic stimulation. In the present experiments, we investigated
quantitatively the time course changes in Fos, FosB and Fras immunoreactivity in 
the magnocellular neurons of the supraoptic nucleus (SON) during acute and
chronic osmotic stimulation. A small number of Fos- and FosB-positive neurons
were observed in the SON of control rats, while many Fras-positive neurons were
seen in control animals. Significant increases in the numbers of Fos-, FosB-, and
Fras-positive neurons were observed 2 h after acute osmotic stimulation by
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 3% NaCl solution. Although the number of
Fos-positive neurons returned to the control level 4 h after i.p. injection, a
significant number of FosB- and Fras-positive neurons were still observed 8 h
after i.p. injection. During chronic osmotic stimulation by giving 2% NaCl
solution for 2 and 5 days, a large number of Fos-positive neurons were observed, 
but the cessation of chronic osmotic stimulation by normal water drinking
immediately decreased the number of Fos-positive neurons to the control level
within 2 h. The number of FosB-positive neurons was increased with period of
chronic osmotic stimulation, and a significant number were observed 2-8 h after
the cessation of the stimulation. The number of Fras-positive neurons was also
significantly higher during chronic osmotic stimulation, and this number was
significantly high 2-8 h after the cessation of the stimulation. RT-PCR analysis 
demonstrated the persistent expression of c-fos mRNA in the SON during chronic
osmotic stimulation. These results suggest that c-fos mRNA and Fos protein are
constitutively elevated during chronic osmotic stimulation and the time course
changes in Fos are different from those seen in FosB and Fras.

PMID: 11376854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3704-13.

Tissue-specific transgenic knockdown of Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) expression 
mediated by dominant negative Fra-2.

Smith M(1), Burke Z, Humphries A, Wells T, Klein D, Carter D, Baler R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.

Fos-related antigen 2 (Fra-2) is a member of the Fos family of immediate-early
genes, most of which are rapidly induced by second messengers. All members of
this family act by binding to AP-1 sites as heterodimeric complexes with other
proteins. However, each appears to have a distinct role. The role and biology of 
Fra-2 are less well understood than those of its relatives c-Fos, Fra-1, and
FosB; moreover, Fra-2 target genes remain largely unknown, as does the basis of
its selective effects on transcriptional activity. To pursue these issues, we
created a transgenic rat line (NATDNF2) in which a dominant negative fra-2 (DNF2)
gene is strongly expressed in the pineal gland; tissue selectivity was achieved
by putting the DNF2 gene under the control of the rat arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase (AANAT) regulatory region, which targets gene expression to a
very restricted set of tissues (pineal gland >> retina). Expression of AANAT is
normally turned on after the onset of darkness in the rat; as a result, pineal
DNF2 expression occurs only at night. This was associated with marked suppression
of the nocturnal increase in fra-2 mRNA and protein levels, indicating that DNF2 
expression inhibits downstream effects of Fra-2, including the maintenance of
high levels of fra-2 gene expression. Analysis of 1,190 genes in the NATDNF2
pineal gland, including the AANAT gene, identified two whose expression is
strongly linked to fra-2 expression: the genes encoding type II iodothyronine
deiodinase and nectadrin (CD24).

PMCID: PMC87005
PMID: 11340164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Endocrinology. 2001 May;142(5):1975-81.

Parathyroid hormone stimulates fra-2 expression in osteoblastic cells in vitro
and in vivo.

McCauley LK(1), Koh-Paige AJ, Chen H, Chen C, Ontiveros C, Irwin R, McCabe LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics/Prevention/Geriatrics, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109-1078, USA.

PTH and PTH-related protein (PTHrP) are key mediators of skeletal development and
homeostasis through their activation of the PTH-1 receptor. Previous studies have
found that several AP-1 family members are regulated by PTH, such as c-fos,
fra-1, and c-jun. There are numerous genes in the bone microenvironment that
contain AP-1 sites, and different Fos family members are reported to have
opposing transcriptional activities at AP-1 sites. The purpose of this study was 
to identify the effects of PTH on expression of the AP-1 protein complex member, 
fra-2, to extend our understanding of transcriptional regulators of PTH action.
PTH induction of fra-2 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels in MC3T3-E1 preosteoblastic
cells was maximal with 0.1 microM PTH (1-34). The expression in vitro was
greatest 1 h after treatment and was present with N-terminal PTH but not PTH
(7-34) or (53-84). Cycloheximide treatment induced fra-2 expression, and
actinomycin D inhibited basal and PTHrP-induced expression. AP-1 protein in
nuclear extracts of MC3T3-E1 cells was increased with PTH treatment at 3 h and
consisted of high levels of Fra-2 protein, as evidenced by a supershift in an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Western blot analysis. Up-regulation of 
steady-state fra-2 mRNA was also noted in vivo, where injection of PTH (1-34) (20
microgram) resulted in a more-than-7-fold maximal increase in fra-2 mRNA
expression in the calvaria of mice, after 1 h of treatment. These data add to the
transcriptional mediators induced by PTH and suggest that the interplay of AP-1
family members will provide insight into regulatory pathways of PTH and PTHrP for
their anabolic and catabolic actions in bone.

PMID: 11316763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 1;20(5):634-44.

Mechanism of repression of squamous differentiation marker, SPRR1B, in malignant 
bronchial epithelial cells: role of critical TRE-sites and its transacting
factors.

Patterson T(1), Vuong H, Liaw YS, Wu R, Kalvakolanu DV, Reddy SP.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, Department of
Environmental Health Sciences, 615 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

The overexpression of SPRR1B in bronchial epithelium is a marker for early
metaplastic changes and the loss of its expression is associated with an
irreversible malignant transformation. In the present study, we have used a model
system consisting of normal and malignant bronchial epithelial (BE) cells to
elucidate the differential transcriptional control of SPRR1B. SPRR1B expression
is either detectable or PMA (phorbol 13-myristate 12-acetate) -inducible in
several malignant BE cells including squamous, adeno, small and large cell
carcinomas. Loss of SPRR1B expression is correlated well with the lack of strong 
in vivo protein-DNA interactions at the -152 bp promoter, which contains two
functional TRE sites. Even though the basal level AP-1 protein DNA binding
pattern is different between normal and malignant cells, PMA significantly
enhances Jun and Fos binding to the consensus TRE site in both cell types.
Intriguingly, the composition of AP-1 protein binding to the -152 to -86 bp
SPRR1B promoter is quite different. In untreated cells, SPRR1B promoter is
predominantly occupied by JunD and Fra2. PMA significantly induced binding of
JunB and Fra1 in normal cells, while JunB and Fra2 bound to TREs in the malignant
cells. Overexpression of fra1 in malignant cells significantly enhanced SPRR1B
promoter activity. In contrast, overexpression of fra2, but not fra1, strongly
reduced both basal and PMA-inducible promoter activities in normal cells.
Together, these results indicate that either temporal expression and/or
differential activation of AP-1 proteins, especially Fra1 and Fra2, might
contribute to the dysregulation of terminal differentiation marker, SPRR1B,
expression in various BE cells.

PMID: 11313996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neurosci Res. 2001 Apr 1;64(1):34-42.

Differential in vitro degradation of particular Fos family members expressed by
kainic acid in nuclear and cytosolic fractions of murine hippocampus.

Manabe T(1), Ogita K, Nakamichi N, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Kanazawa University Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-0934, Japan.
yyoneda@anet.ne.jp

Mice were injected with kainic acid (KA) at a convulsive dose, followed by
homogenization of the hippocampus in the presence of different protease and
phosphatase inhibitors, and subsequent preparation of nuclear and cytosolic
fractions. An intraperitoneal injection of KA resulted in marked expression of
particular Fos family members, including c-Fos, Fra-2, and Fos-B, but not Fra-1
proteins, in both fractions 2 to 18 h after administration. These fractions were 
individually incubated at 30 degrees C for 1 to 18 h for determination of in
vitro degradation. Similarly rapid degradation was seen with c-Fos protein
between nuclear fractions obtained 2 and 18 h after administration, while no
significant degradation was found for c-Fos protein in cytosolic fractions
obtained 2 h after administration during incubation. By contrast, in vitro
incubation led to rapid degradation of c-Fos protein in cytosolic fractions
obtained 18 h after administration. Degradation profiles were peculiar to each
member protein in nuclear and cytosolic fractions obtained 2 and 18 h after
administration. Dialysis prevented degradation of c-Fos protein in nuclear
fractions without markedly affecting that in cytosolic fractions in a manner
independent of the time after administration. The addition of inhibitors for
phosphatases, but not for proteases, accelerated the degradation of c-Fos protein
in nuclear fractions previously dialyzed. These results suggest that in vivo KA
signals may modulate heterologous machineries responsible for breakdown of each
Fos family member in a unique manner in nuclear fractions, rather than cytosolic 
fractions, of murine hippocampus.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11276049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Cancer. 2001 Mar 1;91(5):625-30.

Overexpression of JunB in undifferentiated malignant rat oral keratinocytes
enhances the malignant phenotype in vitro without altering cellular
differentiation.

Robinson CM(1), Prime SS, Huntley S, Stone AM, Davies M, Eveson JW, Paterson IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Dental Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, United 
Kingdom. max.robinson@bristol.ac.uk

Our study examined the expression of AP-1 family members in keratinocytes derived
from the rat-4NQO model of oral carcinogenesis in which extremes of epithelial
differentiation and tumour cell aggressiveness are evident. The constitutive
expression of JunB was diminished in the undifferentiated, more aggressive tumour
phenotype compared with the well-differentiated, less aggressive keratinocytes,
whereas the expression of other AP-1 family members (c-jun, junD, c-fos, fra1,
fra2 and fosB) was either very weak or variable. After transfection of the
undifferentiated keratinocytes with junB cDNA, clonal populations were isolated
that expressed similar levels of JunB protein as the well-differentiated cells.
Both untransfected and transfected cell lines were keratin negative and vimentin 
positive. Increased expression of JunB in the transfected cells resulted in
up-regulation of c-Jun and Fra1 and an enhanced AP-1 activity as demonstrated by 
transcriptional activation of the prototypic AP-1 dependent promoter, MMP-1. JunB
transfected cells grew more quickly than vector-only controls and were refractory
to the growth inhibitory effects of TGF-beta1. Over-expression of JunB resulted
in the elevated expression of the AP-1 dependent proteinase, MMP-9, whereas the
expression of the AP-1 independent enzyme, MMP-2, was unaffected. JunB
transfected keratinocytes were highly invasive in an in vitro assay of tumour
cell invasion compared with vector controls. The results indicate that increased 
expression of JunB above baseline levels in undifferentiated rat keratinocytes
does not alter epithelial differentiation but enhances the malignant phenotype in
vitro, possibly by altering the dynamics of the AP-1 complex.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11267971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Apr;15(4):638-53.

Identification of a decidua-specific enhancer on the human prolactin gene with
two critical activator protein 1 (AP-1) binding sites.

Watanabe K(1), Kessler CA, Bachurski CJ, Kanda Y, Richardson BD, Stanek J,
Handwerger S, Brar AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Deletion analysis of the human PRL promoter in endometrial stromal cells
decidualized in vitro revealed a 536-bp enhancer located between nucleotide (nt) 
-2,040 to -1,505 in the 5'-flanking region. The 536-bp enhancer fragment ligated 
into a thymidine kinase (TK) promoter-luciferase reporter plasmid conferred
enhancer activity in decidual-type cells but not nondecidual cells. DNase I
footprint analysis of decidualized endometrial stromal cells revealed three
protected regions, FP1-FP3. Transfection of overlapping 100-bp fragments of the
536-bp enhancer indicated that FP1 and FP3 each conferred enhancer activity. Gel 
shift assays indicated that both FP1 and FP3 bind activator protein 1 (AP-1), and
JunD and Fra-2 are components of the AP-1 complex in decidual fibroblasts.
Mutation of the AP-1 binding site in either FP1 or FP3 decreased enhancer
activity by approximately 50%, while mutation of both sites almost completely
abolished activity. Coexpression of the 536-bp enhancer and A-fos, a dominant
negative to AP-1, decreased enhancer activity by approximately 70%. Conversely,
coexpression of Fra-2 in combination with JunD or c-Jun and p300 increased
enhancer activity 6- to 10-fold. Introduction of JunD and Fra-2 into nondecidual 
cells is sufficient to confer enhancer activity. JunD and Fra-2 protein
expression was markedly increased in secretory phase endometrium and decidua of
early pregnancy (high PRL content) compared with proliferative phase endometrium 
(no PRL). These investigations indicate that the 5'-flanking region of the human 
PRL gene contains a decidua-specific enhancer between nt -2,040/-1,505 and AP-1
binding sites within this enhancer region are critical for activity.

PMID: 11266514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. EMBO Rep. 2000 Nov;1(5):422-7.

An enhanceosome containing the Jun B/Fra-2 heterodimer and the HMG-I(Y)
architectural protein controls HPV 18 transcription.

Bouallaga I(1), Massicard S, Yaniv M, Thierry F.

Author information: 
(1)Département des biotechnologies, URA 1644 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Recent studies have reported new mechanisms that mediate the transcriptional
synergy of strong tissue-specific enhancers, involving the cooperative assembly
of higher-order nucleoprotein complexes called enhanceosomes. Here we show that
the HPV18 enhancer, which controls the epithelial-specific transcription of the
E6 and E7 transforming genes, exhibits characteristic features of these
structures. We used deletion experiments to show that a core enhancer element
cooperates, in a specific helical phasing, with distant essential factors binding
to the ends of the enhancer. This core sequence, binding a Jun B/Fra-2
heterodimer, cooperatively recruits the architectural protein HMG-I(Y) in a
nucleoprotein complex, where they interact with each other. Therefore, in HeLa
cells, HPV18 transcription seems to depend upon the assembly of an enhanceosome
containing multiple cellular factors recruited by a core sequence interacting
with AP1 and HMG-I(Y).

PMCID: PMC1083764
PMID: 11258482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Lipid Res. 2001 Mar;42(3):390-8.

Cholesterol sulfate stimulates involucrin transcription in keratinocytes by
increasing Fra-1, Fra-2, and Jun D.

Hanley K(1), Wood L, Ng DC, He SS, Lau P, Moser A, Elias PM, Bikle DD, Williams
ML, Feingold KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Lipids that are synthesized de novo in the epidermis, including fatty acids,
oxysterols, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3), and farnesol, can regulate the
differentiation of normal human keratinocytes (NHK). Cholesterol sulfate (CS), an
epidermal lipid that is produced in the upper nucleated layers of the epidermis
coincident with terminal differentiation, has been shown to play a role in the
regulation of the late stages of keratinocyte differentiation, including
formation of the cornified envelope. In the present study, we determined i)
whether CS regulates involucrin (INV), an early keratinocyte differentiation
marker, and ii) the mechanism by which CS regulates differentiation. mRNA and
protein levels of INV, a precursor protein of the cornified envelope, increased
2- to 3-fold in NHK incubated in the presence of CS. In contrast, cholesterol had
no effect on INV protein or mRNA levels. Transcriptional regulation was assessed 
in NHK transfected with INV promoter-luciferase constructs. CS increased
luciferase reporter activity approximately 2- to 3-fold in NHK transfected with a
3.7-kb INV promoter construct. Deletional analysis revealed a CS-responsive
region of the INV promoter located between bp --2452 and --1880. A 5-base pair
(bp) mutation of the AP-1 site (bp --2117 to --2111) within this responsive
region abolished CS responsiveness, suggesting a role for the AP-1 complex in the
regulation of INV transcription by CS. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis
demonstrated increased binding of nuclear extracts isolated from CS-treated NHK
to AP-1 DNA as compared with vehicle-treated controls. Incubation of the nuclear 
extract with the appropriate antibodies showed that the AP-1 DNA-binding complex 
contained Fra-1, Fra-2, and Jun D. Western blots demonstrated that CS treatment
increased the levels of Fra-1, Fra-2, and Jun D, and Northern analyses revealed
that CS increased mRNA levels for these same AP-1 factors. These data indicate
that CS, an endogenous lipid synthesized by keratinocytes, regulates the early
stages of keratinocyte differentiation, and may do so through its ability to
modulate levels of AP-1 proteins. -- Hanley, K., L. Wood, D. C. Ng, S. S. He, P. 
Lau, A. Moser, P. M. Elias, D. D. Bikle, M. L. Williams, and K. R. Feingold.
Cholesterol sulfate stimulates involucrin transcription in keratinocytes by
increasing Fra-1, Fra-2, and Jun D. J. Lipid Res. 2001. 42: 390--398.

PMID: 11254751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Neurosci. 2001 Jan 1;21(1):18-26.

Nerve growth factor, but not epidermal growth factor, increases Fra-2 expression 
and alters Fra-2/JunD binding to AP-1 and CREB binding elements in
pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells.

Boss V(1), Roback JD, Young AN, Roback LJ, Weisenhorn DM, Medina-Flores R, Wainer
BH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Pathology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30329, USA.

In pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells nerve growth factor (NGF) and epidermal growth
factor (EGF) activate similar receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways but
evoke strikingly different biological outcomes: NGF induces differentiation and
EGF acts as a mitogen. A novel approach was developed for identifying
transcription factor activities associated with NGF-activated, but not
EGF-activated, signaling, using random oligonucleotide clones from a DNA
recognition library to isolate specific DNA binding proteins from PC12 nuclear
extracts. A protein complex from NGF-treated, but not EGF-treated, cells was
identified that exhibits increased mobility and DNA binding activity in gel
mobility shift assays. The binding complex was identified in supershift assays as
Fra-2/JunD. The clones used as probes contain either AP-1 or cAMP response
element binding (CREB) recognition elements. Time course experiments revealed
further differences in NGF and EGF signaling in PC12 cells. NGF elicits a more
delayed and sustained ERK phosphorylation than EGF, consistent with previous
reports. Both growth factors transiently induce c-fos, but NGF evokes a greater
response than EGF. NGF specifically increases Fra-1 and Fra-2 levels at 4 and 24 
hr. The latter is represented in Western blots by bands in the 40-46 kDa range.
NGF, but not EGF, enhances the upper bands, corresponding to phosphorylated
Fra-2. These findings suggest that prolonged alterations in Fra-2 and subsequent 
increases in Fra-2/JunD binding to AP-1 and CREB response elements common among
many gene promoters could serve to trigger broadly an NGF-specific program of
gene expression.

PMID: 11150315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2000 Dec 28;85(1-2):161-70.

Is light-regulated AP-1 binding in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus gated by the
circadian clock?

François-Bellan AM(1), Guillaumond F, Bosler O, Becquet D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-501, Institut Fédératif Jean-Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord,
Université de la Méditerranée, Bd. Pierre Dramard, 13916 Marseille cedex 20,
France. francois.am@jean-roche.univ-mrs.fr

In mammals, photic entrainment of circadian rhythms likely involves light- and
clock-dependent expression of immediate early genes, including fos-like and
jun-like genes, in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus. Using an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, we evaluated whether the photic regulation of DNA-binding
activity and composition of activating protein-1 (AP-1) complexes in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus is also dependent on circadian phase. Phase-dependent
light inducibility in the expression of fra-2 and c-fos genes and in
immunoreactive Fra-2 and c-Fos protein expression was also evaluated, by in situ 
hybridization and immunocytochemistry. Light's effects on AP-1 DNA-binding
differed both qualitatively and quantitatively according to the circadian phase
at which light was applied. This phase dependence accounted for by both
compartmentalization of proteins involved in constitutive AP-1 complexes within
the nucleus or cytoplasm and control of the extent to which the expression of
specific complexes was induced. It was then shown that the mechanisms by which
the circadian clock gates the photic induction of AP-1 components differed
according to the nature of the protein.

PMID: 11146118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Neuroscience. 2000;101(4):913-9.

Long-term induction of Fos-related antigen-2 after methamphetamine-,
methylenedioxymethamphetamine-, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3, 6-tetrahydropyridine-
and trimethyltin-induced brain injury.

Pennypacker KR(1), Yang X, Gordon MN, Benkovic S, Miller D, O'Callaghan JP.

Author information: 
(1)University of South Florida, College of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, Tampa, FL 33612, USA. kpennypa@hsc.usf.edu

A long-term induction of Fos-related antigens has been shown in neurons after
brain injury, suggesting that Fos-related antigens are involved in enhancing the 
transcription of genes related to the process of regeneration and repair. In the 
present study, we report that levels of Fos-related antigen-2 are elevated in
several models of chemically induced brain injury. Trimethyltin, which causes
degeneration of neurons primarily in the hippocampus and other limbic regions,
results in a five-fold induction of Fos-related antigen-2 immunoreactivity in
neurons in the pyramidal and dentate layers of the hippocampus starting at seven 
days post-treatment and persisting for 60days. Methamphetamine and
methylenedioxymethamphetamine, agents which cause degeneration of dopaminergic
nerve terminals in the striatum of the mouse, cause an increase in Fos-related
antigen-2 immunoreactivity which begins at three days post-treatment and returns 
to basal levels by days 5 and 15, respectively. Treatment with
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3, 6-tetrahydropyridine elevated levels of Fos-related
antigen-2 in the mouse striatum at three days post-treatment. This abbreviated
time-course of Fos-related antigen-2 induction is consistent with less severe
insult (terminal damage) relative to trimethyltin (cell death), but induction
occurs during the period of regeneration and repair in both models.
Dexfenfluramine, a non-neurotoxic amphetamine, does not induce Fos-related
antigen-2 expression. Decreasing core temperature of the mouse, which blocks
amphetamine-induced neurotoxicity, also blocks Fos-related antigen-2 induction.
In summary, Fos-related antigen-2 is induced in models of both cell death and
terminal degeneration, suggesting that this transcription factor may serve as a
universal signal transduction molecule involved in the regulation of genes
related to regeneration and repair in the CNS.

PMID: 11113340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Neuroscience. 2000;100(3):453-63.

Differential expression and phosphorylation of particular fos family members by
kainate in nuclear and cytosolic fractions of murine hippocampus.

Manabe T(1), Kitayama T, Ogita K, Yoneda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Setsunan University, Hirakata, 573-0101, Osaka,
Japan.

An i.p. injection of kainate resulted in severe losses of neuronal cells stained 
by Cresyl Violet in the CA1 and CA3 pyramidal layers of the murine hippocampus
within two weeks, without affecting those in the dentate granule layer up to six 
weeks. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed marked and predominant expression of
Fos family members, including c-Fos, Fos-B and Fra-2 proteins, in the dentate
granule layer of the hippocampus, but not in the pyramidal layers, 2-18h after
administration. Immunoblotting experiments showed that kainate induced more
potent expression of c-Fos protein in nuclear fractions obtained 2h after
injection than those obtained 18h later, with similar expression between
cytosolic fractions obtained 2 and 18h after administration. Both Fos-B and Fra-2
proteins were more potently expressed in nuclear and cytosolic fractions 18h
after administration than 2h when determined on immunoblotting analysis.
Two-dimensional electrophoresis revealed expression of several proteins
immunoreactive to the anti-c-Fos antibody with different isoelectric points in
response to kainate in nuclear and cytosolic fractions of the hippocampus for
2-18h after a single injection. Immunoprecipitation analysis using the anti-c-Fos
antibody showed phosphorylation of c-Fos protein on serine residues in
hippocampal nuclear fractions 2h after administration, with additional
phosphorylation on tyrosine residues 18h later. Prior treatment of the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide prevented the expression of immunoreactivities 
to the anti-c-Fos antibody detected on two-dimensional electrophoresis in
hippocampal nuclear fractions obtained 2h after administration.These results
suggest that in vivo kainate signals may lead to persistent expression of the
transcription factor activator protein-1 that consists of different Fos family
members, as well as of c-Fos protein phosphorylated on serine and/or tyrosine
residues, at an early stage after administration. Such signal consolidation
processes could play a role in mechanisms associated with neuronal survival after
kainate in the dentate granular layer of murine hippocampus.

PMID: 11098108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncogene. 2000 Oct 12;19(43):5020-9.

Transcriptional control of SPARC by v-Jun and other members of the AP1 family of 
transcription factors.

Vial E(1), Perez S, Castellazzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie Humaine, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM-U412), Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France.

Transformation of chick embryo fibroblasts by the v-Jun oncoprotein correlates
with a down-regulation of the extracellular matrix protein SPARC and repression
of the corresponding mRNA. Alteration in SPARC expression has been repeatedly
reported in human cancers of various origin, and is thought to contribute to the 
remodeling of the extracellular matrix during neoplastic progression.
Transcriptional control of SPARC is poorly understood. We show here that (i)
v-Jun-mediated repression of the endogenous SPARC gene is enhanced by Fra2 but
alleviated by ATF2, Fra2 and ATF2 being the two major partners of v-Jun in the
transformed cells; (ii) high basal activity as well as repression by v-Jun and
modulation by Fra2 and ATF2 is restricted to a small proximal fragment (-124/+16)
of the chicken SPARC promoter; (iii) the activity of this minimal promoter is
modulated by all the AP1 family members known in chickens (c-Jun and JunD; c-Fos 
and Fra2; ATF2; c-Maf, MafA, and MafB). Taken together these data demonstrate
that, at least in avian primary cells, SPARC expression is under the control of
the AP1 transcription factor. Further studies with the minimal (-124/+16)
promoter fragment are needed to understand how this control takes place at the
molecular level.

PMID: 11042689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Neurochem. 2000 Oct;75(4):1398-407.

Circadian binding activity of AP-1, a regulator of the arylalkylamine
N-acetyltransferase gene in the rat pineal gland, depends on circadian Fra-2,
c-Jun, and Jun-D expression and is regulated by the clock's zeitgebers.

Guillaumond F(1), Sage D, Deprez P, Bosler O, Becquet D, François-Bellan AM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U501, Institut Fédératif Jean-Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord,
Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France.

The daily rhythm in circulating melatonin is driven by a circadian rhythm in the 
expression of the arylalkylamine N:-acetyltransferase gene in the rat pineal
gland. Turning off expression of this gene at the end of night is believed to
involve inhibitory transcription factors, among which Fos-related antigen 2
(Fra-2) appears as a good candidate. Circadian rhythms in the expression of three
proteins of activating protein-1 (AP-1) complexes, namely, Fra-2, c-Jun, and
Jun-D, are shown here to account for circadian variations in AP-1 binding
activity. Quantitative variations in the Fra-2 component over the circadian cycle
were associated with qualitative variations in protein isoforms. Destruction of
the suprachiasmatic nucleus resulted in decreased nocturnal AP-1 activity,
showing that AP-1 circadian rhythm is driven by this nucleus. Exposure to light
during subjective night and administration of a serotonin 5-HT(1A)/5-HT(7)
receptor agonist during subjective day, respectively, induced a 50% decrease and 
a 50% increase in both AP-1 and Fra-2 expression. These effects were impaired by 
suprachiasmatic nucleus lesions. These data show that pineal AP-1 binding
activity, which results from Fra-2 expression, can be modulated by light and
serotonin through the suprachiasmatic nucleus according to a "phase dependence"
that is characteristic of the rhythm of clock sensitivity to both zeitgebers.

PMID: 10987819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Histol Histopathol. 2000 Jul;15(3):921-8.

Fos family members: regulation, structure and role in oncogenic transformation.

Tulchinsky E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Biology, The Danish Cancer Society, Institute
of Cancer Biology, Copenhagen. et@cancer.dk

The members of the Fos protein family might be subdivided in two groups,
according to their ability to transform rodent fibroblasts, transforming (c-Fos
and FosB) and non-transforming (Fra-1 and Fra-2) proteins. Members of these
groups are differently activated in response to external stimuli and possess
different structural features. Importantly, whilst c-Fos and FosB contain
multiple transactivation modules in their N- and C-terminal parts,
transactivation domains are absent in the non-transforming Fos proteins. As a
result, Fra-1 and Fra-2 though efficiently form dimers with the Jun proteins, are
weak transcriptional activators and inhibit the c-Fos-dependent activation in
transient transfection assay. The numerous experiments performed with the
different Fos mutant proteins with impaired transforming ability, as well as with
chimeric proteins revealed the importance of the transactivation function for
transformation. Fra-1 and Fra-2 proteins albeit ineffectively triggering
oncogenic transformation, are abundant in ras- and src-transformed murine and
chicken fibroblasts, in neoplastic thyroid cells and in highly malignant mouse
adenocarcinoma cells, which underwent mesenchymal transition. The abundance of
the non-transforming Fos proteins in these systems might be mediated by a
positive AP-l-dependent feedback mechanism, as well as by wnt signals.
Furthermore, the manipulation of the Fra-1 expression level in thyroid and
mammary tumor cells modulated the transcription of several tumor progression
markers and affected cell morphology and invasiveness. These recent data
demonstrate a novel function of non-transforming Fos proteins in the maintenance 
and progression of the transformed state. Interestingly, this function is
independent of the documented invalidity of the Fra-1 and Fra-2 proteins as
transcriptional activators in rodent fibroblasts.

PMID: 10963134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Oncogene. 2000 Aug 17;19(35):4011-21.

High levels of phosphorylated c-Jun, Fra-1, Fra-2 and ATF-2 proteins correlate
with malignant phenotypes in the multistage mouse skin carcinogenesis model.

Zoumpourlis V(1), Papassava P, Linardopoulos S, Gillespie D, Balmain A, Pintzas
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Research and Biotechnology, National Hellenic Research
Foundation, 48 Vas. Constantinou Ave., 116 35 Athens, Greece.

Analysis of the functions of AP-1 transcription factor in cellular systems has
shown its key role as a mediator of oncogenic signals. The employment of suitable
animal model systems greatly facilitates the study of changes in the composition 
and activity of the AP-1 complex. Here, we have analysed the quantitative and
qualitative changes of AP-1 at different stages of carcinogenesis in mouse skin
cell lines, derived from tumours induced by chemical mutagens. The findings of
this study suggest that elevated AP-1 DNA binding and transactivation activity
characterize the carcinoma cell lines, most notably the highly malignant spindle 
carcinomas. In addition, increased amounts and post-translational modifications
of c-Jun, Fra-1, Fra-2 and ATF-2 proteins account for a high percentage of the
increased AP-1 activity. Remarkably, high levels of phosphorylated ATF-2 protein 
were detected in malignant cell lines, indicating a novel role of ATF-2 in tumour
progression. c-Jun and ATF-2 proteins are phosphorylated by highly active JNK
kinases present in tumour cells. Finally, our results indicate distinct functions
for different AP-1 components in the promotion and progression of mouse skin
tumours. Oncogene (2000) 19, 4011 - 4021.

PMID: 10962557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 27;275(43):33718-28.

Regulation of AP1 (Jun/Fos) factor expression and activation in ovarian granulosa
cells. Relation of JunD and Fra2 to terminal differentiation.

Sharma SC(1), Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

AP1 transcription factors control rapid responses of mammalian cells to stimuli
that impact proliferation, differentiation, and transformation. To determine
which AP1 factors are present in and regulated by hormones in ovarian cells
during specific stages of proliferation and differentiation, we used both in
vitro and in vivo models, Western blotting, immunohistochemistry, DNA binding
assays, and transfections of AP1 promoter-reporter constructs. The expression
patterns of Jun and Fos family members in response to hormones
(follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and cAMP) were
distinct. JunB, c-Jun, c-Fos, and Fra2 were rapidly but transiently induced by
FSH in immature granulosa cells. JunD and Fra2 were induced by LH and maintained 
as granulosa cells terminally differentiated into luteal cells. Forskolin and
phorbol myristate acetate acted synergistically to enhance transcription of an
AP1(-73COL)-luciferase construct. JunD appears to be one mediator of this effect,
since JunD was a major component of the AP1-DNA binding complex in granulosa
cells, and menin, a selective inhibitor of JunD, blocked transcription of
-73COL-luciferase. Thus, FSH and LH via cAMP induce specific AP1 factors, the AP1
expression patterns are distinct, and that of JunD and Fra2 correlates with the
transition of proliferating granulosa cells to terminally differentiated,
non-dividing luteal cells.

PMID: 10934195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurosci. 2000 Aug 1;20(15):5647-53.

Fos-related antigen 2: potential mediator of the transcriptional activation in
rat adrenal medulla evoked by repeated immobilization stress.

Nankova BB(1), Rivkin M, Kelz M, Nestler EJ, Sabban EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New York Medical College,
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

The precise mechanisms by which beneficial responses to acute stress are
transformed into long-term pathological effects of chronic stress are largely
unknown. Western blot analyses revealed that members of the AP1 transcription
factor family are differentially regulated by single and repeated stress in the
rat adrenal medulla, suggesting distinct roles in establishing stress-induced
patterns of gene expression in this tissue. The induction of c-fos was transient,
whereas marked elevation of long-lasting Fos-related antigens, including Fra2,
was observed after repeated immobilization. We investigated DNA protein
interactions at the AP1-like promoter elements of two stress-responsive genes,
tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase. Increased DNA-binding
activity was displayed in adrenomedullary extract from repeatedly stressed rats, 
which was predominantly composed of c-Jun- and Fra2-containing dimers. The
induction of Fra2 and increased AP1-like binding activity was reflected in
sustained transcriptional activation of tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine
beta-hydroxylase genes after repeated episodes of stress. The functional link
between Fra2 and regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase
transcription was confirmed in PC12 cells coexpressing this factor and the
corresponding promoter-reporter gene constructs. These studies emphasize the
potential importance of stress-evoked increases in the expression of the Fra2
gene for in vivo adaptations of the adrenal catecholamine producing system.

PMID: 10908602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Jul 28;289(1):1-4.

Expression of fos-related antigen-2 in rat hippocampus after middle cerebral
arterial occlusion.

Pennypacker KR(1), Eidizadeh S, Kassed CA, O'Callaghan JP, Sanberg PR, Willing
AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, College of Medicine, University
of South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, MDC 9, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
kpennypa@hsc.usf.edu

AP-1 transcription factors have been shown to be induced in the brain after
ischemic injury. However, their roles in neuronal survival or death have yet to
be defined. Here, we report the discovery of elevated nuclear levels of
fos-related antigen-2 (FRA-2) in the nuclei of hippocampal neurons seven days
after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Expression of FRA-2 and AP-1 DNA
binding activity is elevated in hippocampi ipsilateral as well as contralateral
to MCAO. Using Fluoro-Jade staining as a marker of neurodegeneration, FRA-2 was
not found to be expressed in degenerating neurons. Thus, FRA-2 is expressed in
neurons that survive ischemic insult suggesting a role for this transcription
factor in neuronal adaptation to the post-injury state.

PMID: 10899394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30765-73.

Requirement of Ras/MAPK pathway activation by transforming growth factor beta for
transforming growth factor beta 1 production in a Smad-dependent pathway.

Yue J(1), Mulder KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.

Our previous results have shown that transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)
rapidly activates Ras, as well as both ERKs and SAPKs. In order to address the
biological significance of the activation of these pathways by TGFbeta, here we
examined the role of the Ras/MAPK pathways and the Smads in TGFbeta(3) induction 
of TGFbeta(1) expression in untransformed lung and intestinal epithelial cells.
Expression of either a dominant-negative mutant of Ras (RasN17) or a
dominant-negative mutant of MKK4 (DN MKK4), or addition of the MEK1 inhibitor
PD98059, inhibited the ability of TGFbeta(3) to induce AP-1 complex formation at 
the TGFbeta(1) promoter, and the subsequent induction of TGFbeta(1) mRNA. The
primary components present in this TGFbeta(3)-inducible AP-1 complex at the
TGFbeta(1) promoter were JunD and Fra-2, although c-Jun and FosB were also
involved. Furthermore, deletion of the AP-1 site in the TGFbeta(1) promoter or
addition of PD98059 inhibited the ability of TGFbeta(3) to stimulate TGFbeta(1)
promoter activity. Collectively, our data demonstrate that TGFbeta(3) induction
of TGFbeta(1) is mediated through a signaling cascade consisting of Ras, the
MAPKKs MKK4 and MEK1, the MAPKs SAPKs and ERKs, and the specific AP-1 proteins
Fra-2 and JunD. Although Smad3 and Smad4 were not detectable in
TGFbeta(3)-inducible AP-1 complexes at the TGFbeta(1) promoter, stable expression
of dominant-negative Smad3 could significantly inhibit the ability of TGFbeta(3) 
to stimulate TGFbeta(1) promoter activity. Transient expression of
dominant-negative Smad4 also inhibited the ability of TGFbeta(3) to transactivate
the TGFbeta(1) promoter. Thus, although the Ras/MAPK pathways are essential for
TGFbeta(3) induction of TGFbeta(1), Smads may only contribute to this biological 
response in an indirect manner.

PMID: 10843986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Brain Res. 2000 May 12;864(2):270-80.

A differential role of CREB phosphorylation in cAMP-inducible gene expression in 
the rat pineal.

Spessert R(1), Rapp M, Jastrow H, Karabul N, Blum F, Vollrath L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Johannes Gutenberg University, Saarstrasse 19-21,
D-55099, Mainz, Germany. spessert@mail.uni-mainz.de

In the rat pineal gland cAMP mediates nocturnal induction of the enzyme
arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase (AA-NAT) as well as of transcription factors
such as inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER), Fos-related antigen-2 (Fra-2) and 
JunB. Cyclic AMP stimulates the phosphorylation of the DNA binding protein cAMP
response element binding protein (CREB). While cAMP-induced CREB phosphorylation 
appears to be a prerequisite for AA-NAT and ICER gene expression, it is not known
whether CREB phosphorylation accounts for the full cAMP response of the two
genes. Furthermore, the significance of CREB phosphorylation in cAMP-activated
Fra-2 and JunB transcription is unknown. In the present in vitro study we used
the serine/threonine protein phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid (OA) to
phosphorylate CREB without altering intrapineal cAMP concentration. It was
observed that OA (10(-7) M) was less effective than dibutyryl cAMP (dbcAMP;
10(-3) M) in inducing AA-NAT mRNA and ICER mRNA, respectively. On the basis of
this finding, it is concluded that CREB phosphorylation alone is apparently not
sufficient for the full cAMP response of the two genes. By contrast, OA and
dbcAMP equally stimulated the accumulation of the mRNAs of Fra-2 and JunB.
Therefore cAMP may induce Fra-2 and JunB transcripts via CREB phosphorylation.
Our observations suggest that CREB phosphorylation plays a critical role in
diversification of cAMP-dependent gene induction in the rat pineal.

PMID: 10802034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2000 Mar 29;76(2):396-406.

Stimulation of astrocyte-enriched culture with arachidonic acid increases
proenkephalin mRNA: involvement of proto-oncoprotein and mitogen activated
protein kinases.

Won JS(1), Kim YH, Song DK, Huh SO, Lee JK, Suh HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Institute of Natural Medicine, College of
Medicine, Hallym University, 1 Okchun-Dong, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do, South Korea.

In astrocyte-enriched cultures, arachidonic acid (AA, 100 microM) significantly
increased the proenkephalin (proENK) mRNA level (4. 9-fold at 8 h). In addition, 
AA also increased several AP-1 proteins, such as c-Fos, Fra-1, Fra-2, JunB, JunD,
and c-Jun, or AP-1 and ENKCRE-2 DNA-binding activity. As well as AP-1 proteins
and their DNA-binding activities, proENK mRNA level induced by AA was reduced by 
the pretreatment with 15 microM of cycloheximide (CHX; 1.6-fold). AA-dependent
increase of proENK mRNA is not mediated by cyclooxygenase- or
lipoxygenase-dependent metabolites, or free radicals, because the AA-induced
increase of proENK mRNA levels was not affected by indomethacin (10 microM),
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (10 microM), or N-acetylcysteine. However, as well as
proto-oncoprotein levels, such as Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, JunB, but not JunD,
AA-induced increase of proENK mRNA was significantly reduced by the pretreatment 
with 10 microM of PD98059 (1.3-fold) or 10 microM of SB203580 (1.8-fold). These
results strongly suggest that AA rather than one of its metabolites is involved
in the increase of proENK mRNA. In addition, the activation of both the p38 and
ERK pathways appears to be involved in the AA-induced increase of proENK mRNA via
activating the expression of proto-oncoprotein, such as Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, and 
JunB.

PMID: 10762717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Eur J Immunol. 2000 Mar;30(3):778-86.

Thymosin-alpha1 regulates MHC class I expression in FRTL-5 cells at
transcriptional level.

Giuliani C(1), Napolitano G, Mastino A, Di Vincenzo S, D'Agostini C, Grelli S,
Bucci I, Singer DS, Kohn LD, Monaco F, Garaci E, Favalli C.

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Endocrinology, University of Chieti, Italy.

In this study we examined the effect of the synthetic peptide thymosin-alpha1
(T(alpha)1) on MHC class I expression in FRTL-5 cells. Treatment with T(alpha)1
increased expression of MHC class I surface molecules and mRNA, which reached its
peak (153 +/- 8 % of the control value) after 12 h. Chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) analysis, following transfection with a plasmid
containing the regulatory sequence of MHC class I (or its deletion derivatives)
with the CAT reporter gene, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay experiments 
demonstrated that the action of T(alpha)1 was at the transcriptional level, and
its mechanism of action is likely due to increased binding between the complex
p50/fra-2 and the enhancer A sequence of the 5' flanking region of a swine class 
I gene (PD1). An increase in the expression of MHC class I surface molecules was 
also observed by flow cytometry in murine and human tumor cell lines and in
primary cultures of human macrophages. This study shows for the first time an
effect of Talpha1 on the regulation of gene expression at the molecular level,
and may further contribute to explaining the results obtained using Talpha1 in
the control of infectious diseases and tumor growth.

PMID: 10741392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Brain Res. 2000 Jan 10;852(2):247-54.

Quinpirole attenuates the striatal immediate early gene expression, but not the
hyperactivity, induced by the serotonin agonist RU-24969.

Cook DF(1), Wirtshafter D.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Psychology, 60607-7137,
USA.

Systemic administration of the mixed 5-HT(1A/1B) agonist RU-24969 has been shown 
to produce a dramatic increase in locomotor activity and to induce robust c-Fos
expression in the rat striatum. Previous studies have also shown that
pretreatment with the D2-like dopamine agonist quinpirole virtually abolishes
RU-24969-induced striatal c-Fos expression. The present study was undertaken to
determine whether the effects of RU-24969 on immediate early gene expression
extend to the additional Fos family transcription factors FosB and Fra-2.
Additionally, this study quantitatively examined the effect of quinpirole
pretreatment on the ability of RU-24969 to induce both locomotor hyperactivity
and striatal immediate early gene expression. RU-24969 alone produced elevations 
in locomotor activity and induced clear expression of c-Fos, FosB and Fra-2
throughout the entire striatal complex. Quinpirole pretreatment virtually
abolished RU-24969-induced expression of all three transcription factors, but did
not alter the elevated locomotor activity produced by RU-24969. These results
demonstrate that the effects of RU-24969 on locomotor activity can be dissociated
from its effects on immediate early gene expression within the striatum.

PMID: 10678749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Feb 15;163(1):17-25.

Modulation of transcription factor AP-1 activity in murine EL-4 thymoma cells by 
vomitoxin (deoxynivalenol).

Li S(1), Ouyang Y, Yang GH, Pestka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan,
48824, USA.

Trichothecene mycotoxins have been reported to suppress or superinduce cytokine
mRNA expression by leukocytes both in vitro and in vivo. Modulation of
transcription factor activities may be critical for these observations. Here, the
effect of trichothecene vomitoxin (VT, deoxynivalenol) on activator protein-1
(AP-1) activity was determined in the murine EL-4 thymoma. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) revealed that VT modulated AP-1 binding activity in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner when using a synchronous model in which 
VT was added concurrently with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and
ionomycin (ION) to EL-4 cells. Induction of AP-1 binding activity by PMA/ION was 
suppressed in the presence of VT for a short period (1 to 12 h), but was enhanced
upon prolonged VT exposure (48 to 72 h). VT also enhanced AP-1 binding activity
when added to the cell culture 12 h after PMA/ION activation (delayed synchronous
model). Using specific antibodies against AP-1 complex proteins, it was
demonstrated by gel supershift assay that VT preferentially affected
phosphorylated c-Jun, Jun B, c-Fos, and Fra-2 binding activities, whereas it did 
not alter Jun D and Fra-1 binding. A transient transfection assay demonstrated
that these increased binding activities are associated with enhanced AP-1
transactivation potential. Elevation of AP-1 activity may contribute to cytokine 
dysregulation and immunotoxic effects associated with exposure to trichothecene
mycotoxins such as VT.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10662601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nat Genet. 2000 Feb;24(2):184-7.

Fosl1 is a transcriptional target of c-Fos during osteoclast differentiation.

Matsuo K(1), Owens JM, Tonko M, Elliott C, Chambers TJ, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells derived from haematopoietic precursors of
the monocyte-macrophage lineage. Mice lacking Fos (encoding c-Fos) develop
osteopetrosis due to an early differentiation block in the osteoclast lineage.
c-Fos is a component of the dimeric transcription factor activator protein-1
(Ap-1), which is composed mainly of Fos (c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2) and Jun
proteins (c-Jun, JunB and JunD). Unlike Fra-1 (encoded by Fosl1), c-Fos contains 
transactivation domains required for oncogenesis and cellular transformation. The
mechanism by which c-Fos exerts its specific function in osteoclast
differentiation is not understood. Here we show by retroviral-gene transfer that 
all four Fos proteins, but not the Jun proteins, rescue the differentiation block
in vitro. Structure-function analysis demonstrated that the major
carboxy-terminal transactivation domains of c-Fos and FosB are dispensable and
that Fra-1 (which lacks transactivation domains) has the highest rescue activity.
Moreover, a transgene expressing Fra-1 rescues the osteopetrosis of c-Fos-mutant 
mice in vivo. The osteoclast differentiation factor Rankl (also known as TRANCE, 
ODF and OPGL; refs 8-11) induces transcription of Fosl1 in a c-Fos-dependent
manner, thereby establishing a link between Rank signalling and the expression of
Ap-1 proteins in osteoclast differentiation.

PMID: 10655067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cell Growth Differ. 1999 May;10(5):333-42.

Fra-2-positive autoregulatory loop triggered by mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) and Fra-2 phosphorylation sites by MAPK.

Murakami M(1), Ui M, Iba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Regulation, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

We reported previously that activation of endogenous activator protein 1 (AP-1)
in chicken embryo fibroblasts is essential for the cellular transformation
induced by v-src, and we further showed that the activation of AP-1 is
accompanied by elevation of Fra-2 and c-Jun expression and also high-level
phosphorylation of Fra-2 by activated endogenous extracellular signal-regulated
kinase [mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)]. Here, we report that the
transcriptional activity of Fra-2/c-Jun heterodimer was greatly enhanced by
cotransfecting a constitutively active mutant of MEK1 gene (MEK-DD) into F9
cells, indicating that Fra-2 was converted into an active transactivator after
phosphorylation by MAPK. High-level expression of MEK-DD alone was sufficient to 
induce clear cellular transformation of chicken embryo fibroblasts, which caused 
constitutive activation of endogenous MAPK, hyperphosphorylation of Fra-2, and
elevation of fra-2 and c-jun gene expression. These results indicate that
phosphorylation of Fra-2 by MAPK plays an important role in stimulating
endogenous AP-1 activity in a positive autoregulation mechanism, in which
phosphorylated Fra-2 induces fra-2 expression through AP-1 binding sites present 
in its promoter. We also localized the Fra-2 phosphorylation sites by MAPK to
three threonine and three serine residues in the COOH-terminal region by means of
site-directed mutagenesis and showed that the threonine residues were more
susceptible to MAPK.

PMID: 10359014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Life Sci. 1999;64(3):175-82.

Enterocyte-like differentiation of the Caco-2 intestinal cell line is associated 
with increases in AP-1 protein binding.

Ding Q(1), Dong Z, Evers BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston
77555, USA.

The nuclear factor AP-1, a large family of transcription factors composed of the 
Jun and Fos protein families, plays a role in the differentiation of various
cells; the role of the AP-1 factors in intestinal differentiation is not known.
Members of the AP-1 family can be activated by the Ras pathway and, in addition, 
Ras appears to be important for gut differentiation. The purpose of this study
was to determine whether AP-1 activity is altered in the Caco-2 cell line, which 
spontaneously differentiates to a small bowel phenotype after confluency, and the
Caco-2-ras cell line, which exhibits differentiated properties regardless of
culture conditions. AP-1 binding activity, consisting of c-Jun, JunD, c-Fos and
Fra-2 proteins, was increased in Caco-2 cells at 3 days postconfluency, a time
point associated with G1 block and cessation of proliferation. Steady state
levels of JunD were increased at day 3 postconfluency as determined by Western
blot. Furthermore, AP-1 binding was increased in preconfluent Caco-2-ras cells
compared with parental Caco-2 cells, suggesting that AP-1 induction may be
mediated by the Ras pathway. The early induction of AP-1 binding activity
suggests a role for these proteins in the differentiation of the Caco-2
intestinal cell line.

PMID: 10027748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Neurochem. 1999 Feb;72(2):841-7.

Light-induced variations in AP-1 binding activity and composition in the rat
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

François-Bellan AM(1), Deprez P, Becquet D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire des Interactions Fonctionnelles en Neuroendocrinologie, INSERM
U501, Institut Fédératif Jean-Roche, Faculté de Médecine Nord, Marseille, France.

Expression of immediate early genes, including fos-like and jun-like genes, in
the suprachiasmatic nucleus is believed to be part of the mechanism for photic
entrainment of circadian rhythms to the environmental light/dark cycle. However, 
the effects of a light stimulus on activating protein-1 (AP-1) complexes in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus remain unclear. The photic regulation of AP-1 DNA-binding
activity and composition in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus was evaluated by
using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay. A light pulse given during
subjective night induced an increase in AP-1 binding activity when either nuclear
or whole-cell extracts from suprachiasmatic nuclei were used. Under constant dark
conditions, proteins that are predominant components of AP-1 complexes are Fra-2 
and Jun-D. Under light stimulation, c-Fos and Jun-B consistently increased, as
expected, but this was also the case for Fra-2, Jun-D, and c-Jun, although to a
lesser extent. An immunocytochemical study of the Fra-2 expression pattern
demonstrated the presence of the protein in the ventrolateral as well as in the
dorsomedial subdivisions of the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Light regulation of
Fra-2 immunoreactivity, however, appeared to be restricted to the ventrolateral
subdivision. It is concluded that light may be acting both by increasing
constitutive AP-1 complexes and by inducing the expression of specific complexes.

PMID: 9930761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):330-41.

The repertoire of fos and jun proteins expressed during the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle is determined by the duration of mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation.

Cook SJ(1), Aziz N, McMahon M.

Author information: 
(1)ONYX Pharmaceuticals, Richmond, California 94806, USA. simon.cook@bbsrc.ac.uk

In Rat-1 fibroblasts nonmitogenic doses of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) stimulate 
a transient activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), whereas
mitogenic doses elicit a sustained response. This sustained phase of MAPK
activation regulates cell fate decisions such as proliferation or
differentiation, presumably by inducing a program of gene expression which is not
observed in response to transient MAPK activation. We have examined the
expression of members of the AP-1 transcription factor complex in response to
stimulation with different doses of LPA. c-Fos, c-Jun, and JunB are induced
rapidly in response to LPA stimulation, whereas Fra-1 and Fra-2 are induced after
a significant lag. The expression of c-Fos is transient, whereas the expression
of c-Jun, JunB, Fra-1, and Fra-2 is sustained. The early expression of c-Fos can 
be reconstituted with nonmitogenic doses of LPA, but the response is transient
compared to that observed with mitogenic doses. In contrast, expression of Fra-1,
Fra-2, and JunB and optimal expression of c-Jun are observed only with doses of
LPA which induce sustained MAPK activation and DNA synthesis. LPA-stimulated
expression of c-Fos, Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, and JunB is inhibited by the MEK1
inhibitor PD098059, indicating that the Raf-MEK-MAPK cascade is required for
their expression. In cells expressing a conditionally active form of Raf-1
(DeltaRaf-1:ER), we observed that selective, sustained activation of Raf-MEK-MAPK
was sufficient to induce expression of Fra-1, Fra-2, and JunB but, interestingly,
induced little or no c-Fos or c-Jun. The induction of c-Fos observed in response 
to LPA was strongly inhibited by buffering the intracellular [Ca2+]. Moreover,
although Raf activation or calcium ionophores induced little c-Fos expression, we
observed a synergistic induction in response to the combination of DeltaRaf-1:ER 
and ionomycin. These results suggest that kinetically distinct phases of MAPK
activation serve to regulate the expression of distinct AP-1 components such that
sustained MAPK activation is required for the induced expression of Fra-1, Fra-2,
c-Jun, and JunB. However, in contrast to the case for Fra-1, Fra-2, and JunB,
activation of the MAPK cascade alone is not sufficient to induce c-Fos
expression, which rather requires cooperation with other signals such as Ca2+
mobilization. Finally, the identification of the Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, and JunB
genes as genes which are selectively regulated by sustained MAPK activation or in
response to activated Raf suggests that they are candidates to mediate certain of
the effects of Ras proteins in oncogenic transformation.

PMCID: PMC83891
PMID: 9858557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Oncogene. 1998 Nov 19;17(20):2593-600.

Apoptosis during castration-induced regression of the prostate is Fos dependent.

Feng Z(1), Joos HJ, Vallan C, Mühlbauer R, Altermatt HJ, Jaggi R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

Apoptotic cell death was shown to be accompanied or preceded by an elevated
expression of the c-fos protooncogene and DNA binding activity of transcription
factor AP-1. We used Fos-deficient mice to study the role of c-Fos during
programmed cell death in the prostate. In normal mice apoptosis is induced in the
prostate within 2-4 days after castration. Histological features of reduced
secretory activity and morphological signs of programmed cell death become
obvious. No apparent decrease in secretory activity and no epithelial cell death 
were observed in Fos-deficient animals after castration. Fragmentation of nuclear
DNA was measured by in situ terminal transferase reaction. DNA fragmentation was 
observed in the prostate epithelium of control mice after castration whereas no
similar fragmentation was found in Fos-deficient animals. After castration an
AP-1 complex accumulated in the prostate of Fos deficient mice which mainly
consists of FosB, Fra-2 and JunD whereas in control animals the AP-1 complex in
addition contained c-Fos. Our data strongly suggest that c-Fos is required for
programmed cell death of prostate epithelial cells.

PMID: 9840922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 3;17(9):1131-40.

Overexpression of fra-2 in transgenic mice perturbs normal eye development.

McHenry JZ(1), Leon A, Matthaei KI, Cohen DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cell Biology, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Camberra ACT.

The major components of transcription factor AP-1 (Activator Protein 1) are
encoded by the two families of genes related to the proto-oncogenes c-fos and
c-jun. The fos-related antigen-2 (fra-2) gene is the most recently described
member of the Fos family. To determine the oncogenic potential of fra-2,
transgenic mice were generated which over-express fra-2 in a number of tissues.
No tumours were evident in any transgenic mice up to 18 months of age, although
eye development was severely disrupted in these animals. Corneal abnormalities
could be observed histologically as early as embryonic day 15.5 and eyelid fusion
failed to occur. Adult eyes were characterized by generalized anterior segment
dysgenesis similar to that previously reported in transgenic mice over-expressing
transforming growth factor alpha (TGF alpha), and occasionally microphthalmia.
Expression of fra-2 was shown to increase following TGF alpha treatment of cells 
in vitro, suggesting that AP-1 complexes containing Fra-2 contribute to TGF alpha
signalling events.

PMID: 9764823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Auton Pharmacol. 1998 Jun;18(3):149-55.

Differential effects of adrenaline and noradrenaline on the hepatic expression of
immediate early genes in mice.

Im YB(1), Won JS, Suh HW, Huh SO, Kim YH, Song DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Institute of Natural
Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon, Kangwon-Do, South Korea.

1. The effects of intraperitoneally (i.p.) administered noradrenaline and
adrenaline on the hepatic expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) were studied
in mice. 2. Intraperitoneal injections of various doses (0.2-2 mg kg(-1)) of
noradrenaline and adrenaline dose-dependently induced hepatic c-fos and c-jun
mRNA levels. The time-course study showed that there was an increase in c-fos and
c-jun mRNA levels within 15 min, which reached a peak at 30 min, and returned to 
the basal levels 1-2 h after noradrenaline or adrenaline injection (2 mg kg(-1), 
i.p.). A Western blot assay revealed that c-Jun protein levels were maximally
increased at 30 min and 1-2 h in noradrenaline- and adrenaline-treated mice,
respectively. There was a slight increase in c-Fos protein, while 46-kDa Fra
protein was prominently increased. Noradrenaline (2 mg kg(-1), i.p.) induced
46-kDa Fra within 15 min, which reached a maximum at 30 min and returned to the
basal levels by 1 h. Adrenaline (2 mg kg(-1), i.p.) induced 46-kDa Fra at 30 min,
which returned to the basal levels at 4 h. 3. Noradrenaline (2 mg kg(-1),
i.p.)-induced increases in c-fos and c-jun mRNA expressions were inhibited by the
pre-treatment with prazosin (alpha1-adrenergic antagonist; 0.5 mg kg(-1), i.p.), 
but not with yohimbine (alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonist; 1 mg kg(-1), i.p.) nor
with propranolol (beta-adrenoceptor antagonist; 10 mg kg(-1), i.p.). Adrenaline
(2 mg kg(-1), i.p.)-induced increases in c-fos and c-jun mRNA expressions were
inhibited by the pre-treatment with prazosin or with propranolol, but not with
yohimbine. Administration of ICI-118,551 (beta2-adrenoceptor antagonist; 2 mg
kg(-1), i.p.), but not betaxolol (beta1-adrenoceptor antagonist; 2 mg kg(-1),
i.p.), blocked adrenaline (2 mg kg(-1), i.p.)-induced increases in c-fos and
c-jun mRNA expressions. 4. The results suggest that noradrenaline elicits the
hepatic c-fos and c-jun mRNA responses by stimulating alpha1-adrenergic
receptors, whereas in the case of adrenaline, this is elicited by stimulating
both alpha1- and beta2-adrenergic receptors in mice. These catecholamine-induced 
hepatic IEG responses may be responsible for mediating some of the catecholamine 
actions in the liver.

PMID: 9754635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 1998 May 28;16(21):2711-21.

Expression of dominant negative Jun inhibits elevated AP-1 and NF-kappaB
transactivation and suppresses anchorage independent growth of HPV immortalized
human keratinocytes.

Li JJ(1), Rhim JS, Schlegel R, Vousden KH, Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Physiology, National Cancer Institute, FCRDC,
Frederick, Maryland 21702-1201, USA.

AP-1 transactivation appears to be required for mouse JB6 cell neoplastic
transformation induced by the tumor promoter TPA or epidermal growth factor
(EGF). Exposure to AP-1 transrepressing retinoids and glucocorticoids and
expression of a dominant negative c-jun (TAM67) blocked tumor promoter-induced
AP-1 transactivation and neoplastic transformation. The aim of the present study 
was to extend the inquiry of the role of AP-1 and other transcription factors to 
human neoplastic progression. Expression of human papillomavirus (HPV) 16 or 18
E6 and E7 immortalizes human keratinocytes and inhibits serum/calcium-stimulated 
differentiation. Further transformation by v-fos co-expression renders these
keratinocytes tumorigenic in nude mice. We have analysed two series of E6/E7
immortalized human keratinocyte cell lines that show progressing phenotypes
ranging from differentiation sensitive to anchorage-independent to tumorigenic in
nude mice. We analysed the activities of AP-1 and NF-kappaB which may
'cross-talk'. Both DNA binding and transactivation of AP-1 and NF-kappaB
transcription factors showed elevation in the anchorage-independent (16RH) and
tumorigenic (18 v-fos) keratinocyte lines compared to the less progressed but
immortalized cell lines. HPV E7 was expressed at a constant level shown by
quantitative RT-PCR in both the more and the less progressed lines, indicating
that E7 is not the factor limiting this progression. Blocked shift/supershift
analysis indicates that Fos family member proteins especially Fra-1 and Fra-2 are
related to progression and no changes found in the Jun family member proteins
although they are present in the AP-1/DNA binding complex. When a dominant
negative mutant c-jun driven by a human keratin 14 promoter was co-transfected
with AP-1 or NF-kappaB reporters, both AP-1 and NF-kappaB activities were
suppressed in the more progressed cell lines 16RH and 18 v-fos but not in the
less progressed 16RL or 18 cell lines. Overexpression of the same dominant
negative c-jun did not inhibit p53 dependent reporter transactivation, indicating
the specificity of inhibition of AP-1 and NF-kappaB transactivation in the
HPV-immortalized cells. Stable transfectants of this mutant c-jun in the two more
progressed cell lines 16RH and 18 v-fos showed reduced AP-1 and NF-kappaB
activation and reduced anchorage-independent growth. Together, these results
indicate that activation of AP-1, NF-kappaB or both may contribute to neoplastic 
progression in HPV immortalized human keratinocytes and that specific targeting
of the elevated levels seen in benign or malignant tumors might be effective for 
prevention or treatment of human cancer.

PMID: 9652737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 10;273(28):17318-25.

Three activator protein-1-binding sites bound by the Fra-2.JunD complex cooperate
for the regulation of murine laminin alpha3A (lama3A) promoter activity by
transforming growth factor-beta.

Virolle T(1), Monthouel MN, Djabari Z, Ortonne JP, Meneguzzi G, Aberdam D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U385, Faculté de Médecine, 06107 Nice Cedex 2, France.

Several lines of evidence suggest a role for laminin-5 in skin wound healing. We 
report here that transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), which elicits
various responses during cutaneous healing, stimulates transcription of the mouse
laminin alpha3A (lama3A) gene. To identify the TGF-beta-responsive elements
(TGFbeta-REs) on the lama3A promoter, we have generated a series of 5'-deletions 
of the promoter upstream of the beta-galactosidase reporter gene. Transient cell 
transfection assays using mouse PAM212 keratinocytes revealed that TGFbeta-REs
lie between nucleotides -297 and -54 relative to the transcription start site.
Insertion of the TGFbeta-RE in front of the unresponsive minimal SV40 promoter
conferred TGF-beta inducibility. Computer analysis of the promoter sequence
identified three canonical activator protein-1 (AP-1) sites located at
nucleotides -277 (AP-1A), -125 (AP-1B), and -69 (AP-1C). Site-directed
mutagenesis of either the AP-1A or AP-1C site did not drastically alter the basal
activity of the lama3A promoter, but reduced TGF-beta responsiveness by 50%.
Simultaneous mutation of these two AP-1 sites resulted in a 65% decline in the
response to TGF-beta, suggesting a cooperative contribution of each site to the
overall promoter activity. In contrast, mutation of the AP-1B site markedly
reduced the basal activity of the lama3A promoter, indicating that this AP-1 site
is essential for gene expression. Mobility shift assays demonstrated specific
binding of Fra-2 and JunD to the AP-1 sites, suggesting for the first time a
possible regulatory function for the Fra-2.JunD AP-1 complex in a basal
keratinocyte-specific gene.

PMID: 9651314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Brain Res. 1998 Jun 1;794(2):255-66.

Expression of c-jun, junB, c-fos, fra-1 and fra-2 mRNA in the rat brain following
seizure activity and axotomy.

Beer J(1), Mielke K, Zipp M, Zimmermann M, Herdegen T.

Author information: 
(1)II. Institute of Physiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld
326, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

The present study has investigated the congruence of mRNA induction and protein
expression of inducible transcription factors (ITFs). The patterns of c-jun,
junB, c-fos, fra-1 and fra-2 mRNAs were studied by radioactive and
non-radioactive in situ hybridization in the adult rat brain following
kainate-induced seizure activity and axotomy. In the same animals, the expression
of c-Jun, JunB and c-Fos proteins was compared with the respective mRNA signals. 
Using radioactive labeled probes all investigated mRNAs showed an onset within 1 
h after systemic kainate application and the maximal levels were generally
reached after 3 h. Each mRNA displayed a specific temporo-spatial expression
pattern. Whereas fra-1 and fra-2 were restricted to the hippocampus, c-jun, junB 
and c-fos were additionally induced in the cortex, amygdala and thalamus. The
areas with maximal labeling were the dentate gyrus and the hippocampal CA1 and
CA3 subfields. The expression patterns between c-jun, junB and c-fos mRNA were
virtually congruent with the respective protein. Labeling of the junB and fra-2
probes with digoxigenin yielded similar results. Twenty-four hours, 3 and 10 days
following transection of the medial forebrain bundle and the mamillo-thalamic
tract, high levels of c-jun mRNA (either digoxigenin or radioactive labeled
probes) and protein were seen in the axotomized neurons of the substantia nigra
pars compacta and mamillary body whereas the other mRNAs studied and the JunB or 
c-Fos proteins could not be detected. These findings demonstrate that mRNAs
encoding for ITFs are translated into the respective proteins following
excitotoxic seizures and axotomy, and that the antisera used for
immunocytochemistry yield specific expression patterns of homologous proteins.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9622645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochem J. 1997 Nov 1;327 ( Pt 3):651-62.

Cross-species characterization of the promoter region of the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator gene reveals multiple levels of regulation.

Vuillaumier S(1), Dixmeras I, Messaï H, Lapouméroulie C, Lallemand D, Gekas J,
Chehab FF, Perret C, Elion J, Denamur E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 458, Hôpital Robert Debré, 48 boulevard Sérurier, 75019 Paris,
France.

The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene is highly
conserved within vertebrate species. Its pattern of expression in vivo seems to
be tightly regulated both developmentally and in a tissue-specific manner, but
shows differences with species. To identify transcriptional regulatory elements
in the CFTR promoter region, we have used a combined approach based both on the
analysis of the chromatin structure in vivo in rat tissues and on evolutionary
clues (i.e. phylogenetic footprinting). In CFTR-expressing tissues, 15 DNase
I-hypersensitive sites were identified within a 36 kb region encompassing exon 1.
Eleven of them are clustered in a 3.5 kb region that exhibits eleven phylogenetic
footprints observed when comparing sequences from eight mammalian species
representing four orders (Primates, Artiodactylia, Lagomorpha and Rodentia).
Comparison of the two sets of data allows the identification of two types of
regulatory elements. Some are conserved between species, such as a non-consensus 
cAMP response element (CRE) and a PMA-responsive element (TRE) located
respectively at positions -0.1 and -1.3 kb relative to ATG. Some are
species-specific elements such as a 300 bp purine.pyrimidine (Pu.Py) stretch that
is present only in rodents. Analysis of protein/DNA interactions in vitro with
rat tissue protein extracts on the conserved elements revealed that the TRE site 
binds a specific heterodimeric complex composed of Fra-2, Jun D and a protein
immunologically related to Jun/CRE-binding protein in the duodenum, whereas the
CRE-like site binds ATF-1 ubiquitously. Functional analysis in Caco-2 cells
showed that the CRE-like site supports a high basal transcriptional activity but 
is not able by itself to induce a response to cAMP, whereas the TRE site acts as 
a weak transactivator stimulated by PMA. Lastly, we found that the
rodent-specific Pu.Py stretch confers nuclease S1 hypersensitivity under
conditions of acidic pH and supercoiling. This indicates a non-B DNA conformation
and thus reinforces the biological significance of non-random Pu.Py strand
asymmetry in the regulation of transcription. Thus the tight transcriptional
regulation of CFTR expression involves the combination of multiple regulatory
elements that act in the chromatin environment in vivo. Some of them are
conserved throughout evolution, such as the CRE-like element, which is clearly
involved in the basal level of transcription; others are species-specific.

PMCID: PMC1218840
PMID: 9581539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1998 Feb;44(2):217-24.

Inductions of immediate early genes (IEGS) and ref-1 by human chorionic
gonadotropin in murine Leydig cell line (MA-10).

Suzuki S(1), Nagaya T, Suganuma N, Tomoda Y, Seo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Nagoya University, Japan.

The effect of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) on the expression of immediate
early genes (IEGs) including all members of fos and jun family, and c-myc was
studied using mouse Leydig cell line (MA-10 cells) by Northern blot analyses. In 
addition, the induction of ref-1 which enhances DNA binding of fos/jun proteins
was also analyzed. HCG induced a rapid and transient expression of c-fos, fosB,
c-jun, junB, junD and c-myc with a peak at 30 min to 1 h. In contrast, induction 
of fra-1 mRNA was delayed with a peak at 3 hr. However, fra-2 mRNA was
immediately increased by hCG with a peak at 1 h. The ref-1 mRNA was expressed
before the stimulation and its level was not altered by hCG at least for 8 hr.
The differential induction of IEGs and continuous expression of ref-1 mRNA
suggest an important role of their gene products on the regulation of Leydig cell
function by hCG.

PMID: 9530505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Dec 8;241(1):24-30.

Overexpression of members of the AP-1 transcriptional factor family from an early
stage of renal carcinogenesis and inhibition of cell growth by AP-1 gene
antisense oligonucleotides in the Tsc2 gene mutant (Eker) rat model.

Urakami S(1), Tsuchiya H, Orimoto K, Kobayashi T, Igawa M, Hino O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Cancer Institute, 1-37-1 Kami-ikebukuro,
Tokyo, Toshima-ku, 170, Japan.

We previously isolated subtracted cDNA clones for genes having increased
expression in Tsc2 gene mutant (Eker) rat renal carcinomas (RCs). Among them,
fra-1 encoding a transcriptional factor activator protein 1 (AP-1) was
identified. We have therefore investigated whether other members of the AP-1
transcription factor family might also be involved in renal carcinogenesis in the
Eker rat model. In the present study, overexpression of fra-1, fra-2, c-jun,
junB, and junD mRNAs was demonstrated in RCs by Northern blot analysis.
Interestingly, AP-1 proteins were highly expressed even in the earliest
preneoplastic lesions (e.g., phenotypically altered tubules) as suggested by
immunohistochemistry. Moreover, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive
element (TRE)-binding activity of AP-1 proteins was observed in RC cell extracts 
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. As a next step, we transfected antisense
oligonucleotides targeting AP-1 genes into RC cells and demonstrated that their
growth was strongly inhibited. Thus, the data suggest that overexpression of AP-1
genes might play a crucial role in renal carcinogenesis in the Eker rat model.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9405228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 1997 Sep;15(11):1337-46.

Opposing activities of c-Fos and Fra-2 on AP-1 regulated transcriptional activity
in mouse keratinocytes induced to differentiate by calcium and phorbol esters.

Rutberg SE(1), Saez E, Lo S, Jang SI, Markova N, Spiegelman BM, Yuspa SH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Carcinogenesis and Tumor Promotion, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The major differentiation products of maturing keratinocytes contain AP-1
regulatory motifs, and AP-1 DNA binding activity increases in cultured
keratinocytes induced to differentiate by calcium. Here, we have analysed AP-1
transcriptional activity in mouse keratinocytes treated with calcium and
12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA), two agents that induce terminal
differentiation of keratinocytes with different phenotypic consequences. Reporter
constructs representing multimers of AP-1 sequences found in keratinocyte marker 
genes demonstrated that the calcium-induced AP-1 DNA binding activity does not
correlate with transcriptional activation. Moreover, expression from active
subunits of the profilaggrin and spr 1 promoters increased in calcium-treated
keratinocytes when the AP-1 sites were disrupted, indicating that AP-1 may
negatively regulate certain promoters in these cells. In contrast, AP-1 reporter 
activity was increased in keratinocytes treated with TPA. This induction was
dependent upon the expression of c-Fos since AP-1 transcriptional activity was
not increased in TPA-treated keratinocytes derived from c-fos null mice. Analysis
of AP-1 protein expression in calcium- and TPA-treated keratinocytes demonstrated
that only TPA increased the expression of c-Jun, while Jun B and Jun D were
induced by both of these agents. c-Fos was expressed only in TPA treated
keratinocytes, Fra-2 was expressed only in calcium-treated cells, and Fra-1 was
expressed in both. Exogenous expression of Fra-2 repressed AP-1 transcriptional
activity in TPA-treated keratinocytes, while c-Fos expression activated the AP-1 
sequence in calcium-treated keratinocytes. These data indicate that Fra-2 and
c-Fos play opposing roles in regulating AP-1 activity in keratinocytes and that
multiple inducer-dependent regulatory pathways may exist for the expression of
keratinocyte differentiation markers.

PMID: 9315102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. FEBS Lett. 1997 Jun 30;410(2-3):191-4.

The effects of measles virus persistent infection on AP-1 transcription factor
binding in neuroblastoma cells.

Fishman D(1), Wolfson M, Bazarski E, Segal S, Rager-Zisman B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Health Sciences, The
Cancer Research Center, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Measles virus (MV) persistence in brain cells has broad effects on different
cellular functions. We have previously shown that NS20Y clone, originally derived
from C1300 neuroblastoma cells, persistently infected with MV (NS20Y/MS),
displays constitutively elevated levels of c-fos and PKC mRNAs, implying
MV-mediated effects on transcriptional regulation. Nonetheless, the mode by which
virus affects the transcriptional machinery still remains obscure. In order to
define this phenomenon, we studied the binding properties of major transcription 
factors (AP-1 and NFkappaB) in NS20Y/MS cells. Using electrophoretic mobility
shift approach (EMSA) with the appropriate oligonucleotide probes, we have found 
that the persistent MV infection does not affect NFkappaB binding, while the AP-1
binding was significantly decreased. Similar inhibition was not observed in NS20Y
cells acutely infected with MV. Anti-measles antibody-mediated restriction of
viral gene expression restored AP-1 binding, thus suggesting that measles virus
proteins may affect the components of the host transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 9237627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO J. 1997 Apr 15;16(8):2072-85.

The binding of a Fos/Jun heterodimer can completely disrupt the structure of a
nucleosome.

Ng KW(1), Ridgway P, Cohen DR, Tremethick DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, The John Curtin School of Medical Research, The
Australian National University, Canberra.

An important first step in the chromatin remodelling process is the initial
binding of a transcriptional activator to a nucleosomal template. We have
investigated the ability of Fos/Jun (a transcriptional activator involved in the 
signal transduction pathway) to interact with its cognate binding site located in
the promoter region of the mouse fos-related antigen-2 (fra-2) promoter, when
this site was reconstituted into a nucleosome. Two different nucleosome assembly 
systems were employed to assemble principally non-acetylated or acetylated
nucleosomes. The ability of Fos/Jun to interact with an acetylated or an
unacetylated nucleosome differed markedly. Fos/Jun bound to an unacetylated
nucleosome with only a 4- to 5-fold reduction in DNA binding affinity compared
with naked DNA. Strikingly, the binding of Fos/Jun to a single high-affinity site
incorporated into an acetylated nucleosome resulted in the complete disruption of
nucleosomal structure without histone displacement. Moreover, this disruption was
sufficient to facilitate the subsequent binding of a second transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC1169810
PMID: 9155033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mamm Genome. 1997 Mar;8(3):223.

The gene encoding the Fos-related antigen 2 (Fosl2) maps to mouse chromosome 5.

Poirier C(1), Lalouette A, Foletta VC, Cohen DR, Guénet JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique des Mammifères, 25 rue du Docteur Roux, Institut Pasteur,
75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

PMID: 9069127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncogene. 1997 Feb 20;14(7):837-47.

Transformation by ras modifies AP1 composition and activity.

Mechta F(1), Lallemand D, Pfarr CM, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogenes, URA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The Ras proteins play a central role in regulating cell growth and their mutation
can lead to abnormal proliferation. To analyse the potential link betwen AP1
activity, encoded by members of the jun and fos gene families, and Ras-mediated
cellular transformation, we have studied several NIH3T3 clones which overexpress 
the Ha-Ras or Ki-Ras oncogenes. These transformed fibroblasts accumulated higher 
levels of cJun, JunB, Fra1 and Fra2 proteins relative to their normal
counterparts. They also displayed increased AP1 DNA binding activity which was
predominantly composed of cJun and Fra1 containing dimers. Following serum
stimulation of Ras clones, the elevated levels of cJun and Fral remained steady, 
while the induction of JunB and Fra2 was partially attenuated. Moreover,
deregulated Ras signaling resulted in a complete loss of the serum inducibility
of cFos and FosB. Ectopic co-expression of cJun and Fra1 in NIH3T3 fibroblasts
led to a transformed phenotype, attenuation of cFos serum inducibility, increased
AP1 activity and Cyclin D1 accumulation, all characteristics of oncogenic Ras
expressing cells. These results demonstrate that cJun and Fra1 are crucial
mediators of the Ras-transformation process.

PMID: 9047391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 26;93(24):14140-5.

Transcriptional control of circadian hormone synthesis via the CREM feedback
loop.

Foulkes NS(1), Borjigin J, Snyder SH, Sassone-Corsi P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

Transcription factor cAMP-responsive element modulator (CREM) plays a key
physiological and developmental role within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal
axis. The use of an alternative, intronic promoter within the CREM gene is
responsible for the production of a cAMP-inducible repressor, inducible cAMP
early repressor (ICER). ICER negatively autoregulates the ICER promoter, thus
generating a feedback loop. We have previously documented a striking,
clock-driven circadian fluctuation of CREM expression in the pineal gland.
Oscillating ICER levels tightly correlate with fluctuations in the synthesis of
the pineal hormone melatonin, whose production is also driven by the endogenous
clock. Melatonin in turn regulates the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The enzyme
serotonin N-acetyltransferase (NAT) catalyzes the rate limiting step in melatonin
synthesis. Thus, oscillations in NAT levels determine the circadian synthesis of 
melatonin. Here we demonstrate that NAT expression is dramatically increased in
CREM-deficient mice that we have generated by homologous recombination.
Characterization of the NAT promoter shows the presence of a ICER binding site.
In addition, transfection studies show that ICER powerfully represses NAT
transcription. Our results implicate CREM as a central regulator of output
functions of the clock. Indeed, CREM acts as a key regulator of oscillatory
hormonal synthesis.

PMCID: PMC19507
PMID: 8943074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Genomics. 1996 Nov 15;38(1):72-5.

Chromosomal assignment of the human gene encoding the Fos-related antigen-2
(FRA2) to chromosome 2p22-p23.

Molven A(1), Houge G, Berger R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. 
Anders.Molven@gen.haukeland.no

The four members of the Fos gene family give rise to proteins that are part of
the AP-1 transcription factor complex. When studying cAMP-induced apoptosis in a 
leukemia cell line from rat, we found that the Fra-2 gene (coding for the
Fos-related antigen-2) became strongly upregulated as the leukemia cells started 
to die. It was therefore of interest to determine the cytogenetic localization of
the human Fra-2 gene (FRA2), including a comparison to chromosomal aberrations
observed in leukemia patients. Based on sequence information from the rat and
chicken Fra-2 homologs, we were able to PCR-amplify a 4.5-kb genomic fragment
covering exon 4 of FRA2. This fragment was employed as probe for both radioactive
and fluorescence in situ hybridization to human metaphase chromosomes, allowing
us to assign FRA2 to 2p22-p23. The localization of the gene to chromosome 2 was
independently verified by PCR amplification of a FRA2-specific fragment from a
panel of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids.

PMID: 8954781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Endocrinology. 1996 Oct;137(10):4398-408.

Developmental expression and activities of specific fos and jun proteins are
functionally related to osteoblast maturation: role of Fra-2 and Jun D during
differentiation.

McCabe LR(1), Banerjee C, Kundu R, Harrison RJ, Dobner PR, Stein JL, Lian JB,
Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Developmental studies of oncogene expression implicate the Fos and Jun family of 
transcription factors in the regulation of bone growth and differentiation.
Promoters of many developmentally regulated genes, including osteocalcin, a
marker of osteoblast differentiation, contain AP-1 sites that bind Fos/Jun
dimers. Here, we demonstrate that the selective expression of fos- and
jun-related genes is functionally related to the stage of osteoblast growth and
differentiation in vitro. During osteoblast proliferation, nuclear protein levels
of all seven activating protein-1 (AP-1) members are maximal. Subsequently,
during the period of extracellular matrix maturation, levels decline. In fully
differentiated osteoblasts, Fra-2 and (to a lesser extent) Jun D are the
principal AP-1 members detectable by Western blot analysis. AP-1 complex
composition and binding activity also exhibit developmental changes. All Fos and 
Jun family members are involved in AP-1 complex formation in proliferating cells,
whereas Fra-2 and Jun D predominate in AP-1 complexes in differentiated
osteoblasts. Overexpression of Fos and Jun family members in ROS 17/2.8 cells
markedly affects the expression of an osteocalcin promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase construct. Coexpression of only one AP-1 pair, Fra-2 and Jun D,
stimulated reporter expression, whereas coexpression of other AP-1 pairs
down-regulated expression (i.e. c-jun and any Fos family member) or had no effect
(i.e. Fra-1 and Jun B). Promoter deletion analyses indicate that these effects
are site specific. Consequential effects of Fra-2 on osteoblast differentiation
are further demonstrated by antisense studies in which osteoblast differentiation
and the development of a bone tissue-like organization were suppressed.
Consistent with recent findings suggesting that AP-1 complex composition can
selectively regulate gene transcription, our findings demonstrate that
differential expression of Fos and Jun family members could play a role in the
developmental regulation of bone-specific gene expression and, as a result, may
be functionally significant for osteoblast differentiation.

PMID: 8828501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1996 Sep 5;41(1-2):57-64.

Changes in the expression of transcription factors ATF-2 and Fra-2 after axotomy 
and during regeneration in rat retinal ganglion cells.

Robinson GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599,
USA.

The expression of one member of the bZip superfamily of transcription factors,
c-Jun, is known to be induced by axotomy in retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and is 
associated with axonal regrowth. This study used immunohistochemistry combined
with retrograde labeling to examine the expression of two additional bZip
transcription factors (ATF-2 and Fra-2) in identified adult rat RGCs under
favorable and unfavorable conditions for axonal regrowth. For unfavorable
regrowth conditions, ganlgion cell axons within the optic nerve were cut close to
the eye. For favorable conditions, the optic nerve was replaced with an
autologous peripheral nerve graft to allow axonal regrowth. At regular intervals,
after axotomy alone or in conjunction with graft placement, the expression of
these transcription factors was examined in retinal wholemounts using
protein-specific antibodies. The strong cytoplasmic expression of Fra-2 seen in
unaxotomized RGCs was reduced beginning 24 h after axotomy. Similarly, the strong
nuclear expression of ATF-2 seen prior to axotomy was also reduced after axotomy.
These reduction persisted in surviving ganglion cells throughout the 3 week study
period. One to 6 months after axotomy and peripheral nerve graft placement,
identified RGCs with regrown axons showed strong ATF-2 and Fra-2 expression,
suggesting a return to basal conditions. These findings support roles for ATF-2
and Fra-2 in the survival and regeneration process of these central nervous
system neurons after axotomy.

PMID: 8883934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 1996 Jul 4;13(1):167-76.

Differentiation of mouse keratinocytes is accompanied by PKC-dependent changes in
AP-1 proteins.

Rutberg SE(1), Saez E, Glick A, Dlugosz AA, Spiegelman BM, Yuspa SH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Carcinogenesis and Tumor Promotion, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The conversion of cultured basal keratinocytes to the spinous and granular cell
phenotypes seen in the skin can be stimulated by raising the levels of
extracellular calcium. Here we show that AP-1 DNA binding activity is very low in
primary cultures of basal keratinocytes, but that this activity is induced 24-48 
h after increasing the concentration of extracellular calcium from 0.05 to 0.12
mM. As such, the induction of AP-1 DNA binding activity correlates with events
occurring during the terminal stages of keratinocyte differentiation.
Calcium-induced AP-1 DNA binding complexes consist of Fra-1, Fra-2, c-Jun, JunB
and JunD and are independent of c-Fos, since the induction of DNA binding
activity and the composition of the AP-1 binding complexes are identical in
differentiating keratinocytes derived from c-fos null and wild type mice. The
formation of calcium-induced AP-1 binding complexes is regulated by protein
kinase C (PKC) and requires a functional PKCalpha isozyme, as determined through 
pharmacological down-modulation of specific PKC isozymes in differentiating
keratinocytes. Moreover, PKC activation is required for the increased expression 
of Fra-2, JunB and JunD in the nucleus of differentiating cells in vitro. This
observation provides a link between the obligate activation of PKC during
keratinocyte differentiation and the nuclear response required to alter gene
expression. In vivo expression patterns suggest that the predominant AP-1
heterodimer in the granular layer consists of Fra-2 and JunB while a JunD and
Fra-1 complex predominates the spinous layer of mouse epidermis. These findings
suggest distinct functions for different AP-1 proteins in the regulation of
events related to keratinocyte maturation.

PMID: 8700543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Endocrinology. 1996 May;137(5):1991-2000.

Transforming growth factor-beta 1 responsiveness of the rat osteocalcin gene is
mediated by an activator protein-1 binding site.

Banerjee C(1), Stein JL, Van Wijnen AJ, Frenkel B, Lian JB, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Osteocalcin (OC), a bone specific protein expressed during differentiation and
mineralization of the bone extracellular matrix, is down-regulated upon treatment
with transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1. To address the potential role of OC
gene expression in relation to TGF-beta 1 regulation of bone formation and
resorption, we examined the transcriptional activity of the rat OC promoter after
TGF-beta 1 treatment. 5' deletion analysis of rat OC promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase constructs demonstrated that TGF-beta 1 treatment repressed
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity by 2.4-fold in transient transfections
of ROS 17/2.8 cells. A 29-bp region between -162 and -134 identified as the
TGF-beta 1 response domain, conferred TGF-beta 1 responsiveness to the -108 to
+24 rat OC basal promoter in an orientation dependent manner. Mutation of an
activator protein-1/cAMP-response element-like motif (- 146 to -139) abolished
TGF-beta 1 responsiveness of the construct. In vitro gel-mobility shift and
competition assays using wild-type and mutated oligonucleotides and antibodies
indicate that Fra-2, a Fos related transcription factor, binds to this motif. We 
show that Fra-2 is an activator of the OC promoter, and TGF-beta 1 inhibits this 
activation. Our results demonstrate that Fra-2 is hyperphosphorylated upon
TGF-beta 1 treatment of ROS 17/2.8 cells. Additionally, treatment of cells with a
staurosporine protein kinase C inhibitor abrogates TGF-beta 1 mediated
down-regulation of the OC promoter activity. Together, these results demonstrate 
that TGF-beta 1 responsiveness of the rat osteocalcin gene in ROS 17/2.8 cells is
mediated through an activator protein-1 like cis-acting element that interacts
with Fra-2. Furthermore, our results are consistent with a critical role for
TGF-beta 1 induced phosphorylation of Fra-2 in the repression of OC gene
transcription.

PMID: 8612540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Immunol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;74(2):121-33.

Transcription factor AP-1, and the role of Fra-2.

Foletta VC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cell Biology, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

Transcription factors function to regulate gene transcription. They may be
constitutively expressed or may only be activated during specific situations.
Activator protein-1 (AP-1) is an inducible transcription factor, and is comprised
of multiple protein complexes that include the gene products of the fos and jun
gene families. Numerous cellular and viral genes contain AP-1 binding sites
within their promoters and, accordingly, AP-1 has been shown to play a role in
the regulation of both basal and inducible transcription of these genes.
fos-related antigen-2 (fra-2) has been found to have both similar and unique
properties to that of other fos gene members in terms of its regulation and
expression. The analysis and determination of the function of Fra-2 will provide 
further information on the role of AP-1.

PMID: 8723999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Pharmacol. 1996 Apr;49(4):636-45.

Induction of chronic Fos-related antigens in rat brain by chronic morphine
administration.

Nye HE(1), Nestler EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Previous studies have shown that repeated exposure to cocaine or to several other
stimuli induces novel 35-37 kDa Fos-related antigens (chronic Fras) in specific
brain regions. Induction of these proteins is associated with prolonged increases
in AP-1 DNA binding activity that parallel the long half-life of the chronic Fras
in brain. In the current study, we characterized regulation of the chronic Fras
in response to prolonged exposure to morphine. After 5 days of morphine
treatment, we observed increased levels of the chronic Fras and of AP-1 binding
activity in rat striatum and nucleus accumbens, effects that were not seen in
most other brain regions that we studied. Concomitant administration of
naltrexone, an opioid receptor antagonist, prevented the induction of these
proteins. Two-dimensional gel analysis showed that the chronic Fras induced by
chronic morphine administration are identical to those induced after chronic
cocaine and other treatments. A time course study indicated that chronic Fra
induction was first apparent after 3 days of morphine treatment and peaked
between 5 and 7 days of treatment in both the striatum and nucleus accumbens.
Withdrawal studies demonstrated robust induction of several known acute Fras,
including c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1, Fra-2, and delta FosB, at 6 hr after naltrexone
precipitation of withdrawal in the striatum, nucleus accumbens, and several other
brain regions. Levels of these proteins returned to basal values by 72 hr. In
contrast, no further induction of the chronic Fras was evident after 6 hr of
withdrawal in the striatum and nucleus accumbens, but levels of the proteins
increased beyond their already elevated chronic morphine values after longer
periods (72 hr) of withdrawal, even though physical withdrawal symptoms had
resolved at this time point. Chronic Fras were also induced after these prolonged
withdrawal periods in several other brain regions, where the proteins were not
induced by chronic morphine alone. We discuss the possible roles played by the
chronic Fras in the adaptive responses of the brain to chronic opiate exposure
and opiate withdrawal.

PMID: 8609891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Oncogene. 1995 Dec 21;11(12):2681-7.

Differential expression of the fos and jun family members c-fos, fosB, Fra-1,
Fra-2, c-jun, junB and junD during human epidermal keratinocyte differentiation.

Welter JF(1), Eckert RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University
School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4970, USA.

Activator protein 1 (AP1) family proteins have been implicated in the regulation 
of genes expressed in the epidermis. However, no comprehensive analysis of the
expression patterns of the known AP1 family proteins in the human epidermis or
any other terminally differentiating tissue has been performed. In the present
study we describe the localization of c-fos, fosB, Fra-1, Fra-2, c-jun, junB and 
junD in the normal human epidermis. Each is expressed in specific epidermal
layers. c-fos is localized in the nuclei of the upper spinous and granular layer 
cells. FosB is present in the nuclei in all layers. Fra-1 is absent from the
basal layer, but is present in all other layers. Fra-2 is detected in all layers,
but staining intensity is increased in the upper spinous layer. c-jun staining is
limited to the granular layer, while junB and junD are present in all layers. The
differentiation-dependent pattern of expression of the AP1 family members suggest
an important role for these proteins in specifying the temporal and spatial
pattern of gene expression during keratinocyte differentiation.

PMID: 8545126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 10;270(45):27319-25.

Circadian expression of transcription factor Fra-2 in the rat pineal gland.

Baler R(1), Klein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neuroendocrinology, Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Physiological changes in Fos-like immunoreactivity in the rat pineal gland are
shown here to be due primarily to changes in a 42/46-kDa Fos-related antigen
(Fra). Studies are presented that indicate this 42/46-kDa Fra is Fra-2, a poorly 
understood member of the Fos family of transcription factors. Both Fra-2 mRNA and
protein are absent during the day and increase robustly at night on a circadian
basis; organ culture studies indicate that regulation is mediated by an
adrenergic-->cyclic AMP mechanism. AP-1 binding activity changes in parallel to
changes in the level of Fra-2 protein.

PMID: 7592994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Oncogene. 1995 Sep 21;11(6):1069-78.

Cyclic AMP stimulates a JunD/Fra-2 AP-1 complex and inhibits the proliferation of
interleukin-6-dependent cell lines.

Rezzonico R(1), Loubat A, Lallemand D, Pfarr CM, Far DF, Proudfoot A, Rossi B,
Ponzio G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U364, Faculté de Médecine, Nice, France.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a proinflammatory cytokine which also acts as a growth
factor for some murine hybridomas (7TD1) or human myelomas (U266). We demonstrate
that elevation of cAMP cellular content inhibits IL-6-stimulated cell growth, by 
blocking cells mainly in G1 phase. This inhibition is associated with increased
expression of the Fos family protein Fra-2. Treatment of cells with 8Br-cAMP
results in increased DNA-binding activity of two distinct AP-1 complexes;
JunD/Fra-2 and JunB/Fra-2, and also in elevated AP-1 transactivation. When
8Br-cAMP is withdrawn from the medium, cells enter S phase and Fra-2 protein
levels and AP-1 DNA-binding activity decrease to their basal value indicating
that a temporally correlation exists between the 8Br-cAMP-mediated induction of
JunD/Fra-2 AP-1 complex and the 7TD1 and U266 cell growth inhibition.

PMID: 7566966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Aug;9(8):981-93.

Synergistic activation of neurotensin/neuromedin N gene expression by c-Jun and
glucocorticoids: novel effects of Fos family proteins.

Harrison RJ(1), McNeil GP, Dobner PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

The cis-regulatory region of the neurotensin/neuromedin N (NT/N) gene integrates 
diverse environmental signals in the neuroendocrine PC12 cell line, resulting in 
remarkable synergistic regulation. An AP-1 site appears to play a pivotal role in
cooperative NT/N gene activation, as mutations in this site decrease responses to
all inducer combinations by at least an order of magnitude. Here we report that
c-Jun acts synergistically with glucocorticoids to activate the NT/N promoter,
and that Fos family proteins have novel regulatory effects on this interaction.
Cotransfection of individual pCMV-AP-1 expression plasmids revealed that c-Jun
most potently activates the NT/N promoter and that costimulation with
dexamethasone results in a further 6- to 12-fold increase in expression. Unlike
its general inhibitory effects on glucocorticoid regulation in other systems,
c-Fos potentiated activation by glucocorticoids when coexpressed with c-Jun, and 
Fos B had a similar, but more limited, positive effect. In contrast, Fra-1
reversed the direction of glucocorticoid regulation, and Fra-2 abolished
synergism. AP-1, cAMP response element, and glucocorticoid response element
motifs are required for full cooperative activation by either c-Jun or
c-Jun/c-Fos and glucocorticoids. These results indicate that NT/N promoter
activation involves synergistic interactions between specific AP-1 complexes and 
ligand-activated glucocorticoid receptor, and similar mechanisms may regulate
NT/N gene expression in central neurons.

PMID: 7476995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 23;92(11):4972-6.

Antitumor promotion by phenolic antioxidants: inhibition of AP-1 activity through
induction of Fra expression.

Yoshioka K(1), Deng T, Cavigelli M, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0636, USA.

Induction of phase 2 detoxification enzymes by phenolic antioxidants can account 
for prevention of tumor initiation but cannot explain why these compounds inhibit
tumor promotion. Phase 2 genes are induced through an antioxidant response
element (ARE). Although the ARE resembles an AP-1 binding site, we show that the 
major ARE binding and activating protein is not AP-1. Interestingly, AP-1 DNA
binding activity was induced by the phenolic antioxidant tert-butylhydroquinone
(BHQ), but the induction of AP-1 transcriptional activity by the tumor promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) was inhibited by this compound. BHQ
induced expression of c-jun, junB, fra-1, and fra-2, which encode AP-1
components, but was a poor inducer of c-fos and had no effect on fosB. Like c-Fos
and FosB, the Fra proteins heterodimerize with Jun proteins to form stable AP-1
complexes. However, Fra-containing AP-1 complexes have low transactivation
potential. Furthermore, Fra-1 repressed AP-1 activity induced by either TPA or
expression of c-Jun and c-Fos. We therefore conclude that inhibitory AP-1
complexes composed of Jun-Fra heterodimers, induced by BHQ, antagonize the
transcriptional effects of the tumor promoter TPA, which are mediated by Jun-Fos 
heterodimers. Since AP-1 is an important mediator of tumor promoter action, these
findings may explain the anti-tumor-promoting activity of phenolic antioxidants.

PMCID: PMC41829
PMID: 7761434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 12;270(19):11453-62.

Hormonal modulation of major histocompatibility complex class I gene expression
involves an enhancer A-binding complex consisting of Fra-2 and the p50 subunit of
NF-kappa B.

Giuliani C(1), Saji M, Napolitano G, Palmer LA, Taniguchi SI, Shong M, Singer DS,
Kohn LD.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Cell Regulation, NIDDK, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Hydrocortisone decreases major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I gene
expression in rat thyroid cells and counteracts increases induced by interferons.
Using FRTL-5 cells transfected with class I promoter-reporter gene chimeras, we
show that hydrocortisone action is transcriptional and mediated by an element
located between 180 and 170 base pairs upstream of the start of transcription.
Gel shift assays reveal that hydrocortisone causes the decrease of a specific
protein-DNA complex; this same complex, referred to as Mod-1, is increased by
interferon. Oligonucleotide competition assays reveal that the Mod-1 complex is
associated with enhancer A of the class I gene, -180 to -170 base pairs
(5'-GGGGAGTCCCC-3'), immediately upstream of the interferon response element.
Antibodies to fra-2, a fos family member, and to the p50, but not the p65,
subunit of NF-kappa B supershift the Mod-1 complex. We suggest that
hydrocortisone decreases MHC class I gene expression by reducing the formation of
Mod-1, which contains both p50 and fra-2; interferon reverses the hydrocortisone 
effect and increases Mod-1 formation. These observations are relevant to the
molecular basis of hydrocortisone therapy in autoimmune thyroid disease and to
the actions of interferon to exacerbate or induce autoimmune disease.

PMID: 7744783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Immunity. 1995 May;2(5):473-83.

Coordinate and cooperative roles for NF-AT and AP-1 in the regulation of the
murine IL-4 gene.

Rooney JW(1), Hoey T, Glimcher LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The transcription factor NF-AT plays an essential role in the inducible
transcription of several cytokine genes during T cell activation. The distal
NF-AT site of the murine IL-2 promoter binds both NF-AT and AP-1 proteins, and
thus represents a composite regulatory site that integrates Ca(2+)- and
PKC-dependent signaling pathways in T cell activation. However, the individual
contributions of the NF-AT and AP-1 components to promoter activity via this
composite site have not been resolved, owing to the absence of a clearly defined 
AP-1 binding site, which, when mutated abolishes AP-1 binding. We describe here
an apparently analogous NF-AT/AP-1 composite site in the murine IL-4 promoter,
which can be mutated to selectively block the recruitment of each component. We
show that the cooperative and coordinate involvement of both NF-AT and AP-1 is
necessary for full activity of the NF-AT/AP-1 composite site, and, ultimately,
the entire IL-4 promoter.

PMID: 7749982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 1995 Mar 16;10(6):1069-79.

Tissue-specific expression of the fos-related transcription factor fra-2 during
mouse development.

Carrasco D(1), Bravo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research 
Institute, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-4000.

The fra-2 gene is related to the proto-oncogene c-fos and encodes a member of the
AP-1 transcription factor gene family. We have studied the expression of fra-2
during mouse embryonic development and compared it to the pattern of expression
of other fos and jun family members. By in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analysis we have shown fra-2 expression during late
organogenesis. fra-2 transcripts are detected in several differentiating
epithelia, developing cartilage and central nervous system. The pattern of fra-2 
expression is distinct from that observed for other fos related genes, suggesting
that fra-2 has a unique role in cellular differentiation during fetal
development.

PMID: 7700631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Oncogene. 1994 Nov;9(11):3305-11.

Cloning and characterisation of the mouse fra-2 gene.

Foletta VC(1), Sonobe MH, Suzuki T, Endo T, Iba H, Cohen DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian
National University, Canberra.

Transcription factor AP-1 is comprised of multiple protein complexes that include
members of a family of genes related to the proto-oncogene c-fos. In this report,
we have extended the analysis of one member of this family, fos-related antigen-2
(fra-2), by isolating and characterising genomic and cDNA clones encoding the
mouse fra-2 homolog. The overall gene structure (number and positions of introns)
was similar to that of both the chicken fra-2 gene and other members of the fos
family, and the relative positions of putative enhancers in the 5' regulatory
region were well conserved between the mouse and chicken fra-2 genes. High levels
of fra-2 mRNA were detected in ovary, stomach, small and large intestine, brain, 
lung and heart. The mouse Fra-2 protein showed 94% and 87.5% conservation with
human and chicken Fra-2, respectively, and mouse Fra-2, like the chicken homolog,
induced transformation of chicken embryo fibroblasts. The characterisation of the
mouse fra-2 gene provides a basis for analysis of Fra-2 function in the whole
animal.

PMID: 7936655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncogene. 1994 Sep;9(9):2537-47.

Regulation of Fra-1 and Fra-2 phosphorylation differs during the cell cycle of
fibroblasts and phosphorylation in vitro by MAP kinase affects DNA binding
activity.

Gruda MC(1), Kovary K, Metz R, Bravo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Research 
Institute, Princeton, New Jersey 08543-4000.

The Fos family of transcription factors, c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2, are
rapidly induced in quiescent fibroblasts following serum or growth factor
stimulation. The Fos proteins show distinct patterns of expression during cell
growth with only Fra-1 and Fra-2 maintained at significant levels in growing
cells, suggesting that the different family members direct unique functions for
cell growth. Post-translational modification of Fos proteins has been observed
following serum stimulation, which may allow an additional level of regulation.
Our studies show that the synthesis and post-translational modification of Fra-1 
and Fra-2 in Swiss 3T3 cells is serum-dependent during G1 following the
transition from G0 and during asynchronous growth but is serum-independent during
S phase and mitosis. Post-translational modification of Fra-1 and Fra-2 causes a 
significant shift in their gel mobility which is eliminated by alkaline
phosphatase treatment. Several kinases can phosphorylate Fra-1 and Fra-2 in
vitro, including cAMP-dependent kinase (PKA), protein kinase C (PKC),
cyclin-dependent kinase 1-cdc2 (cdc2), and mitogen activated protein (MAP)
kinase. From these, MAP kinase is the only one that causes a shift in gel
mobility similar to that observed in vivo. One dimensional phosphopeptide maps of
Fra-1 and Fra-2 phosphorylated by MAP kinase in vitro are similar to those of in 
vivo labeled Fra-1 and Fra-2, suggesting that MAP kinase may also phosphorylate
Fra-1 and Fra-2 in vivo. We have also determined that phosphorylation of Fra-1
and Fra-2 by MAP kinase increases their DNA binding activity.

PMID: 8058317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Virol. 1994 Jun;68(6):3527-35.

Analysis of AP-1 function in cellular transformation pathways.

Suzuki T(1), Murakami M, Onai N, Fukuda E, Hashimoto Y, Sonobe MH, Kameda T,
Ichinose M, Miki K, Iba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virus Research, University of Tokyo, Japan.

To understand the role of endogenous AP-1 activity in cellular transformation
induced by oncogenes, we have made use of a fos mutant (supfos-1) and a jun
mutant (supjun-1), either of which can function as a transdominant inhibitor of
AP-1-mediated transcriptional regulation. Chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF)
infected with a series of transforming retroviruses were doubly infected with
retrovirus carrying supfos-1 or supjun-1, and suppression of cellular
transformation was monitored in terms of reversion to normal cellular morphology 
or acquisition of anchorage-dependent growth. Cellular transformation induced by 
several exogenously expressed transforming genes of the fos or jun family was
efficiently suppressed, as expected. CEF transformed by v-src, v-yes, v-fps,
c-Ha-ras, and N-terminally truncated c-raf were also induced to revert to the
normal phenotype by these transdominant mutants, suggesting that functional
transcription factor AP-1 activity is essential for the cellular transformation
induced by these oncogenes. The suppression is not attributable to nonspecific
inhibition of cellular proliferation, because CEF transformed by v-ros or v-myc
were not induced to revert to the normal phenotype. We next analyzed changes in
all known components of chicken AP-1 induced by v-src, c-Ha-ras, or activated
c-raf transformation. The levels of both Fra-2 and c-Jun expression were elevated
two- to fourfold, and hyperphosphorylation of Fra-2 was also observed. We further
showed that Fra-2-c-Jun heterodimer is mainly responsible for the elevated AP-1
DNA-binding activity in these transformed cells, and we propose that this
heterodimer play a crucial role in the transformation induced by these oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC236856
PMID: 8189491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


