
1. Acta Pol Pharm. 2016 Jan-Feb;73(1):55-63.

CYCLOSPORIN A AFFECTS THE PROLIFERATION PROCESS IN NORMAL HUMAN DERMAL
FIBROBLASTS.

Janikowska G, Janikowsk T, Pyka A, Wilczok A, Mazurek U.

Cyclosporin A is an immunosuppressant drug that is used not only in solid
transplant rejection, but also in moderate and severe forms of psoriasis,
pyoderma, lupus or arthritis. Serious side effects of the drug such as skin
cancer or gingival hyperplasia probably start with the latent proliferation
process. Little is known about the influence of cyclosporin A on molecular
signaling in epidermal tissue. Thus, the aim of this study was to estimate the
influence of cyclosporin A on the process of proliferation in normal human dermal
fibroblasts. Fibroblasts were cultured in a liquid growth medium in standard
conditions. Cyclosporin A was added to the culture after the confluence state.
Survival and proliferation tests on human dermal fibroblast cells were performed.
Total RNA was extracted from fibroblasts, based on which cDNA and cRNA were
synthesized. The obtained cRNA was hybridized with the expression microarray
HGU-133A_2.0. Statistical analysis of 2734 mRNAs was performed by the use of
GeneSpring 13.0 software and only results with p < 0.05 were accepted. Analysis
of variance with Tukey post hoc test with Benjamini-Hochberg correction for all
three (8, 24, 48 h) culture stages (with and without cyclosporin A) was performed
to lower the number of statistically significant results from 679 to 66, and
less. Between statistically and biologically significant mRNAs down-regulated
were EGRJ, BUBIB, MKI67, CDK1, TTK, E2F8, TPX2, however, the INSIG1, FOSL1, HMOX1
were up-regulated. The experiment data revealed that cyclosporin A up-regulated
FOSL1 in the first 24 h, afterwards down-regulating its expression. The HMOX1
gene was up-regulated in the first stage of the experiment (CsA 8 h), however,
after the next 16 h of culture time its expression was down-regulated (CsA 24 h),
to finally increased in the later time period. The results indicate that
cyclosporin A had a significant effect on proliferation in normal human dermal
fibroblasts through the changes in the expression of genes related to the cell
cycle and transcription regulation process.

PMID: 27008801  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 21. pii: jbc.M115.708131. [Epub ahead of print]

Activated a2-Macroglobulin Regulates Transcriptional Activation of c-Myc Target
Genes Through Cell Surface GRP78.

Gopal U(1), Gonzalez-Gronow M(1), Pizzo SV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, United States. (2)Duke University Medical
Center, United States salvatore.pizzo@duke.edu.

Activated a2-Macroglobulin (a2M*) signals predominantly through cell surface
GRP78 (CS-GRP78) to promote proliferation and survival of cancer cells; however, 
the molecular mechanism remains obscure. c-Myc is an essential transcriptional
regulator that controls cell proliferation. Here we hypothesize that whether
a2M*/CS-GRP78-evoked key signaling events are required for transcriptional
activation of c-Myc target genes. Activation of CS-GRP78 by a2M* requires
ligation of the GRP78 primary amino acid sequence (Leu(98)-Leu(115)). After
stimulation with a2M*, CS-GRP78 signaling activates PDK1 to induce
phosphorylation of PLK1, which in turn induces c-Myc transcription. We
demonstrate that PLK1 binds directly to c-Myc and promotes its transcriptional
activity by phosphorylating Ser(62). Moreover, activated c-Myc recruits into the 
E-boxes of target genes FOSL1 and ID2 by phosphorylating histone H3 at Ser(10).
In addition, targeting the carboxyl terminal domain of CS-GRP78 with a Mab
suppresses transcriptional activation of c-Myc target genes and impairs cell
proliferation. This work demonstrates that a2M*-CS-GRP78 acts as an upstream
regulator of the PDK1-PLK1 signaling axis to modulate c-Myc transcription and its
target genes suggesting a therapeutic strategy for targeting c-Myc-associated
malignant progression.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 27002159  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S1063-4584(16)01065-7. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene expression changes in damaged osteoarthritic cartilage identify a signature 
of non-chondrogenic and mechanical responses.

Dunn SL(1), Soul J(2), Anand S(3), Schwartz JM(4), Boot-Handford RP(5),
Hardingham TE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: sara.dunn@manchester.ac.uk. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
jamie.soul@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk. (3)Stockport NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: sanjayanand@doctors.org.uk. (4)Wellcome Trust
Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic
address: jean-marc.Schwartz@manchester.ac.uk. (5)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
ray.boothandford@manchester.ac.uk. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix
Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
tim.hardingham@manchester.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Joint degeneration in osteoarthritis (OA) is characterised by damage 
and loss of articular cartilage. The pattern of loss is consistent with damage
occurring only where the mechanical loading is high. We have investigated using
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and systems analyses the changes that occur in damaged
OA cartilage by comparing it with intact cartilage from the same joint.
METHODS: Cartilage was obtained from eight OA patients undergoing total knee
replacement. RNA was extracted from cartilage on the damaged distal medial
condyle (DMC) and the intact posterior lateral condyle (PLC). RNA-seq was
performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and systems analyses 
applied to identify dysregulated pathways.
RESULTS: In the damaged OA cartilage, there was decreased expression of
chondrogenic genes SOX9, SOX6, COL11A2, COL9A1/2/3, ACAN and HAPLN1; increases in
non-chondrogenic genes COL1A1, COMP and FN1; an altered pattern of secreted
proteinase expression; but no expression of major inflammatory cytokines. Systems
analyses by PhenomeExpress revealed significant sub-networks of DEGs including
mitotic cell cycle, Wnt signalling, apoptosis and matrix organisation that were
influenced by a core of altered transcription factors (TFs), FOSL1, AHR, E2F1 and
FOXM1.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression changes in damaged cartilage suggested a signature
non-chondrogenic response of altered matrix protein and secreted proteinase
expression. There was evidence of a damage response in this late OA cartilage,
which surprisingly showed features detected experimentally in the early response 
of cartilage to mechanical overload. PhenomeExpress analysis identified a hub of 
DEGs linked by a core of four differentially regulated TFs.

Copyright © 2016 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26973327  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Int J Cancer. 2016 Mar 2. doi: 10.1002/ijc.30068. [Epub ahead of print]

Exome sequencing of oral squamous cell carcinoma in users of Arabian snuff
reveals novel candidates for driver genes.

Al-Hebshi NN(1), Li S(2), Nasher AT(3), El-Setouhy M(4), Alsanosi R(4), Blancato 
J(5), Loffredo C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, College of Dentistry, , Jazan University, 
Jazan, Saudi Arabia. (2)Beijing Genome Institute (BGI), Shenzhen, Republic of
China. (3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry,
Sana'a University, Yemen. (4)Substance Abuse Research Center (SARC), Jazan
University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia. (5)Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA.

The study sought to identify genetic aberrations driving oral squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) development among users of shammah, an Arabian preparation of
smokeless tobacco. Twenty archival OSCC samples, 15 of which with a history of
shammah exposure, were whole-exome sequenced at an average depth of 127x. Somatic
mutations were identified using a novel, matched controls-independent filtration 
algorithm. CODEX and Exomedepth coupled with a novel, Database of Genomic
Variant-based filter were employed to call somatic gene-CNVs. Significantly
mutated genes (SMGs) were identified with Oncodrive FM and the Youn and Simon's
method. Candidate driver genes were nominated based on Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA). The observed mutational spectrum was similar to that reported by
the TCGA project. In addition to confirming known genes of OSCC (TP53, CDKNA2,
CASP8, PIK3CA, HRAS, FAT1, TP63, CCND1 and FADD) the analysis identified several 
candidate novel driver events including mutations of NOTCH3, CSMD3, CRB1, CLTCL1,
OSMR and TRPM2, amplification of the proto-oncogenes FOSL1, RELA, TRAF6, MDM2,
FRS2 and BAG1, and deletion of the recently described tumor suppressor SMARCC1.
Analysis also revealed significantly altered pathways not previously implicated
in OSCC including Oncostatin-M signalling pathways, AP-1 and C-MYB transcription 
networks and endocytosis. There was a trend for higher number of mutations,
amplifications and driver events in samples with history of shammah exposure
particularly those that tested EBV positive, suggesting an interaction between
tobacco exposure and EBV. The work provides further evidence for the genetic
heterogeneity of oral cancer, and suggests shammah-associated OSCC is
characterized by extensive amplification of oncogenes. This article is protected 
by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 UICC.

PMID: 26934577  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Orthop Res. 2016 Feb 22. doi: 10.1002/jor.23209. [Epub ahead of print]

RNA-seq analysis of clinical-grade osteochondral allografts reveals activation of
early response genes.

Lin Y(1,)(2), Lewallen EA(1), Camilleri ET(1), Bonin CA(1), Jones DL(1),
Dudakovic A(1), Galeano-Garces C(1), Wang W(1,)(3), Karperien MJ(4), Larson
AN(1), Dahm DL(1), Stuart MJ(1), Levy BA(1), Smith J(1), Ryssman DB(1),
Westendorf JJ(1), Im HJ(5), van Wijnen AJ(1), Riester SM(1), Krych AJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Orthopedics, WuHan Orthopedics Hospital/Puai Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430033,
China. (4)Department of Developmental BioEngineering, University of Twente,
Enschede, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Biochemistry, Rush University Medical
Center, Chicago, IL, 60612.

Preservation of osteochondral allografts used for transplantation is critical to 
ensure favorable outcomes for patients after surgical treatment of cartilage
defects. To study the biological effects of protocols currently used for
cartilage storage, we investigated differences in gene expression between stored 
allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage from living donors using high throughput 
molecular screening strategies. We applied next generation RNA sequencing
(RNA-seq) and real-time reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) to assess genome-wide differences in mRNA expression between
stored allograft cartilage and fresh cartilage tissue from living donors. Gene
ontology analysis was used to characterize biological pathways associated with
differentially expressed genes. Our studies establish reduced levels of mRNAs
encoding cartilage related extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins (i.e., COL1A1,
COL2A1, COL10A1, ACAN, DCN, HAPLN1, TNC, and COMP) in stored cartilage. These
changes occur concomitantly with increased expression of 'early response genes'
that encode transcription factors mediating stress/cytoprotective responses (i.e.
EGR1, EGR2, EGR3, MYC, FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB and JUND). The elevated
expression of 'early response genes' and reduced levels of ECM-related mRNAs in
stored cartilage allografts suggests that tissue viability may be maintained by a
cytoprotective program that reduces cell metabolic activity. These findings have 
potential implications for future studies focused on quality assessment and
clinical optimization of osteochondral allografts used for cartilage
transplantation. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26909883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Feb 23. pii: molcanther.0567.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

The Bromodomain BET inhibitor JQ1 Suppresses Tumor Angiogenesis in Models of
Childhood Sarcoma.

Bid HK(1), Phelps DA(2), Xiao L(3), Guttridge DC(4), Lin J(5), London C(6), Baker
LH(7), Mo X(8), Houghton PJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute, Resonant Therapeutics, Inc. (2)Greehey Children's
Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio. (3)Center for Childhood Cancer & Blood Diseases, Nationwide Children's
Hospital. (4)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Ohio State University. (5)Center
for Childhood Cancer, Nationwide Childrens Hospital. (6)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Ohio State University. (7)Internal Medicine, Oncology, University of
Michigan. (8)Center for Biostatistics, Ohio State University. (9)Greehey
Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio houghtonp@uthscsa.edu.

The bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) inhibitor, JQ1 has marked
antitumor activity against several hematologic malignancies as well as solid
tumor models. Here we investigated its activity in vitro and in vivo against
models of childhood rhabdomyosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma. In vitro, JQ1 (but not
the inactive enantiomer JQ1R) inhibited cell proliferation, and increased G1
fraction of cells, although there was no correlation between cell line
sensitivity and suppression of c-MYC or MYCN. In vivo, xenografts showed
significant inhibition of growth during the period of treatment, and rapid
regrowth after treatment was stopped, activity typical of antiangiogenic agents. 
Further, xenografts derived from cell lines intrinsically resistant or sensitive 
to JQ1 in vitro had similar sensitivity in vivo as xenografts. Further
investigation showed that JQ1 reduced tumor vascularization. This was secondary
to both drug-induced down regulation of tumor-derived growth factors and direct
effects of JQ1 on vascular elements. JQ1 suppressed VEGF-stimulated
vascularization of Matrigel plugs in mice, and in vitro suppressed
differentiation, proliferation and invasion of human umbilical cord vascular
endothelial cells (HUVECs). In HUVECs JQ1 partially suppressed c-MYC levels, but 
dramatically reduced AP-1 levels and activity through suppression of the AP-1
associated protein FOSL1. Our data suggest that the antitumor activity of JQ1 in 
these sarcoma models is largely a consequence of its anti-angiogenic activity.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26908627  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Brain Res. 2016 Jan 15;1631:157-64. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.11.041. Epub
2015 Dec 2.

Hippocampal NMDAR-Wnt-Catenin signaling disrupted with cognitive deficits in
adolescent offspring exposed to prenatal hypoxia.

Wei B(1), Li L(1), He A(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun M(2), Xu Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Fetology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215006, China. (2)Institute for Fetology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China. Electronic address:
sunmiaosun@yahoo.com. (3)Institute for Fetology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China; Center for Perinatal Biology, Loma
Linda University, CA 92354, USA. Electronic address: xuzhice@suda.edu.cn.

Prenatal hypoxia (PH) is one of the most common stresses on fetuses, and might
lead to abnormal brain development. This work investigates whether PH affects
behavioral development of the learning/memory ability in the adolescent offspring
rats and the underlying molecular basis in the brain. In this study, pregnant
rats used to generate PH offspring were treated with hypoxia (10.5% oxygen) from 
gestational day 4 to 21. Brain weights of either the fetuses or the 6-week old
offspring in the PH group were found to be significantly lower compared with the 
control group. Morris water maze tests showed longer escape latency and swimming 
distance during navigation testing in the PH offspring; retention tests
demonstrated less frequency of crossing target areas indicating impaired learning
and memory ability in the PH offspring. The expressions of subunits of
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs), Grin1/NR1, Grin2a/NR2A, and Grin2b/NR2B,
were significantly decreased in the hippocampus of adolescent offspring in the PH
group. Wnt3a as well as active form of ß-catenin protein were also significantly 
down-regulated. Furthermore, the expression of early response gene, Fosl1, was
significantly reduced. The results above provide new evidence that PH might
result in the spatial acquisition and retrieval deficits in the adolescent
offspring, associated with dysregulation of NMDARs-Wnt-Catenin signaling in the
hippocampus. This study result deepens the knowledge of the long-term influence
of prenatal insults on the neuro-behavioral development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656067  [PubMed - in process]


8. Respir Res. 2015 Dec 9;16(1):147. doi: 10.1186/s12931-015-0305-4.

The whole-genome expression analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
aspirin sensitive asthmatics versus aspirin tolerant patients and healthy donors 
after in vitro aspirin challenge.

Wieczfinska J(1), Kacprzak D(2), Pospiech K(3), Sokolowska M(4,)(5), Nowakowska
M(6), Pniewska E(7), Bednarek A(8), Kuprys-Lipinska I(9), Kuna P(10), Pawliczak
R(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunopathology, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of
Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, 7/9 Zeligowskiego, 90-752, Lodz, Poland.
joanna.wieczfinska@umed.lodz.pl. (2)Department of Immunopathology, Medical
University of Lodz, Chair of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, 7/9
Zeligowskiego, 90-752, Lodz, Poland. dorkac@csk.umed.lodz.pl. (3)Department of
Molecular Carcinogenesis, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of Molecular Medicine
and Biotechnology, Lodz, Poland. karolina.pospiech@umed.lodz.pl. (4)Department of
Immunopathology, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of Allergology, Immunology and
Dermatology, 7/9 Zeligowskiego, 90-752, Lodz, Poland.
milena.sokolowska@siaf.uzh.ch. (5)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research 
(SIAF), University of Zurich, Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and
Education, Davos, Switzerland. milena.sokolowska@siaf.uzh.ch. (6)Department of
Molecular Carcinogenesis, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of Molecular Medicine
and Biotechnology, Lodz, Poland. magdalena.nowakowska@umed.lodz.pl. (7)Department
of Immunopathology, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of Allergology, Immunology 
and Dermatology, 7/9 Zeligowskiego, 90-752, Lodz, Poland.
e.pniewska@csk.umed.lodz.pl. (8)Department of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Medical
University of Lodz, Chair of Molecular Medicine and Biotechnology, Lodz, Poland. 
andrzej.bednarek@umed.lodz.pl. (9)Department of Internal Medicine, Asthma and
Allergy, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
izabela.kuprys-lipinska@umed.lodz.pl. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Asthma
and Allergy, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. piotr.kuna@umed.lodz.pl.
(11)Department of Immunopathology, Medical University of Lodz, Chair of
Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, 7/9 Zeligowskiego, 90-752, Lodz, Poland.
rafal.pawliczak@umed.lodz.pl.

BACKGROUND: Up to 30% of adults with severe asthma are hypersensitive to aspirin 
and no unambiguous theory exists which provides a satisfactory explanation for
the occurrence of aspirin-induced asthma (AIA) in some asthmatic patients.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare the AIA expression profile
against aspirin tolerant asthma (ATA) and healthy volunteers (HV) profile in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) after in vitro aspirin challenge in
Caucasian population.
METHODS: PBMCs were separated from blood of three groups of subjects--11 AIA, 7
ATA and 15 HV and then stimulated by either 2 µM lysine aspirin or 20 µM lysine
as a control. Subsequently, RNA was isolated, transcribed into cDNA and subjected
to microarray and qPCR studies. Simultaneously, protein was extracted from PBMCs 
and used in further immunoblotting analysis.
RESULTS: The validation of results at mRNA level has shown only three genes,
whose expression was significantly altered between comprising groups. mRNA
expression of CNPY3 in PBMCs in AIA was significantly lower (-0.41<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.67) than
in HV (1.04<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.69), (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02); mRNA expression of FOSL1 in PBMCs in AIA was
also significantly decreased (-0.66<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.97) as opposed to HV (0.31<U+2009>±<U+2009>4.83),
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). While mRNA expression of ERAS in PBMCs was increased (1.15<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.23) in
AIA in comparison to HV (-1.32<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.41), (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). At protein level the changed 
expression of one protein was confirmed. Protein expression of FOSL1 in PBMCs in 
AIA was both significantly lower (-0.86<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.08) than in ATA (0.39<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.42),
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046) and in HV (0.9<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.27), (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study implies a positive association between CNPY3, ERAS,
FOSL1 and aspirin-intolerant asthma, suggesting that these findings would be
useful for further investigations of NSAIDs mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4673746
PMID: 26646719  [PubMed - in process]


9. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Dec;8(4):345-53. doi: 10.3342/ceo.2015.8.4.345.
Epub 2015 Nov 10.

Microarray Analysis of Gene Expression Alteration in Human Middle Ear Epithelial 
Cells Induced by Asian Sand Dust.

Go YY(1), Park MK(2), Kwon JY(3), Seo YR(3), Chae SW(1), Song JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and 
Neck Surgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Life Science, Institute of Environmental Medicine for Green
Chemistry, Dongguk University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The primary aim of this study is to evaluate the gene expression
profile of Asian sand dust (ASD)-treated human middle ear epithelial cell (HMEEC)
using microarray analysis.
METHODS: The HMEEC was treated with ASD (400 µg/mL) and total RNA was extracted
for microarray analysis. Molecular pathways among differentially expressed genes 
were further analyzed. For selected genes, the changes in gene expression were
confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: A total of 1,274 genes were differentially expressed by ASD. Among them,
1,138 genes were 2 folds up-regulated, whereas 136 genes were 2 folds
down-regulated. Up-regulated genes were mainly involved in cellular processes,
including apoptosis, cell differentiation, and cell proliferation. Down-regulated
genes affected cellular processes, including apoptosis, cell cycle, cell
differentiation, and cell proliferation. The 10 genes including ADM, CCL5, EDN1, 
EGR1, FOS, GHRL, JUN, SOCS3, TNF, and TNFSF10 were identified as main modulators 
in up-regulated genes. A total of 11 genes including CSF3, DKK1, FOSL1, FST,
TERT, MMP13, PTHLH, SPRY2, TGFBR2, THBS1, and TIMP1 acted as main components of
pathway associated with 2-fold down regulated genes.
CONCLUSION: We identified the differentially expressed genes in ASD-treated
HMEEC. Our work indicates that air pollutant like ASD, may play an important role
in the pathogenesis of otitis media.

PMCID: PMC4661249
PMID: 26622952  [PubMed]


10. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 17;15:43. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0089-2.

MiR-21 is required for efficient kidney regeneration in fish.

Hoppe B(1), Pietsch S(1), Franke M(1,)(2,)(3), Engel S(1), Groth M(4), Platzer
M(4), Englert C(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann
Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745, Jena, Germany. (2)Present address: 
Research Group of Development & Disease, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, 14195, Berlin, Germany. (3)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353, Berlin, Germany. (4)Genome Analysis,
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11,
07745, Jena, Germany. (5)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Leibniz Institute on
Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11, 07745, Jena,
Germany. cenglert@fli-leibniz.de. (6)Faculty of Biology and Pharmacy, Friedrich
Schiller University of Jena, Fürstengraben 1, 07743, Jena, Germany.
cenglert@fli-leibniz.de.

BACKGROUND: Acute kidney injury in mammals, which is caused by cardiovascular
diseases or the administration of antibiotics with nephrotoxic side-effects is a 
life-threatening disease, since loss of nephrons is irreversible in mammals. In
contrast, fish are able to generate new nephrons even in adulthood and thus
provide a good model to study renal tubular regeneration.
RESULTS: Here, we investigated the early response after gentamicin-induced renal 
injury, using the short-lived killifish Nothobranchius furzeri. A set of
microRNAs was differentially expressed after renal damage, among them miR-21,
which was up-regulated. A locked nucleic acid-modified antimiR-21 efficiently
knocked down miR-21 activity and caused a lag in the proliferative response,
enhanced apoptosis and an overall delay in regeneration. Transcriptome profiling 
identified apoptosis as a process that was significantly affected upon antimiR-21
administration. Together with functional data this suggests that miR-21 acts as a
pro-proliferative and anti-apoptotic factor in the context of kidney regeneration
in fish. Possible downstream candidate genes that mediate its effect on
proliferation and apoptosis include igfbp3 and fosl1, among other genes.
CONCLUSION: In summary, our findings extend the role of miR-21 in the kidney. For
the first time we show its functional involvement in regeneration indicating that
fast proliferation and reduced apoptosis are important for efficient renal
tubular regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4650918
PMID: 26577279  [PubMed - in process]


11. Theriogenology. 2016 Mar 1;85(4):724-733.e1. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.10.016. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Effect of vitrification using the Cryotop method on the gene expression profile
of in vitro-produced bovine embryos.

de Oliveira Leme L(1), Dufort I(2), Spricigo JF(1), Braga TF(1), Sirard MA(2),
Franco MM(3), Dode MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, University of Brasilia,
Brasília, Federal District, Brazil. (2)Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction, Faculté des Sciences de l'Agriculture et de l'Alimentation,
Département des Sciences Animales, Pavillon INAF, Université Laval, Québec City, 
Quebec, Canada. (3)Embrapa Genetic Resources and Biotechnology, Laboratory of
Animal Reproduction, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil. (4)School of Agriculture
and Veterinary Medicine, University of Brasilia, Brasília, Federal District,
Brazil; Embrapa Genetic Resources and Biotechnology, Laboratory of Animal
Reproduction, Brasília, Federal District, Brazil. Electronic address:
margot.dode@embrapa.br.

The present study analyzed the changes in gene expression induced by the Cryotop 
vitrification technique in bovine blastocyst-stage embryos, using Agilent
EmbryoGENE microarray slides. Bovine in vitro-produced embryos were vitrified and
compared with nonvitrified (control) embryos. After vitrification, embryos were
warmed and cultured for an additional 4 hours. Survived embryos were used for
microarray analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR)
quantification. Survival rates were higher (P < 0.05) in the control embryos
(100%) than in the vitrified embryos (87%). Global gene expression analysis
revealed that only 43 out of 21,139 genes exhibited significantly altered
expression in the vitrified embryos compared to the control embryos, with a very 
limited fold change (P < 0.05). A total of 10 genes were assessed by qPCR. Only
the FOS-like antigen 1 (FOSL1) gene presented differential expression (P < 0.05) 
according to both the array and qPCR methods, and it was overexpressed in
vitrified embryos. Although, the major consequence of vitrification seems to be
the activation of the apoptosis pathway in some cells. Indeed, FOSL1 is part of
the activating protein 1 transcription factor complex and is implicated in a
variety of cellular processes, including proliferation, differentiation, and
apoptosis. Therefore, our results suggest that a limited increase in the rate of 
apoptosis was the only detectable response of the embryos to vitrification
stress.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26553569  [PubMed - in process]


12. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3912-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.123885. Epub 2015 Oct 
1.

Osteogenic capillaries orchestrate growth plate-independent ossification of the
malleus.

Matsuo K(1), Kuroda Y(2), Nango N(3), Shimoda K(4), Kubota Y(5), Ema M(6), Bakiri
L(7), Wagner EF(7), Takeda Y(8), Yashiro W(9), Momose A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan kmatsuo@keio.jp. (2)Laboratory of
Cell and Tissue Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (3)Ratoc System Engineering Co., Ltd., 1-24-8
Sekiguchi, Bunkyo, Tokyo 162-0041, Japan. (4)Laboratory Animal Center, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. 
(5)Department of Vascular Biology, The Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. (6)Research
Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta,
Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. (7)Genes, Development and Disease
Group, National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Cancer Cell Biology Programme,
Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, Madrid 28029, Spain. (8)X-ray Research Laboratory,
Rigaku Corporation, 3-9-12 Matsubara-cho, Akishima, Tokyo 196-8666, Japan.
(9)Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials (IMRAM), Tohoku
University, Katahira 2-1-1, Aoba, Sendai Miyagi 980-8577, Japan.

Endochondral ossification is a developmental process by which cartilage is
replaced by bone. Terminally differentiated hypertrophic chondrocytes are
calcified, vascularized, and removed by chondroclasts before bone matrix is laid 
down by osteoblasts. In mammals, the malleus is one of three auditory ossicles
that transmit vibrations of the tympanic membrane to the inner ear. The malleus
is formed from a cartilaginous precursor without growth plate involvement, but
little is known about how bones of this type undergo endochondral ossification.
Here, we demonstrate that in the processus brevis of the malleus, clusters of
osteoblasts surrounding the capillary loop produce bone matrix, causing the
volume of the capillary lumen to decrease rapidly in post-weaning mice.
Synchrotron X-ray tomographic microscopy revealed a concentric, cylindrical
arrangement of osteocyte lacunae along capillaries, indicative of pericapillary
bone formation. Moreover, we report that overexpression of Fosl1, which encodes a
component of the AP-1 transcription factor complex, in osteoblasts significantly 
blocked malleal capillary narrowing. These data suggest that
osteoblast/endothelial cell interactions control growth plate-free endochondral
ossification through 'osteogenic capillaries' in a Fosl1-regulated manner.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712877
PMID: 26428006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Int J Oncol. 2015 Nov;47(5):1725-34. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3146. Epub 2015 Sep 2.

Fra-1 is upregulated in gastric cancer tissues and affects the PI3K/Akt and p53
signaling pathway in gastric cancer.

He J(1), Zhu G(1), Gao L(2), Chen P(1), Long Y(2), Liao S(2), Yi H(3), Yi W(2),
Pei Z(2), Wu M(1), Li X(1), Xiang J(1), Peng S(1), Ma J(1), Zhou M(1), Xiong
W(1), Zeng Z(1), Xiang B(1), Tang K(2), Cao L(2), Li G(1), Zhou Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Tumor Hospital and the Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410006, P.R. China.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078,
P.R. China. (3)Research Center of Carcinogenesis and Targeted Therapy, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410008, P.R. China.

Gastric cancer is an aggressive disease that continues to have a daunting impact 
on global health. Fra-1 (FOSL1) plays important roles in oncogenesis in various
malignancies. We investigated the expression of Fra-1 in gastric cancer (GC)
tissues by qPCR, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and western blot technologies. The
results showed that Fra-1 was overexpressed in gastric cancer tissues compared
with the adjacent non-cancerous tissues. To explore the possible mechanism of
Fra-1 in GC, we elucidated the effect of Fra-1 in the apoptosis and cell cycle of
gastric cancer cells, AGS, and found that a considerable decrease in apoptotic
cells and increase of S phase rate were observed for AGS cells with Fra-1
overexpession. We identified and confirmed that Fra-1 affected the expression
level of CTTN and EZR in vitro through LC-MS/MS analyses and western blot
technology. Furthermore, we found that Fra-1 was correlated with dysregulation
PI3K/Akt and p53 signaling pathway in gastric cancer tissues in vitro. Moreover, 
we found that Fra-1 overexpression affected the expression of PI3K, Akt, MDM2 and
p53 in vivo. In summary, our results suggest that Fra-1 is upregulated in gastric
cancer tissues and plays its function by affecting the PI3K/Akt and p53 signaling
pathway in gastric cancer.

PMID: 26330014  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 14;10(8):e0135737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135737.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative MiRNA Expressional Profiles and Molecular Networks in Human Small
Bowel Tissues of Necrotizing Enterocolitis and Spontaneous Intestinal
Perforation.

Ng PC(1), Chan KY(1), Leung KT(1), Tam YH(2), Ma TP(1), Lam HS(1), Cheung HM(1), 
Lee KH(2), To KF(3), Li K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Surgery, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) and spontaneous intestinal
perforation (SIP) are acute intestinal conditions which could result in mortality
and severe morbidity in preterm infants. Our objective was to identify
dysregulated micro-RNAs (miRNAs) in small bowel tissues of NEC and SIP, and their
possible roles in disease pathophysiology.
METHODS: We performed differential miRNA arrays on tissues of NEC (n = 4), SIP (n
= 4) and surgical-control (Surg-CTL; n = 4), and validated target miRNAs by qPCR 
(n = 10 each group). The association of target miRNAs with 52 dysregulated mRNAs 
was investigated by bioinformatics on functional and base-pair sequence
algorithms, and correlation in same tissue samples.
RESULTS: We presented the first miRNA profiles of NEC, SIP and Surg-CTL
intestinal tissues in preterm infants. Of 28 validated miRNAs, 21 were
significantly different between NEC or SIP and Surg-CTL. Limited overlapping in
the aberrant expression of miRNAs between NEC and SIP indicated their distinct
molecular mechanisms. A proposed network of dysregulated miRNA/mRNA pairs in NEC 
suggested interaction at bacterial receptor TLR4 (miR-31, miR-451, miR-203,
miR-4793-3p), mediated via key transcription factors NFKB2 (miR-203), AP-1/FOSL1 
(miR-194-3p), FOXA1 (miR-21-3p, miR-431 and miR-1290) and HIF1A (miR-31), and
extended downstream to pathways of angiogenesis, arginine metabolism, cell
adhesion and chemotaxis, extracellular matrix remodeling, hypoxia/oxidative
stress, inflammation and muscle contraction. In contrast, upregulation of miR-451
and miR-223 in SIP suggested modulation of G-protein-mediated muscle contraction.
CONCLUSIONS: The robust response of miRNA dysregulation in NEC and SIP, and
concerted involvement of specific miRNAs in the molecular networks indicated
their crucial roles in mucosa integrity and disease pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4537110
PMID: 26274503  [PubMed - in process]


15. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Nov 1;24(21):2561-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0066. Epub 2015 
Aug 10.

Dysregulation of Mitochondrial Functions and Osteogenic Differentiation in
Cisd2-Deficient Murine Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Tsai PH(1), Chien Y(1,)(2), Chuang JH(2,)(3), Chou SJ(1), Chien CH(2,)(3), Lai
YH(4), Li HY(4,)(5,)(6), Ko YL(2,)(5), Chang YL(1,)(7), Wang CY(5), Liu
YY(2,)(3), Lee HC(1,)(5), Yang CH(8), Tsai TF(9), Lee YY(3,)(10), Chiou
SH(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University , Taipei, Taiwan . 
(2)2 Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital , Taipei,
Taiwan . (3)3 Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University ,
Taipei, Taiwan . (4)4 Institute of Anatomy & Cell Biology, National Yang-Ming
University , Taipei, Taiwan . (5)5 School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University , Taipei, Taiwan . (6)6 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Neurological Institute , Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan . (7)7 
Department of Pharmacy, Neurological Institute , Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan . (8)8 Department of Ophthalmology, National Taiwan
University Hospital , Taipei, Taiwan . (9)9 Department of Life Sciences &
Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University , Taipei, Taiwan .
(10)10 Department of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute , Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan .

Wolfram syndrome 2 (WFS2) is a premature aging syndrome caused by an irreversible
mitochondria-mediated disorder. Cisd2, which regulates mitochondrial electron
transport, has been recently identified as the causative gene of WFS2. The mouse 
Cisd2 knockout (KO) (Cisd2(-/-)) recapitulates most of the clinical
manifestations of WFS2, including growth retardation, osteopenia, and
lordokyphosis. However, the precise mechanisms underlying osteopenia in WFS2 and 
Cisd2 KO mice remain unknown. In this study, we collected embryonic fibroblasts
from Cisd2-deficient embryos and reprogrammed them into induced pluripotent stem 
cells (iPSCs) via retroviral transduction with Oct4/Sox2/Klf4/c-Myc.
Cisd2-deficient mouse iPSCs (miPSCs) exhibited structural abnormalities in their 
mitochondria and an impaired proliferative capability. The global gene expression
profiles of Cisd2(+/+), Cisd2(+/-), and Cisd2(-/-) miPSCs revealed that Cisd2
functions as a regulator of both mitochondrial electron transport and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which is critical for cell proliferation and osteogenic 
differentiation. Notably, Cisd2(-/-) miPSCs exhibited impaired Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, with the downregulation of downstream genes, such as Tcf1, Fosl1, and 
Jun and the osteogenic regulator Runx2. Several differentiation markers for
tridermal lineages were globally impaired in Cisd2(-/-) miPSCs. Alizarin red S
staining and flow cytometry analysis further revealed that Cisd2(-/-) miPSCs
failed to undergo osteogenic differentiation. Taken together, our results, as
determined using an miPSC-based platform, have demonstrated that Cisd2 regulates 
mitochondrial function, proliferation, intracellular Ca(2+) homeostasis, and Wnt 
pathway signaling. Cisd2 deficiency impairs the activation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling and thereby contributes to the pathogeneses of osteopenia and
lordokyphosis in WFS2 patients.

PMCID: PMC4620525 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26230298  [PubMed - in process]


16. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 16;5:11999. doi: 10.1038/srep11999.

Promoter-level expression clustering identifies time development of
transcriptional regulatory cascades initiated by ErbB receptors in breast cancer 
cells.

Mina M(1), Magi S(2), Jurman G(1), Itoh M(3), Kawaji H(3), Lassmann T(4), Arner
E(5), Forrest AR(6), Carninci P(6), Hayashizaki Y(7), Daub CO(8); FANTOM
Consortium, Okada-Hatakeyama M(2), Furlanello C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, I-38123 Povo, Trento, Italy.
(2)Laboratory for Integrated Cellular Systems, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences (IMS), Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (3)1]
RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies)
(CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan 
[2] RIKEN Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan [3] RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program
(PMI), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (4)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
[3] Telethon Kids Institute, The University of Western Australia, 100 Roberts
Road, Subiaco, WA 6008, Australia. (5)1] RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics Science Center
(OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan [3] Department of
Medicine at Karolinska Institutet and Center for Metabolism and Endocrinology at 
Karolinska University Hospital, 141 86, Stockholm, Sweden. (6)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
(7)1] RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic
Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa
230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program
(PMI), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (8)1] RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies (Division of Genomic Technologies) (CLST (DGT)), 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan [2] RIKEN Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
[3] Department of Biosciences and Nutrition and Science for Life Laboratory,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SE-141 86, Sweden.

The analysis of CAGE (Cap Analysis of Gene Expression) time-course has been
proposed by the FANTOM5 Consortium to extend the understanding of the sequence of
events facilitating cell state transition at the level of promoter regulation. To
identify the most prominent transcriptional regulations induced by growth factors
in human breast cancer, we apply here the Complexity Invariant Dynamic Time
Warping motif EnRichment (CIDER) analysis approach to the CAGE time-course
datasets of MCF-7 cells stimulated by epidermal growth factor (EGF) or heregulin 
(HRG). We identify a multi-level cascade of regulations rooted by the Serum
Response Factor (SRF) transcription factor, connecting the MAPK-mediated
transduction of the HRG stimulus to the negative regulation of the MAPK pathway
by the members of the DUSP family phosphatases. The finding confirms the known
primary role of FOS and FOSL1, members of AP-1 family, in shaping gene expression
in response to HRG induction. Moreover, we identify a new potential regulation of
DUSP5 and RARA (known to antagonize the transcriptional regulation induced by the
estrogen receptors) by the activity of the AP-1 complex, specific to HRG
response. The results indicate that a divergence in AP-1 regulation determines
cellular changes of breast cancer cells stimulated by ErbB receptors.

PMCID: PMC4503981
PMID: 26179713  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Sep;35(18):3163-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00118-15. Epub 2015 Jul 
6.

Dynamic Regulation of AP-1 Transcriptional Complexes Directs Trophoblast
Differentiation.

Kubota K(1), Kent LN(2), Rumi MA(2), Roby KF(3), Soares MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Reproductive
Health and Regenerative Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas, USA kkubota@kumc.edu msoares@kumc.edu. (2)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Institute for Reproductive Health and Regenerative
Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Institute for Reproductive Health and 
Regenerative Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, 
USA.

Placentation is a process that establishes the maternal-fetal interface and is
required for successful pregnancy. The epithelial component of the placenta
consists of trophoblast cells, which possess the capacity for multilineage
differentiation and are responsible for placenta-specific functions. FOS-like
antigen 1 (FOSL1), a component of AP-1 transcription factor complexes,
contributes to the regulation of placental development. FOSL1 expression is
restricted to trophoblast giant cells and invasive trophoblast cells. In the
present study, we characterized the FOSL1 regulatory pathway in rat trophoblast
cells. Transcriptome profiling in control and FOSL1 knockdown cells identified
FOSL1-dependent gene sets linked to endocrine and invasive functions. FOSL1 was
shown to occupy AP-1 binding sites within these gene loci, as determined by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Complementary in vivo experiments using
trophoblast-specific lentiviral delivery of FOSL1 short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
provided in vivo validation of FOSL1 targets. FOSL1 actions require a
dimerization partner. Coimmunoprecipitation, coimmunolocalization, and ChIP
analyses showed that FOSL1 interacts with JUNB and, to a lesser extent, JUN in
differentiating trophoblast cells. Knockdown of FOSL1 and JUNB expression
inhibited both endocrine and invasive properties of trophoblast cells. In
summary, FOSL1 recruits JUNB to form AP-1 transcriptional complexes that
specifically regulate the endocrine and invasive trophoblast phenotypes.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4539370
PMID: 26149388  [PubMed - in process]


18. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2015 Sep;309(5):H880-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00095.2015. Epub 2015 Jun 26.

Activation of the (pro)renin receptor in the paraventricular nucleus increases
sympathetic outflow in anesthetized rats.

Huber MJ(1), Basu R(1), Cecchettini C(1), Cuadra AE(2), Chen QH(3), Shan Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Integrative Physiology, Michigan Technological
University, Houghton, Michigan; (2)Department of Biology, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts; and. (3)Department of Kinesiology and
Integrative Physiology, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, Michigan;
Biotech Research Center, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, Michigan.
(4)Department of Kinesiology and Integrative Physiology, Michigan Technological
University, Houghton, Michigan; Biotech Research Center, Michigan Technological
University, Houghton, Michigan zhiyings@mtu.edu.

Previous studies have indicated that hyperactivity of brain prorenin receptors
(PRR) is implicated in neurogenic hypertension. However, the role of brain PRR in
regulating arterial blood pressure (ABP) is not well understood. Here, we test
the hypothesis that PRR activation in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus
(PVN) contributes to increased sympathetic nerve activity (SNA). In anaesthetized
adult Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats, bilateral PVN microinjection of human prorenin (2
pmol/side) significantly increased splanchnic SNA (SSNA; 71 ± 15%, n = 7).
Preinjection of either prorenin handle region peptide, the PRR binding blocker
(PRRB), or tiron (2 nmol/side), the scavenger of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
significantly attenuated the increase in SSNA (PRRB: 32 ± 5% vs. control, n = 6; 
tiron: 8 ± 10% vs. control, n = 5; P < 0.05) evoked by prorenin injection. We
further investigated the effects of PRR activation on ROS production as well as
downstream gene expression using cultured hypothalamus neurons from newborn SD
rats. Incubation of brain neurons with human prorenin (100 nM) dramatically
enhanced ROS production and induced a time-dependent increase in mRNA levels of
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), NAPDH oxidase 2 subunit cybb, and
FOS-like antigen 1 (fosl1), a marker for neuronal activation and a component of
transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1). The maximum mRNA increase in
these genes occurred 6 h following incubation (iNOS: 201-fold; cybb: 2 -fold;
Ffosl1: 11-fold). The increases in iNOS and cybb mRNA were not attenuated by the 
AT1 receptor antagonist losartan but abolished by the AP-1 blocker curcumin. Our 
results suggest that PVN PRR activation induces sympathoexcitation possibly
through stimulation of an ANG II-independent, ROS-AP-1-iNOS signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4591410 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26116710  [PubMed - in process]


19. Sci Rep. 2015 May 6;5:10120. doi: 10.1038/srep10120.

BET inhibitors induce apoptosis through a MYC independent mechanism and synergise
with CDK inhibitors to kill osteosarcoma cells.

Baker EK(1), Taylor S(2), Gupte A(2), Sharp PP(3), Walia M(2), Walsh NC(1),
Zannettino AC(4), Chalk AM(1), Burns CJ(5), Walkley CR(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] St. Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, 3065 VIC, Australia [2] Department of
Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, 3065 VIC,
Australia. (2)St. Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, 3065 VIC, Australia. (3)The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, 3052,
Australia. (4)Myeloma Research Laboratory, School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia and Cancer 
Theme, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, SA 5000,
Australia. (5)1] The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia [2] The University of Melbourne, Department of
Medical Biology, 3010 VIC, Australia. (6)1] St. Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy,
3065 VIC, Australia [2] Department of Medicine, St. Vincent's Hospital,
University of Melbourne, Fitzroy, 3065 VIC, Australia [3] ACRF Rational Drug
Discovery Centre, St. Vincent's Institute, Fitzroy, 3065 VIC, Australia.

Osteosarcoma (OS) survival rates have plateaued in part due to a lack of new
therapeutic options. Here we demonstrate that bromodomain inhibitors (BETi), JQ1,
I-BET151, I-BET762, exert potent anti-tumour activity against primary and
established OS cell lines, mediated by inhibition of BRD4. Strikingly, unlike
previous observations in long-term established human OS cell lines, the
antiproliferative activity of JQ1 in primary OS cells was driven by the induction
of apoptosis, not cell cycle arrest. In further contrast, JQ1 activity in OS was 
mediated independently of MYC downregulation. We identified that JQ1 suppresses
the transcription factor FOSL1 by displacement of BRD4 from its locus. Loss of
FOSL1 phenocopied the antiproliferative effects of JQ1, identifying FOSL1
suppression as a potential novel therapeutic approach for OS. As a monotherapy
JQ1 demonstrated significant anti-tumour activity in vivo in an OS graft model.
Further, combinatorial treatment approaches showed that JQ1 increased the
sensitivity of OS cells to doxorubicin and induced potent synergistic activity
when rationally combined with CDK inhibitors. The greater level of activity
achieved with the combination of BETi with CDK inhibitors demonstrates the
efficacy of this combination therapy. Taken together, our studies show that BET
inhibitors are a promising new therapeutic for OS.

PMCID: PMC4421868
PMID: 25944566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Hazard Mater. 2015 Oct 30;297:25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2015.04.065. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Maternal exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate disrupts placental growth and
development in pregnant mice.

Zong T(1), Lai L(1), Hu J(2), Guo M(1), Li M(1), Zhang L(1), Zhong C(1), Yang
B(1), Wu L(1), Zhang D(1), Tang M(1), Kuang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang,
Jiangxi 330006, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(3)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Nanchang University, Nanchang,
Jiangxi 330006, China. Electronic address: kuanghaibin@ncu.edu.cn.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) is used as a plasticizer and widely dispersed 
in the environment. DEHP exposure reduces embryo implantations, increases
embryonic loss, and decreases fetal body weights. However, no detailed
information is available about the effect of DEHP on the placentation during
pregnancy. Thus, our aim was to explore the effect of DEHP on the growth and
development of placenta in vivo. Mice were administered DEHP by gavages at 125,
250, 500 mg/kg/day from gestational days (GD) 1 until sacrifice. Results showed
that DEHP treatment significantly reduced the weight of placenta at GD 13.
Histopathologically, in DEHP-treated group, the ectoplacental cones significantly
became smaller at GD9, and total area of placenta and area of spongiotrophoblast 
were significantly reduced at GD 13. Expression levels of Ascl2, Esx1 and Fosl1
mRNA dramatically decreased in DEHP-treated placenta at GD 13. DEHP
administration disrupted labyrinth vascularization of placentas, and inhibited
proliferation and induced apoptosis of placenta by the activation of caspase-3
and -8, up-regulation of Bax and down-regulation of Bcl-2 mRNA and protein at GD 
13. In conclusion, these results suggest that adverse pregnancy outcomes
including low birth-weight and pregnancy loss exposed to DEHP are possibly
mediated, at least in part, via the suppression of placental growth and
development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25935407  [PubMed - in process]


21. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Apr 3;16:112. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0543-y.

Differential co-expression and regulation analyses reveal different mechanisms
underlying major depressive disorder and subsyndromal symptomatic depression.

Xu F(1,)(2), Yang J(3), Chen J(4,)(5), Wu Q(6,)(7), Gong W(8,)(9), Zhang
J(10,)(11), Shao W(12), Mu J(13), Yang D(14), Yang Y(15), Li Z(16), Xie
P(17,)(18,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing, China. frank_cqmu@126.com. (2)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing
Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing,
China. frank_cqmu@126.com. (3)School of Biotechnology, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai, China. liuk8628@163.com. (4)Department of
Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1
Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China. 570572292@qq.com. (5)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. 570572292@qq.com. (6)Department of Neurology, the
First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road,
Chongqing, 400016, China. zxn020@163.com. (7)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing
Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing,
China. zxn020@163.com. (8)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. czs027@163.com. (9)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. czs027@163.com. (10)Department of Neurology,
Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
dyjianguo@163.com. (11)Institute of Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University,
and Chongqing Key Laboratory of Neurobiology, Chongqing, China.
dyjianguo@163.com. (12)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China.
tyl0871@163.com. (13)Department of Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, No. 1 Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China.
ylx8623@163.com. (14)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. bjj0550@163.com. (15)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. fzx023@163.com. (16)Department of Neurology,
Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
zhiwei_li023@163.com. (17)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital, Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn. (18)Department of
Neurology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, No. 1
Youyi Road, Chongqing, 400016, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn. (19)Institute of
Neuroscience, Chongqing Medical University, and Chongqing Key Laboratory of
Neurobiology, Chongqing, China. xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Recent depression research has revealed a growing awareness of how to
best classify depression into depressive subtypes. Appropriately subtyping
depression can lead to identification of subtypes that are more responsive to
current pharmacological treatment and aid in separating out depressed patients in
which current antidepressants are not particularly effective. Differential
co-expression analysis (DCEA) and differential regulation analysis (DRA) were
applied to compare the transcriptomic profiles of peripheral blood lymphocytes
from patients with two depressive subtypes: major depressive disorder (MDD) and
subsyndromal symptomatic depression (SSD).
RESULTS: Six differentially regulated genes (DRGs) (FOSL1, SRF, JUN, TFAP4, SOX9,
and HLF) and 16 transcription factor-to-target differentially co-expressed gene
links or pairs (TF2target DCLs) appear to be the key differential factors in MDD;
in contrast, one DRG (PATZ1) and eight TF2target DCLs appear to be the key
differential factors in SSD. There was no overlap between the MDD target genes
and SSD target genes. Venlafaxine (Efexor, Effexor) appears to have a
significant effect on the gene expression profile of MDD patients but no
significant effect on the gene expression profile of SSD patients.
CONCLUSION: DCEA and DRA revealed no apparent similarities between the
differential regulatory processes underlying MDD and SSD. This bioinformatic
analysis may provide novel insights that can support future antidepressant R&D
efforts.

PMCID: PMC4434877
PMID: 25880836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;29(6):882-95. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1363. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Roles of progesterone receptor A and B isoforms during human endometrial
decidualization.

Kaya HS(1), Hantak AM(1), Stubbs LJ(1), Taylor RN(1), Bagchi IC(1), Bagchi MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Integrative Physiology (H.S.K., A.M.H., M.K.B.), 
Cell and Developmental Biology (L.J.S.), and Comparative Biosciences (I.C.B.),
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801; and
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology (R.N.T.), Wake Forest University School
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157.

Progesterone, acting through the progesterone receptors (PGRs), is one of the
most critical regulators of endometrial differentiation, known as
decidualization, which is a key step toward the establishment of pregnancy. Yet a
long-standing unresolved issue in uterine biology is the precise roles played by 
the major PGR isoforms, PGR-A and PGR-B, during decidualization in the human. Our
approach, expressing PGR-A and PGR-B individually after silencing endogenous PGRs
in human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs), enabled the analysis of the roles of 
these isoforms separately as well as jointly. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing in combination with gene expression profiling
revealed that PGR-B controls a substantially larger cistrome and transcriptome
than PGR-A during HESC differentiation. Interestingly, PGR-B directly regulates
the expression of PGR-A. De novo motif analysis indicated that, although the 2
isoforms bind to the same DNA sequence motif, there are both common and unique
neighboring motifs where other transcription factors, such as FOSL1/2, JUN,
C/EBPß, and STAT3, bind and dictate the transcriptional activities of these
isoforms. We found that PGR-A and PGR-B regulate overlapping as well as distinct 
sets of genes, many of which are known to be critical for decidualization and
establishment of pregnancy. When PGR-A and PGR-B were coexpressed during HESC
differentiation, PGR-B played a predominant role, although both isoforms
influenced each other's transcriptional activity. This study revealed the gene
networks that operate downstream of each PGR isoform to mediate critical
functions, such as regulation of the cell cycle, angiogenesis, lysosomal
activation, insulin receptor signaling, and apoptosis, during decidualization in 
the human.

PMCID: PMC4447642 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25875046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 25;5:9489. doi: 10.1038/srep09489.

GLI2-dependent c-MYC upregulation mediates resistance of pancreatic cancer cells 
to the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1.

Kumar K(1), Raza SS(2), Knab LM(3), Chow CR(4), Kwok B(2), Bentrem DJ(5), Popovic
R(2), Ebine K(1), Licht JD(4), Munshi HG(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical
Center, 820 S. Damen Ave, Chicago, IL 60612. (2)Department of Medicine, Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL
60611. (3)Department of Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, 676 N. St. Clair St, Chicago, IL 60611. (4)1] Department of Medicine,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave,
Chicago, IL 60611 [2] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611. (5)1] Department
of Surgery, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 676 N. St.
Clair St, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, 820 S. Damen Ave, 
Chicago, IL 60612 [3] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611. (6)1] Department
of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 303 E.
Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611 [2] Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, 820 S. Damen
Ave, Chicago, IL 60612 [3] The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, 303 E. Superior Ave, Chicago, IL 60611.

JQ1 and I-BET151 are selective inhibitors of BET bromodomain proteins that have
efficacy against a number of different cancers. Since the effectiveness of
targeted therapies is often limited by development of resistance, we examined
whether it was possible for cancer cells to develop resistance to the BET
inhibitor JQ1. Here we show that pancreatic cancer cells developing resistance to
JQ1 demonstrate cross-resistance to I-BET151 and insensitivity to BRD4
downregulation. The resistant cells maintain expression of c-MYC, increase
expression of JQ1-target genes FOSL1 and HMGA2, and demonstrate evidence of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, reverting EMT fails to
sensitize the resistant cells to JQ1 treatment. Importantly, the JQ1-resistant
cells remain dependent on c-MYC that now becomes co-regulated by high levels of
GLI2. Furthermore, downregulating GLI2 re-sensitizes the resistant cells to JQ1. 
Overall, these results identify a mechanism by which cancer cells develop
resistance to BET inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC4452877
PMID: 25807524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 Feb 23;11(4):411-22. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.10745. eCollection
2015.

MEK inhibitor PD-0325901 overcomes resistance to CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 and
exhibits anti-tumor activity in head and neck cancer.

Bian Y(1), Han J(2), Kannabiran V(3), Mohan S(3), Cheng H(1), Friedman J(1),
Zhang L(4), VanWaes C(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)1. Tumor Biology Section, Head and Neck Surgery Branch, National Institute on 
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA; (2)1. Tumor
Biology Section, Head and Neck Surgery Branch, National Institute on Deafness and
Other Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA; ; 2. Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, National Key Discipline, Key Laboratory of 
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery of the Ministry of Education, Beijing
Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; (3)1. Tumor Biology
Section, Head and Neck Surgery Branch, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA; ; 3. NIH Clinical Research
Training Program-NIH Medical Research Scholars Program, Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)2. 
Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, National Key Discipline, Key 
Laboratory of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery of the Ministry of Education, 
Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China;

The serine-threonine kinase CK2 exhibits genomic alterations and aberrant
overexpression in human head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC). Here, we 
investigated the effects of CK2 inhibitor CX-4945 in human HNSCC cell lines and
xenograft models. The IC50's of CX-4945 for 9 UM-SCC cell lines measured by MTT
assay ranged from 3.4-11.9 µM. CX-4945 induced cell cycle arrest and cell death
measured by DNA flow cytometry, and inhibited prosurvival mediators phospho-AKT
and p-S6 in UM-SCC1 and UM-SCC46 cells. CX-4945 decreased NF-<U+03BA>B and Bcl-XL
reporter gene activities in both cell lines, but upregulated proapoptotic TP53
and p21 reporter activities, and induced phospho-ERK, AP-1, and IL-8 activity in 
UM-SCC1 cells. CX-4945 exhibited modest anti-tumor activity in UM-SCC1
xenografts. Tumor immunostaining revealed significant inhibition of PI3K-Akt-mTOR
pathway and increased apoptosis marker TUNEL, but also induced p-ERK, c-JUN,
JUNB, FOSL1 and proliferation (Ki67) markers, as a possible resistance mechanism.
To overcome the drug resistance, we tested MEK inhibitor PD-0325901 (PD-901),
which inhibited ERK-AP-1 activation alone and in combination with CX-4945. PD-901
alone displayed significant anti-tumor effects in vivo, and the combination of
PD-901 and CX-4945 slightly enhanced anti-tumor activity when compared with
PD-901 alone. Immunostaining of tumor specimens after treatment revealed
inhibition of p-AKT S129 and p-AKT T308 by CX-4945, and inhibition of p-ERK
T202/204 and AP-1 family member FOSL-1 by PD-901. Our study reveals a drug
resistance mechanism mediated by the MEK-ERK-AP-1 pathway in HNSCC. MEK inhibitor
PD-0325901 is active in HNSCC resistant to CX-4945, meriting further clinical
investigation.

PMCID: PMC4366640
PMID: 25798061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Reproduction. 2015 Jun;149(6):555-61. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0018. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Effects of the mycotoxin deoxynivalenol on steroidogenesis and apoptosis in
granulosa cells.

Guerrero-Netro HM(1), Chorfi Y(1), Price CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculté de médecine vétérinaireCentre de recherche en reproduction animale,
Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada J2S 7C6. (2)Faculté de
médecine vétérinaireCentre de recherche en reproduction animale, Université de
Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Quebec, Canada J2S 7C6 christopher.price@umontreal.ca.

Mycotoxins can reduce fertility and development in livestock, notably in pigs and
poultry, although the effect of most mycotoxins on reproductive function in
cattle has not been established. One major mycotoxin, deoxynivalenol (DON), not
only targets immune cells and activates the ribotoxic stress response (RSR)
involving MAPK activation, but also inhibits oocyte maturation in pigs. In this
study, we determined the effect of DON on bovine granulosa cell function using a 
serum-free culture system. Addition of DON inhibited estradiol and progesterone
secretion, and reduced levels of mRNA encoding estrogenic (CYP19A1) but not
progestogenic (CYP11A1 and STAR) proteins. Cell apoptosis was increased by DON,
which also increased FASLG mRNA levels. The mechanism of action of DON was
assessed by western blotting and PCR experiments. Addition of DON rapidly and
transiently increased phosphorylation of MAPK3/1, and resulted in a more
prolonged phosphorylation of MAPK14 (p38) and MAPK8 (JNK). Activation of these
pathways by DON resulted in time- and dose-dependent increases in abundance of
mRNA encoding the transcription factors FOS, FOSL1, EGR1, and EGR3. We conclude
that DON is deleterious to granulosa cell function and acts through a RSR
pathway.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25731188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cutan Ocul Toxicol. 2015;34(4):307-12. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2014.979427. Epub
2014 Nov 28.

Angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockade suppresses H2O2-induced retinal
degeneration in photoreceptor cells.

Yin Y(1), Huang SW(1), Zheng YJ(1), Dong YR(1).

Author information: 
(1)a The Second Hospital of Jilin University , Changchun , Jilin , China.

Exposure to reactive oxygen species (ROS) leads to the development and
progression of retinal degenerative diseases. However, the exact mechanisms are
not fully understood. In this article, the role of angiotensin II type 1 receptor
(AT1R) signaling in H(2)O(2)-induced retinal damage was examined. Mouse
photoreceptor-derived 661<U+2009>W cells were treated with the AT1R blockers valsartan, 
losartan and candesartan before exposure to H(2)O(2). Cell viability,
intracellular ROS level, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), cytochrome-c
level, DNA fragmentation, caspase activity and gene expression were detected.
Pre-treatment of 661<U+2009>W cells with AT1R blockers significantly decreased
H(2)O(2)-mediated toxicity and reduced the ROS level. In addition,
apoptosis-related biochemical indicators showed that pre-incubation of AT1R
blockers would elevate the MMP, decrease the release of cytochrome-c and
formation of DNA fragmentation, and inhibit activities of caspase-3 and caspase-9
in exogenous H(2)O(2)-treated 661<U+2009>W cells. Moreover, treatment with AT1R blockers
suppressed the expression of Egr1, Fosl1 and Lox12. These results suggest that
AT1R signaling mediates H(2)O(2)-induced apoptosis, at least partially through
generating the ROS and increasing the levels of proapoptotic molecules in 661<U+2009>W
cells. AT1R blockade may provide a new therapeutic approach for preventing
oxidative stress-induced retinal neural damage.

PMID: 25430074  [PubMed - in process]


27. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 Jun;291(6):1289-96. doi: 10.1007/s00404-014-3557-1.
Epub 2014 Nov 26.

DACT1 is involved in human placenta development by promoting Wnt signaling.

Hou J(1), Wen YH, Feng KN, Ma XF, Yao JP.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Public Health, Guangzhou Institutes of
Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the expression of DACT1 in human
placenta tissue and the relationship between DACT1 and target genes of the Wnt
signaling pathway.
METHOD: Real-time PCR and western blotting were used to detect the expression of 
DACT1 and the target genes of Wnt signaling pathway in human placenta tissue. And
the relationship between them was analyzed using SPSS 19.
RESULTS: Real-time PCR results showed that DACT1 expression was significantly
higher in 49- to 71-day placenta tissues (mean value = 0.020) than that in 39- to
48-day (the mean value = 0.009). The mRNA expressions of the Wnt signaling
pathway target genes, CCND1, CCND2, FOSL1, DAB2 and JUN, were also increased
expressed in human placenta tissues. Significant positive associations between
DACT1 and CCND1, CCND2, FOSL1, DAB2 and JUN were observed. Western blotting
analysis showed that the protein expression of DACT1, CCND1, CCND2, FOSL1, DAB2
and JUN displayed the increasing trend in 43-, 49- and 71-day placenta samples.
CONCLUSION: DACT1 might play an important role in human placenta development via 
promoting Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25424899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 May;42(5):977-88. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3834-x. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

Gene expression abnormalities in histologically normal breast epithelium from
patients with luminal type of breast cancer.

Zubor P(1), Hatok J, Moricova P, Kajo K, Kapustova I, Mendelova A, Racay P, Danko
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine,
Comenius University in Bratislava, Kollarova 2 Martin, 036 01, Bratislava, Slovak
Republic, Slovakia, zubor@jfmed.uniba.sk.

The gene expression profile of breast cancer has been described as a great
breakthrough on the way to comprehend differences in cancer origin, behavior and 
therapy. However, gene expression profile in histologically normal epithelium
(HNEpi) which could harbor genetic abnormalities predisposing breast tissue to
develop malignancy was minor scope for scientists in the past. Thus, we aimed to 
analyze gene expressions in HNEpi and breast cancer tissue (BCTis) in order to
establish its value as potential diagnostic marker for cancer development. We
evaluated a panel of disease-specific genes in luminal type (A/B) of breast
cancer and tumor surrounding HNEpi by qRT-PCR Array in 32 microdissected samples.
There was 20.2 and 2.4% deregulation rate in genes with at least 2-fold or 5-fold
over-expression between luminal (A/B) type breast carcinomas and tumor
surrounding HNEpi, respectively. The high-grade luminal carcinomas showed higher 
number of deregulated genes compared to low-grade cases (50.6 vs. 23.8% with at
least 2-fold deregulation rate). The main overexpressed genes in HNEpi were KLK5,
SCGB1D2, GSN, EGFR and NGFR. The significant differences in gene expression
between BCTis and HNEpi samples were revealed for BAG1, C3, CCNA2, CD44, FGF1,
FOSL1, ID2, IL6R, NGFB, NGFR, PAPPA, PLAU, SERPINB5, THBS1 and TP53 gene (p <
0.05) and BCL2L2, CTSB, ITGB4, JUN, KIT, KLF5, SCGB1D2, SCGB2A1, SERPINE1 (p <
0.01), and EGFR, GABRP, GSN, MAP2K7 and THBS2 (p < 0.001), and GSN, KLK5 (p <
0.0001). The ontological gene analyses revealed high deregulations in gene group 
directly associated with breast cancer prognosis and origin.

PMID: 25407308  [PubMed - in process]


29. Development. 2014 Dec;141(23):4610-7. doi: 10.1242/dev.112607. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Ezh2-mediated repression of a transcriptional pathway upstream of Mmp9 maintains 
integrity of the developing vasculature.

Delgado-Olguín P(1), Dang LT(2), He D(3), Thomas S(3), Chi L(4), Sukonnik T(3),
Khyzha N(2), Dobenecker MW(5), Fish JE(2), Bruneau BG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry Center for Stem
Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Program in
Physiology and Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario M5G0A4, Canada Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of
Excellence, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada paul.delgadoolguin@sickkids.ca
bbruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu. (2)Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of
Excellence, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada Toronto General Research Institute, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L7, Canada Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S
1A1, Canada. (3)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry
Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, 
USA. (4)Program in Physiology and Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G0A4, Canada. (5)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Signaling,
The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA. (6)Gladstone Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, and Roddenberry Center for Stem Cell Biology and Medicine
at Gladstone, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA Department of Pediatrics,
Cardiovascular Research Institute, and Institute for Regeneration Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
paul.delgadoolguin@sickkids.ca bbruneau@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Maintenance of vascular integrity is required for embryogenesis and organ
homeostasis. However, the gene expression programs that stabilize blood vessels
are poorly understood. Here, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ezh2
maintains integrity of the developing vasculature by repressing a transcriptional
program that activates expression of Mmp9. Inactivation of Ezh2 in developing
mouse endothelium caused embryonic lethality with compromised vascular integrity 
and increased extracellular matrix degradation. Genome-wide approaches showed
that Ezh2 targets Mmp9 and its activators Fosl1 and Klf5. In addition, we
uncovered Creb3l1 as an Ezh2 target that directly activates Mmp9 gene expression 
in the endothelium. Furthermore, genetic inactivation of Mmp9 rescued vascular
integrity defects in Ezh2-deficient embryos. Thus, epigenetic repression of
Creb3l1, Fosl1, Klf5 and Mmp9 by Ezh2 in endothelial cells maintains the
integrity of the developing vasculature, potentially linking this transcriptional
network to diseases with compromised vascular integrity.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302930
PMID: 25359725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Lipids Health Dis. 2014 Sep 2;13:142. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-13-142.

Combination of unsaturated fatty acids and ionizing radiation on human glioma
cells: cellular, biochemical and gene expression analysis.

Antal O, Hackler L Jr, Shen J, Mán I, Hideghéty K, Kitajka K, Puskás LG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Functional Genomics, Institute of Genetics, Biological Research
Center of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged H-6726, Hungary.
puskas.szbk@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Based on previous observations a potential resort in the therapy of
the particularly radioresistant glioma would be its treatment with unsaturated
fatty acids (UFAs) combined with irradiation.
METHODS: We evaluated the effect of different UFAs (arachidonic acid (AA),
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), gamma-linolenic acid (GLA), eicosapentaenoic acid
(EPA) and oleic acid (OA)) on human U87 MG glioma cell line by classical
biochemical end-point assays, impedance-based, real-time cellular and holographic
microscopic analysis. We further analyzed AA, DHA, and GLA at morphological, gene
and miRNA expression level.
RESULTS: Corresponding to LDH-, MTS assays and real-time cytoxicity profiles AA, 
DHA, and GLA enhanced the radio sensitivity of glioma cells. The collective
application of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and irradiation significantly 
changed the expression of EGR1, TNF-a, NOTCH1, c-MYC, TP53, HMOX1, AKR1C1, NQO1, 
while up-regulation of GADD45A, EGR1, GRP78, DDIT3, c-MYC, FOSL1 were recorded
both in response to PUFA treatment or irradiation alone. Among the analyzed
miRNAs miR-146 and miR-181a were induced by DHA treatment. Overexpression of
miR-146 was also detected by combined treatment of GLA and irradiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Because PUFAs increased the radio responsiveness of glioma cells as 
assessed by biochemical and cellular assays, they might increase the therapeutic 
efficacy of radiation in treatment of gliomas. We demonstrated that treatment
with DHA, AA and GLA as adjunct to irradiation up-regulated the expression of
oxidative-stress and endoplasmic reticulum stress related genes, and affected
NOTCH1 expression, which could explain their additive effects.

PMCID: PMC4176829
PMID: 25182732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2014 Nov;38:30-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2014.07.006. Epub
2014 Aug 4.

Prenatal stress increases the striatal and hippocampal expression of correlating 
c-FOS and serotonin transporters in murine offspring.

Bielas H(1), Arck P(2), Bruenahl CA(3), Walitza S(4), Grünblatt E(4).

Author information: 
(1)University Clinics of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Zurich,
Neumünsterallee 9, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland; Department of Psychosomatics and
Psychiatry, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: hannes.bielas@kispi.uzh.ch. (2)Laboratory for Experimental
Feto-Maternal Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Medical
Center Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. (4)University Clinics of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, University of Zurich, Neumünsterallee 9, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland;
Neuroscience Center Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Switzerland.

Prenatal stress (PS) is a known risk factor for several psychiatric diagnoses,
including schizophrenia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism,
anxiety, and depression which have been associated with serotonin transporter
(SERT) dysregulation. Moreover, long-term effects in animal models associate with
higher levels of immediate early genes, e.g. c-FOS (up-regulated in response to
neuronal activity), in the brain of PS offspring. We therefore quantified the
expression of both protein related mRNAs in adolescent BALB/c mice subjected to
mild auditory stress on two separate days in mid gestation. SERT and c-FOS
consistently correlated in most brain regions of PS mice and controls. Moreover, 
two-way ANOVAs revealed concomitantly increased levels of proteins, as well as of
FOSL1 and FOSL2 mRNA, especially in the striatum and hippocampus of the PS
offspring. Sex affected only and less consistently mRNA expression, yet
interacted with PS, demonstrating that glucocorticoid receptor mRNA expression
decreased in PS males but increased in PS females compared to the respective
controls. This first finding of a correlation between SERT and c-FOS protein
expression affected by PS, together with related mRNAs, may be considered a new
target for behavioral and treatment studies in offspring.

Copyright © 2014 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25102410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 21;9(7):e102597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102597.
eCollection 2014.

Gene expression profiling of peri-implant healing of PLGA-Li+ implants suggests
an activated Wnt signaling pathway in vivo.

Thorfve A(1), Bergstrand A(2), Ekström K(1), Lindahl A(3), Thomsen P(1), Larsson 
A(4), Tengvall P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomaterials, Institute of Clinical Sciences, The Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; BIOMATCELL VINN Excellence
Center of Biomaterials and Cell Therapy, Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department of
Chemical and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology,
Gothenburg, Sweden; SuMo BIOMATERIALS VINN Excellence Center, Gothenburg, Sweden;
Stiftelsen Chalmers Industriteknik, Chalmers Teknikpark, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)BIOMATCELL VINN Excellence Center of Biomaterials and Cell Therapy,
Gothenburg, Sweden; Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine,
Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (4)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering,
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden; SuMo BIOMATERIALS VINN
Excellence Center, Gothenburg, Sweden.

Bone development and regeneration is associated with the Wnt signaling pathway
that, according to literature, can be modulated by lithium ions (Li+). The aim of
this study was to evaluate the gene expression profile during peri-implant
healing of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) implants with incorporated Li+,
while PLGA without Li+ was used as control, and a special attention was then paid
to the Wnt signaling pathway. The implants were inserted in rat tibia for 7 or 28
days and the gene expression profile was investigated using a genome-wide
microarray analysis. The results were verified by qPCR and immunohistochemistry. 
Histomorphometry was used to evaluate the possible effect of Li+ on bone
regeneration. The microarray analysis revealed a large number of significantly
differentially regulated genes over time within the two implant groups. The Wnt
signaling pathway was significantly affected by Li+, with approximately 34% of
all Wnt-related markers regulated over time, compared to 22% for non-Li+
containing (control; Ctrl) implants. Functional cluster analysis indicated
skeletal system morphogenesis, cartilage development and condensation as related 
to Li+. The downstream Wnt target gene, FOSL1, and the extracellular
protein-encoding gene, ASPN, were significantly upregulated by Li+ compared with 
Ctrl. The presence of ß-catenin, FOSL1 and ASPN positive cells was confirmed
around implants of both groups. Interestingly, a significantly reduced bone area 
was observed over time around both implant groups. The presence of periostin and 
calcitonin receptor-positive cells was observed at both time points. This study
is to the best of the authors' knowledge the first report evaluating the effect
of a local release of Li+ from PLGA at the fracture site. The present study shows
that during the current time frame and with the present dose of Li+ in PLGA
implants, Li+ is not an enhancer of early bone growth, although it affects the
Wnt signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4105622
PMID: 25047349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jul;13(7):1907-17. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0925. Epub
2014 May 7.

BET bromodomain inhibitors block growth of pancreatic cancer cells in
three-dimensional collagen.

Sahai V(1), Kumar K(2), Knab LM(3), Chow CR(1), Raza SS(1), Bentrem DJ(4), Ebine 
K(1), Munshi HG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Divisions of Hematology/Oncology and. (2)Authors'
Affiliations: Divisions of Hematology/Oncology and Jesse Brown VA Medical Center;
and. (3)Surgical Oncology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University; 
(4)Surgical Oncology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University; Jesse
Brown VA Medical Center; and The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois. (5)Authors' Affiliations: Divisions
of Hematology/Oncology and Jesse Brown VA Medical Center; and The Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois
h-munshi@northwestern.edu.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is associated with pronounced fibrosis
that contributes to chemoresistance, in part, through increased histone
acetylation. Because bromodomain (BRD) and extra terminal domain (BET) proteins
are "readers" of histone acetylation marks, we targeted BET proteins in PDAC
cells grown in three-dimensional collagen. We show that treatment with BET
inhibitors decreases growth of PDAC cells (AsPC1, CD18, and Panc1) in collagen.
Transfection with siRNA against BRD4, which is increased in human PDAC tumors,
also decreases growth of PDAC cells. BET inhibitors additionally decrease growth 
in collagen of PDAC cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition or have become resistant to chemotherapy. Although BET inhibitors and 
BRD4 siRNA repress c-MYC only in AsPC1 and CD18 cells, downregulating c-MYC
decreases growth of all three PDAC cell lines in collagen. FOSL1, which is also
targeted by BET inhibitors and BRD4 siRNA in AsPC1, CD18, and Panc1 cells,
additionally regulates growth of all three PDAC cell lines in collagen. BET
inhibitors and BRD4 siRNA repress HMGA2, an architectural protein that modulates 
chromatin state and also contributes to chemoresistance, in PDAC cells grown in
collagen. Importantly, we show that there is a statistically significant
correlation between BRD4 and HMGA2 in human PDAC tumors. Significantly,
overexpression of HMGA2 partially mitigates the effect of BET inhibitors on
growth and c-MYC and/or FOSL1 expression in collagen. Overall, these results
demonstrate that BET inhibitors block growth of PDAC cells in collagen and that
BET proteins may be potential targets for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4090266
PMID: 24807963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


35. J Clin Lab Anal. 2014 Sep;28(5):391-7. doi: 10.1002/jcla.21699. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Association of FOS-like antigen 1 promoter polymorphism with podocyte foot
process effacement in immunoglobulin A nephropathy patients.

Park HJ(1), Kim JW, Cho BS, Chung JH.

Author information: 
(1)Kohwang Medical Research Institute, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: FOS has been implicated in the progression of renal disease including
IgAN. In this study, we investigated whether polymorphisms of FOS family genes
[FOS, FOSB, FOS-like antigen 1 (FOSL1), and FOSL2] were associated with
immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) and the clinical phenotypes of IgAN patients.
METHODS: We genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of FOS family genes 
(rs2239615 and rs7101 for FOS, rs12373539 and rs2282695 for FOSB, rs637571 for
FOSL1, and rs925255 for FOSL2) using direct sequencing in 198 IgAN patients and
290 control subjects.
RESULTS: No SNPs were associated with IgAN; however, in the analysis of clinical 
phenotypes, we found that rs637571 of FOSL1 was associated with podocyte foot
process effacement of IgAN in additive (CT vs. TT vs. CC, P = 0.0031, OR = 2.08, 
95% CI = 1.27-3.40) and dominant models (CT/TT vs. CC, P = 0.0034, OR = 2.50, 95%
CI = 1.35-4.64). The frequency of genotypes containing the T allele was increased
in IgAN patients with podocyte foot process effacement, compared to those without
podocyte foot process effacement.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that FOSL1 may be related to IgAN severity.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24652774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 3;9(2):e87768. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087768. eCollection 
2014.

High degree of overlap between responses to a virus and to the house dust mite
allergen in airway epithelial cells.

Golebski K(1), Luiten S(1), van Egmond D(1), de Groot E(1), Röschmann KI(1),
Fokkens WJ(1), van Drunen CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Airway epithelium is widely considered to play an active role in
immune responses through its ability to detect changes in the environment and to 
generate a microenvironment for immune competent cells. Therefore, besides its
role as a physical barrier, epithelium affects the outcome of the immune response
by the production of various pro-inflammatory mediators.
METHODS: We stimulated airway epithelial cells with viral double stranded RNA
analogue poly(I:C) or with house dust mite in a time course of 24 hours. In order
to determine cytokines production by stimulated cells, we performed multiplex
enzyme linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: We demonstrate that the temporal pattern of the genes that respond to
virus exposure in airway epithelium resembles to a significant degree their
pattern of response to HDM. The gene expression pattern of EGR1, DUSP1, FOSL1,
JUN, MYC, and IL6 is rather similar after viral (poly(I:C)) and HDM exposure.
However, both triggers also induce a specific response (e.g. ATF3, FOS, and
NFKB1). We confirmed these data by showing that epithelial cells produce a
variety of similar mediators in response to both poly(I:C) and HDM challenge
(IL1-RA, IL-17, IFN-a and MIP1-a), sometimes with a quantitative difference in
response (IL2-R, IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1, MIG, and HGF). Interestingly, only four
mediators (IL-12, IP-10, RANTES and VEGF) where up-regulated specifically by
poly(I:C) and not by HDM. Additionally, we report that pre-exposure to HDM
deregulates production of cytokines and mediators in response to poly(I:C).
CONCLUSIONS: Epithelial cells responses to the HDM-allergen and a virus strongly 
resemble both in gene expression and in protein level explaining why these two
responses may affect each other.

PMCID: PMC3912021
PMID: 24498371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Acta Naturae. 2013 Oct;5(4):110-7.

Three-dimensional model of mouse epidermis for experimental studies of psoriasis.

Soboleva AG(1), Sobolev VV(1), Bruskin SA(1), Mezentsev AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Non-profit Research Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences, N.I.
Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Moscow 119991, Russia.

Three-dimensional models of skin and epidermis imitate the structure of real
tissues and provide accurate information about certain skin conditions, such as
psoriasis. A three-dimensional model of mouse epidermis was generated from the
epidermal keratinocytes of newborn mice and treated with cytokines. The aim of
this study was to evaluate this model as an experimental model of psoriasis and
to assess the changes occurring in its structure and gene expression after the
exposure to proinflammatory cytokines. Treatment of the three-dimensional model
with either interleukin 17 or a combination of tumor necrosis factor and
interferon <U+03B3> was shown to produce morphological changes, which were similar to
acanthosis in psoriatic skin. The observed changes in gene expression of
metalloproteinases and certain psoriasis biomarkers, such as mki67, krt16 and
fosl1, were similar to the changes in patients' skin. Notably, changes caused by 
interleukin 17 were less evident than those caused by the combination of
interferon <U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor. On the contrary, HaCaT cells exhibited no
significant changes in the expression of fosl1 and had decreased levels of mki67 
after being treated with a combination of TNF and IFNG. Moreover, treatment with 
IL17 had no significant effect on krt16 and mki67 expression and even reduced the
fosl1 levels. The findings suggest that artificially generated three-dimensional 
models of murine skin can be used to study psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC3890996
PMID: 24455190  [PubMed]


38. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):5025-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.523746. Epub 2013 
Dec 30.

The FOS transcription factor family differentially controls trophoblast migration
and invasion.

Renaud SJ(1), Kubota K, Rumi MA, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160.

Extravillous trophoblast invasion is a fundamental component of human
placentation. Invading trophoblast cells promote blood flow to the conceptus by
actively remodeling the uterine vasculature. The extent of trophoblast invasion
is tightly regulated; aberrant invasion is linked with several obstetrical
complications. However, the transcriptional networks responsible for controlling 
the extent of trophoblast invasion are not well defined. Previous studies have
identified high levels of FOS (FOS, FOSB, FOS-like (FOSL) 1, and FOSL2) proteins 
in extravillous trophoblast cells. These proteins form part of the activating
protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factor complex and are implicated in regulating
gene networks controlling cellular invasion in diverse biological systems.
Therefore, we hypothesized that FOS family proteins play a role in regulating
trophoblast invasion. We assessed expression of FOS family proteins in
trophoblast cell lines and human placentae at different gestational ages. FOS,
FOSB, and FOSL1 proteins were robustly increased in trophoblast cells subject to 
wound-based migration assays as well as Matrigel-based invasion assays. FOS
knockdown resulted in cessation of proliferation and an induction of migration
and invasion concomitant with robust expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)
1, MMP3, and MMP10. Conversely, FOSL1 knockdown abrogated trophoblast migration
and invasion and inhibited the production of MMP1, MMP3, and MMP10. In human
placenta, FOS was expressed in proximal anchoring villi in conjunction with
phospho-ERK. FOSL1 was temporally expressed only in the distal-most extravillous 
trophoblast cells, which represent a migratory cell population. Therefore, FOS
and FOSL1 exert opposing effects on trophoblast invasion.

PMCID: PMC3931062
PMID: 24379408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gene. 2013 Dec 15;532(2):165-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.09.080. Epub 2013 Oct
2.

Contribution of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms to Wnt pathway activity in
prevalent skeletal disorders.

García-Ibarbia C(1), Delgado-Calle J, Casafont I, Velasco J, Arozamena J,
Pérez-Núñez MI, Alonso MA, Berciano MT, Ortiz F, Pérez-Castrillón JL, Fernández
AF, Fraga MF, Zarrabeitia MT, Riancho JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital U.M. Valdecilla-IFIMAV, University
of Cantabria, RETICEF, Santander, Spain.

We reported previously that the expression of Wnt-related genes is lower in
osteoporotic hip fractures than in osteoarthritis. We aimed to confirm those
results by analyzing ß-catenin levels and explored potential genetic and
epigenetic mechanisms involved. ß-Catenin gene expression and nuclear levels were
analyzed by real time PCR and confocal immunofluorescence. Increased nuclear
ß-catenin was found in osteoblasts isolated from patients with osteoarthritis (99
± 4 units vs. 76 ± 12, p=0.01, n=10), without differences in gene transcription, 
which is consistent with a post-translational down-regulation of ß-catenin and
decreased Wnt pathway activity. Twenty four single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) of genes showing differential expression between fractures and
osteoarthritis (WNT4, WNT10A, WNT16 and SFRP1) were analyzed in DNA isolated from
blood of 853 patients. The genotypic frequencies were similar in both groups of
patients, with no significant differences. Methylation of Wnt pathway genes was
analyzed in bone tissue samples (15 with fractures and 15 with osteoarthritis) by
interrogating a CpG-based methylation array. Six genes showed significant
methylation differences between both groups of patients: FZD10, TBL1X, CSNK1E,
WNT8A, CSNK1A1L and SFRP4. The DNA demethylating agent 5-deoxycytidine
up-regulated 8 genes, including FZD10, in an osteoblast-like cell line, whereas
it down-regulated other 16 genes. In conclusion, Wnt activity is reduced in
patients with hip fractures, in comparison with those with osteoarthritis. It
does not appear to be related to differences in the allele frequencies of the Wnt
genes studied. On the other hand, methylation differences between both groups
could contribute to explain the differences in Wnt activity.

© 2013.

PMID: 24096177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cell Adh Migr. 2013 Sep-Oct;7(5):408-11. doi: 10.4161/cam.25894. Epub 2013 Jul
25.

Role of the AP-1 transcription factor FOSL1 in endothelial cells adhesion and
migration.

Galvagni F(1), Orlandini M(1), Oliviero S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie; Chimica e Farmacia Università di Siena; via
A.Moro; Siena, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie; Chimica e Farmacia
Università di Siena; via A.Moro; Siena, Italy; HUGEF; Torino, Italy.

Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis, the fundamental processes by which new blood
vessels are formed, involve the proliferation, migration, and remodeling of
endothelial cells. Dynamic adhesion of endothelial cells to extracellular matrix 
plays a fundamental role in all these events. Key regulators of endothelial cells
adhesion and migration are the avß3 and uPA-uPAR complexes. The avß3 integrin
heterodimer is the receptor for extracellular matrix components such as
vitronectin and is overexpressed on the cell surface of angiogenic endothelial
cells, but not quiescent cells lining normal vessels. The uPA-uPAR complex
contributes to extracellular matrix remodeling by mediating proteolytic activity 
at the leading edge of migrating cells. We recently reported that the FOSL1
transcription factor of the AP-1 family plays a pivotal role in the regulation of
the level of the avß3 and uPA-uPAR complexes on the surface of endothelial cells.
In this commentary, we review the current knowledge of av and ß3 transcriptional 
regulation in endothelial cells and discuss the role of FOSL1 in angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3903684
PMID: 24084233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Cancer Genet. 2013 Jul-Aug;206(7-8):279-92. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2013.06.002.
Epub 2013 Sep 14.

Complementation of non-tumorigenicity of HPV18-positive cervical carcinoma cells 
involves differential mRNA expression of cellular genes including potential tumor
suppressor genes on chromosome 11q13.

Kehrmann A(1), Truong H, Repenning A, Boger R, Klein-Hitpass L, Pascheberg U,
Beckmann A, Opalka B, Kleine-Lowinski K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology (Tumor Research), University Hospital Essen,
Essen, Germany.

The fusion between human tumorigenic cells and normal human diploid fibroblasts
results in non-tumorigenic hybrid cells, suggesting a dominant role for tumor
suppressor genes in the generated hybrid cells. After long-term cultivation in
vitro, tumorigenic segregants may arise. The loss of tumor suppressor genes on
chromosome 11q13 has been postulated to be involved in the induction of the
tumorigenic phenotype of human papillomavirus (HPV)18-positive cervical carcinoma
cells and their derived tumorigenic hybrid cells after subcutaneous injection in 
immunocompromised mice. The aim of this study was the identification of novel
cellular genes that may contribute to the suppression of the tumorigenic
phenotype of non-tumorigenic hybrid cells in vivo. We used cDNA microarray
technology to identify differentially expressed cellular genes in tumorigenic
HPV18-positive hybrid and parental HeLa cells compared to non-tumorigenic
HPV18-positive hybrid cells. We detected several as yet unknown cellular genes
that play a role in cell differentiation, cell cycle progression, cell-cell
communication, metastasis formation, angiogenesis, antigen presentation, and
immune response. Apart from the known differentially expressed genes on 11q13
(e.g., phosphofurin acidic cluster sorting protein 1 (PACS1) and FOS ligand 1
(FOSL1 or Fra-1)), we detected novel differentially expressed cellular genes
located within the tumor suppressor gene region (e.g., EGF-containing
fibulin-like extracellular matrix protein 2 (EFEMP2) and leucine rich repeat
containing 32 (LRRC32) (also known as glycoprotein-A repetitions predominant
(GARP)) that may have potential tumor suppressor functions in this model system
of non-tumorigenic and tumorigenic HeLa x fibroblast hybrid cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24042169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 5;33(23):3075-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.278. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

Prolactin cooperates with loss of p53 to promote claudin-low mammary carcinomas.

O'Leary KA(1), Rugowski DE(1), Sullivan R(2), Schuler LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, USA. (2)University of Wisconsin Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. (3)1] Department of
Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA [2]
University of Wisconsin Paul P. Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

TP53 is one of the most commonly mutated genes in cancer. In breast cancer, it is
mutated in about 40% of primary clinical tumors and is associated with poor
survival. The mammotrophic hormone, prolactin (PRL), and/or its receptor are also
expressed in many breast cancers, and accumulating epidemiologic data link PRL to
breast cancer development and progression. Like TP53 mutations, evidence for PRL 
activity is evident across several molecular cancer subtypes, and elevated PRL
expression and loss of p53 have been observed in some of the same clinical
tumors. In order to examine the interaction of these factors, we used genetically
modified mouse models of mammary-specific p53 loss and local overexpression of
PRL. We demonstrated that mammary PRL decreased the latency of tumors in the
absence of p53, and increased the proportion of triple-negative claudin-low
carcinomas, which display similarities to human clinical metaplastic carcinomas. 
Moreover, PRL/p53(-/-) carcinomas displayed higher rates of proliferation and
more aggressive behavior. Transcripts associated with cell cycle progression,
invasion and stromal reactivity were differentially expressed in carcinomas that 
developed in the presence of elevated PRL. PRL/p53(-/-) carcinomas also exhibited
selectively altered expression of activating protein-1 components, including
higher levels of c-Jun and FosL1, which can drive transcription of many of these 
genes and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. The ability of PRL to promote
claudin-low carcinomas demonstrates that PRL can influence this subset of
triple-negative breast cancers, which may have been obscured by the relative
infrequency of this cancer subtype. Our findings suggest novel therapeutic
approaches, and provide a preclinical model to develop possible agents.

PMCID: PMC4007359
PMID: 23873024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2012 Dec;9(Suppl 2):S169-74. doi: 10.4103/1735-3327.109745.

Titanium nanotubes stimulate osteoblast differentiation of stem cells from pulp
and adipose tissue.

Pozio A(1), Palmieri A, Girardi A, Cura F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, IDROCOMB, C.R. Casaccia, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Titanium is the gold standard among materials used for prosthetic
devices because of its good mechanical and chemical properties. When exposed to
oxygen, titanium becomes an oxide, anatase that is biocompatible and able to
induce osseointegration.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: IN THIS STUDY WE COMPARED THE EXPRESSION PROFILING OF STEM
CELLS CULTIVATED ON TWO TYPES OF SURFACE: Pure titanium disk and nanotube
titanium disk in order to detect if nanotube titanium instead (NTD) surface
stimulates stem cells towards osteoblast differentiation.
RESULTS: Stem cells cultivated on nanotube titanium disks showed the upregulation
of bone-related genes RUNX2, FOSL1 and SPP1.
CONCLUSIONS: Results demonstrated that nanotube titanium disk surface is more
osteo-induced surface compared to titanium disk, promoting the differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells in osteoblasts.

PMCID: PMC3692168
PMID: 23814578  [PubMed]


44. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2012 Dec;9(Suppl 2):S164-8. doi: 10.4103/1735-3327.109736.

Titanium nanotubes activate genes related to bone formation in vitro.

Pozio A(1), Palmieri A, Girardi A, Cura F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)ENEA, IDROCOMB, C.R. Casaccia, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Titanium is used worldwide to make osseointegrable devices, thanks to
its favorable characteristics as mechanical proprieties and biocompatibility,
demonstrated by in vivo studies with animal models and clinical trials over a
forty-year period. However, the exact genetic effect of the titanium layer on
cells is still not well characterized.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To investigate how titanium nanotubes stimulate
osteoblasts differentiation and proliferation, some osteoblast genes (SP7, RUNX2,
COL3A1, COL1A1, ALPL, SPP1 and FOSL1) were analyzed by quantitative Real Time RT-
PCR.
RESULTS: After 15 days, osteoblasts cultivated on titanium naotube showed the
up-regulation of bone related genes SP7, ENG, FOSL1 and SPP1 and the
down-regulation of RUNX2, COL3A1, COL1A1, and ALPL. After 30 days of treatment,
the bone related genes SP7, ENG, FOSL1 and RUNX2 were up-regulated while COL3A1, 
COL1A1, ALPL and SPP1 were down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results, demonstrates that titanium nanotubes can lead to
osteoblast differentiation and extracellular matrix deposition and mineralization
in dental pulp stem cells by the activation of osteoblast related genes SPP1,
FOSL1 and RUNX2.

PMCID: PMC3692167
PMID: 23814577  [PubMed]


45. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Aug 15;375(1-2):97-105. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.05.017.
Epub 2013 May 23.

Divergence of intracellular signaling pathways and early response genes of two
closely related fibroblast growth factors, FGF8 and FGF18, in bovine ovarian
granulosa cells.

Jiang Z(1), Guerrero-Netro HM, Juengel JL, Price CA.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwestern Agricultural and
Forestry University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) modulate ovarian function, including FGF8 and
FGF18. These FGFs activate the same receptors, although FGF18 is unusual in that 
it increases apoptosis in ovarian granulosa cells whereas the 'typical' response 
to FGF is increased proliferation. The objective of the present study was to
determine which early response genes and pathways are activated by FGF8 and FGF18
in bovine granulosa cells. FGF8 increased abundance of mRNA encoding the
FGF-responsive genes SPRY1, SPRY2, SPRY4, NR4A1 and NR4A3 whereas FGF18 did not. 
FGF8 increased but FGF18 decreased levels of mRNA encoding the growth arrest
associated protein, GADD45B. FGF8 increased ERK1/2 phosphorylation but FGF18 did 
not. Microarray analysis identified EGR1, FOS, FOSL1, BAMBI, XIRP1 and PLK2 as
other FGF8 immediate-early response genes, and FGF18 stimulated EGR1, FOSL1,
BAMBI and PLK2, but not FOS or XIRP1. This study demonstrates that FGF8 and FGF18
signal through divergent pathways in ovarian granulosa cells, despite reportedly 
similar receptor activation patterns.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Oct 1;192:115-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.04.033.
Epub 2013 May 9.

Transcriptomic profiling of progesterone in the male fathead minnow (Pimephales
promelas) testis.

Chishti YZ(1), Feswick A, Munkittrick KR, Martyniuk CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada E2L 4L5.

P4 is a hormone with diverse functions that include roles in reproduction,
growth, and development. The objectives of this study were to examine the effects
of P4 on androgen production in the mature teleost testis and to identify
molecular signaling cascades regulated by P4 to improve understanding of its role
in male reproduction. Fathead minnow (FHM) testis explants were treated in vitro 
with two concentrations of P4 (10(-8) and 10(-6) M) for 6 and 12 h. P4
significantly increased testosterone (T) production in the FHM testis but did not
affect 11-ketotestosterone. Gene network analysis revealed that insulin growth
factor (Igf1) and tumor necrosis factor receptor (Tnfr) signaling was
significantly depressed with P4 treatment after 12h. There was also a 20%
increase in a gene network for follicle-stimulating hormone secretion and an 18% 
decrease in genes involved in vasopressin signaling. Genes in steroid metabolism 
(e.g. star, cyp19a, 11bhsd) were not significantly affected by P4 treatments in
this study, and it is hypothesized that pre-existing molecular machinery may be
more involved in the increased production of T rather than the de novo expression
of steroid-related transcripts and receptors. There was a significant decrease in
prostaglandin E synthase 3b (cytosolic) (ptges3b) after treatment with P4,
suggesting that there is cross talk between P4 and prostaglandin pathways in the 
reproductive testis. P4 has a role in regulating steroid production in the male
testis and may do so by modulating gene networks related to endocrine pathways,
such as Igf1, Tnfr, and vasopressin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Jul;112:106-17. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.04.021. Epub 2013 May 
3.

JUN regulates early transcriptional responses to axonal injury in retinal
ganglion cells.

Fernandes KA(1), Harder JM, Kim J, Libby RT.

Author information: 
(1)Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY,
USA.

The AP1 family transcription factor JUN is an important molecule in the neuronal 
response to injury. In retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), JUN is upregulated soon
after axonal injury and disrupting JUN activity delays RGC death. JUN is known to
participate in the control of many different injury response pathways in neurons,
including pathways controlling cell death and axonal regeneration. The role of
JUN in regulating genes involved in cell death, ER stress, and regeneration was
tested to determine the overall importance of JUN in regulating RGC response to
axonal injury. Genes from each of these pathways were transcriptionally
controlled following axonal injury and Jun deficiency altered the expression of
many of these genes. The differentially expressed genes included, Atf3, Ddit3,
Ecel1, Gadd45a, Gal, Hrk, Pten, Socs3, and Sprr1a. Two of these genes, Hrk and
Atf3, were tested for importance in RGC death using null alleles of each gene.
Disruption of the prodeath Bcl2 family member Hrk did not affect the rate or
amount of RGC death after axonal trauma. Deficiency in the ATF/CREB family
transcription factor Atf3 did lessen the amount of RGC death after injury, though
it did not provide long term protection to RGCs. Since JUN's dimerization partner
determines its transcriptional targets, the expression of several candidate AP1
family members were examined. Multiple AP1 family members were induced by axonal 
injury and had a different expression profile in Jun deficient retinas compared
to wildtype retinas (Fosl1, Fosl2 and Jund). Overall, JUN appears to play a
multifaceted role in regulating RGC response to axonal injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700614
PMID: 23648575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Sci Signal. 2013 Apr 30;6(273):ra28.1-13, S0-15. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003884.

Epigenetic activation of AP1 promotes squamous cell carcinoma metastasis.

Ding X(1), Pan H, Li J, Zhong Q, Chen X, Dry SM, Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine,
School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA.

The transcription factor AP1 (activating protein 1), a heterodimer of the JUN and
FOS proteins, promotes the invasive growth and metastasis of various tumors such 
as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), breast cancer, and melanoma. AP1 activity is
transcriptionally induced through a positive feedback loop. We identified the
histone demethylase KDM4A (lysine-specific demethylase 4A) as a key epigenetic
priming factor in this positive feedback loop. KDM4A contributed to the induction
of genes encoding the AP1 transcription factors and the invasive growth and
metastasis of SCC. KDM4A knockdown decreased the growth factor-induced messenger 
RNA expression and protein abundance of AP1 family members, including JUN and
FOSL1. Mechanistically, histone demethylation by KDM4A facilitated the binding of
the AP1 complex to the promoters of JUN and FOSL1, thereby promoting the positive
feedback loop that maintains activation of AP1. In a mouse model of SCC, KDM4A
knockdown inhibited lymph node metastasis. Moreover, the abundance of KDM4A
correlated with the abundance of JUN and FOSL1 in human SCC tissues, and KDM4A
expression was increased in human lymph node metastases. Our studies provide
insights into the epigenetic control of AP1 and tumor invasion and suggest that
KDM4A could be an important therapeutic target for inhibiting invasive SCC growth
and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3951265
PMID: 23633675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 16;110(16):6476-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219462110. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Inducible deletion of the Blimp-1 gene in adult epidermis causes
granulocyte-dominated chronic skin inflammation in mice.

Chiang MF(1), Yang SY, Lin IY, Hong JB, Lin SJ, Ying HY, Chen CM, Wu SY, Liu FT, 
Lin KI.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei
114, Taiwan.

B lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) is a transcriptional
repressor important for the differentiation and function of several types of
immune cells. Because skin serves as a physical barrier and acts as an immune
sentinel, we investigated whether Blimp-1 is involved in epidermal immune
function. We show that Blimp-1 expression is reduced in skin lesions of some
human eczema samples and in stimulated primary keratinocytes. Epidermal-specific 
deletion of PR domain containing 1, with ZNF domain (Prdm1), the gene encoding
Blimp-1, in adult mice caused spontaneously inflamed skin characterized by
massive dermal infiltration of neutrophils/macrophages and development of chronic
inflammation associated with higher levels of cytokines/chemokines, including
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and enhanced myelopoiesis in bone 
marrow. Deletion of Prdm1 in the epidermis of adult mice also led to stronger
inflammatory reactions in a tape-stripping test and in a disease model of contact
dermatitis. The elevated G-CSF produced by keratinocytes after deletion of Prdm1 
in vitro was mediated by the transcriptional activation of FBJ osteosarcoma
oncogene (Fos) and fos-like antigen 1 (Fosl1). Systemic increases in G-CSF
contributed to the inflammatory responses, because deletion of the G-CSF gene
[colony stimulating factor 3, (Csf3)] prevented neutrophilia and partially
ameliorated the inflamed skin in Prdm1-deficient mice. Our findings indicate a
previously unreported function for Blimp-1 in restraining steady-state epidermal 
barrier immunity.

PMCID: PMC3631680
PMID: 23576729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. FEBS Lett. 2013 May 21;587(10):1510-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.03.029. Epub
2013 Mar 29.

HDAC inhibitors prevent the induction of the immediate-early gene FOSL1, but do
not alter the nucleosome response.

Khan DH(1), Davie JR.

Author information: 
(1)Manitoba Institute of Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada.

Dynamic histone acetylation, catalyzed by lysine acetyltransferases and HDACs, is
critical to IEG expression. Expression of IEGs, such as FOSL1, is induced by
several signal transduction pathways resulting in activation of the protein
kinase MSK and phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10 of nucleosomes (the
nucleosome response) at the upstream promoter and regulatory region of target
genes. HDAC inhibitors prevent FOSL1 gene induction and the association of HDAC1,
2 and 3 with the gene body. However, HDAC inhibitors did not prevent the
nucleosome response. Thus HDAC inhibitors perturb events downstream of the
nucleosome response required for FOSL1 transcription initiation.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23542037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059057. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

XB130, a new adaptor protein, regulates expression of tumor suppressive microRNAs
in cancer cells.

Takeshita H(1), Shiozaki A, Bai XH, Iitaka D, Kim H, Yang BB, Keshavjee S, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

XB130, a novel adaptor protein, promotes cell growth by controlling expression of
many related genes. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), which are frequently mis-expressed in
cancer cells, regulate expression of targeted genes. In this present study, we
aimed to explore the oncogenic mechanism of XB130 through miRNAs regulation. We
analyzed miRNA expression in XB130 short hairpin RNA (shRNA) stably transfected
WRO thyroid cancer cells by a miRNA array assay, and 16 miRNAs were up-regulated 
and 22 miRNAs were down-regulated significantly in these cells, in comparison
with non-transfected or negative control shRNA transfected cells. We chose three 
of the up-regulated miRNAs (miR-33a, miR-149 and miR-193a-3p) and validated them 
by real-time qRT-PCR. Ectopic overexpression of XB130 suppressed these 3 miRNAs
in MRO cells, a cell line with very low expression of XB130. Furthermore, we
transfected miR mimics of these 3 miRNAs into WRO cells. They negatively
regulated expression of oncogenes (miR-33a: MYC, miR-149: FOSL1, miR-193a-3p:
SLC7A5), by targeting their 3' untranslated region, and reduced cell growth. Our 
results suggest that XB130 could promote growth of cancer cells by regulating
expression of tumor suppressive miRNAs and their targeted genes.

PMCID: PMC3602428
PMID: 23527086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Mol Med. 2013 May;31(5):1057-65. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2013.1304. Epub 2013 Mar
15.

Genetic analysis of genes causing hypertension and stroke in spontaneously
hypertensive rats.

Yamamoto H(1), Okuzaki D, Yamanishi K, Xu Y, Watanabe Y, Yoshida M, Yamashita A, 
Goto N, Nishiguchi S, Shimada K, Nojima H, Yasunaga T, Okamura H, Matsunaga H,
Yamanishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.

Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) and stroke-prone SHR (SHRSP) are frequently
used as model rats not only in studies of essential hypertension and stroke, but 
also in studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Normotensive 
Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) are normally used as controls in these studies. In this
study, using these rats, we aimed to identify the genes causing hypertension and 
stroke, as well as the genes involved in ADHD. Since adrenal gland products can
directly influence cardiovascular, endocrine and sympathetic nervous system
functions, gene expression profiles in the adrenal glands of the 3 rat strains
were examined using genome-wide microarray technology when the rats were 3 and 6 
weeks of age, a period in which the rats are considered to be in a
pre-hypertensive state. Gene expression profiles were compared between SHR and
WKY and between SHRSP and SHR. A total of 353 genes showing more than a 4-fold
increase or less than a 4-fold decrease in expression were isolated and candidate
genes were selected as significantly enriched genes. SHR-specific genes isolated 
when the rats were 3 weeks of age contained 12 enriched genes related to
transcriptional regulatory activity and those isolated when the rats were 6 weeks
of age contained 6 enriched genes related to the regulation of blood pressure.
SHRSP-specific genes isolated when the rats were 3 weeks of age contained 4
enriched genes related to the regulation of blood pressure and those isolated
when the rats were 6 weeks of age contained 4 enriched genes related to the
response to steroid hormone stimulus. Ingenuity pathway analysis of enriched
SHR-specific genes revealed that 2 transcriptional regulators, cAMP responsive
element modulator (Crem) and Fos-like antigen 1 (Fosl1), interact with blood
pressure-regulating genes, such as neurotensin (Nts), apelin (Apln) and epoxide
hydrolase 2, cytoplasmic (Ephx2). Similar analyses of SHRSP-specific genes
revealed that angiotensinogen (Agt), one of the blood pressure-regulating genes, 
plays pivotal roles among SHRSP-specific genes. Moreover, genes associated with
ADHD, such as low density lipoprotein receptor (Ldlr) and Crem, are discussed.

PMID: 23525202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Keio J Med. 2012;61(4):120-7.

Gefitinib, but not erlotinib, is a possible inducer of Fra-1-mediated
interstitial lung disease.

Takada Y(1), Matsuo K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, School of Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

Gefitinib is an anticancer drug developed to inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Two structurally-related EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, gefitinib (Iressa) and erlotinib (Tarceva), are used 
as oral chemotherapy by patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. Immediately
after introduction of gefitinib to clinical practice, interstitial lung disease
was identified as a life-threatening adverse effect, although this condition can 
be well managed. It is still unclear whether gefitinib and other EGFR inhibitors 
induce similar adverse effects in lung. We previously established mouse models of
interstitial lung disease in which gefitinib induces expression of Fosl1 (which
encodes the AP-1 transcription factor Fra-1) in the presence of exogenous or
endogenous Toll-like receptor ligands, leading to abnormal cytokine and chemokine
expression. Here, we compared and monitored the effects of EGFR inhibitors
gefitinib, erlotinib and AG1517 (PD153035) on the mRNA expression levels of
Fosl1, Tnf and Ccl2. Unexpectedly, gefitinib, but not the other tyrosine kinase
inhibitors, elicited the Fosl1 expression profile proposed to be predictive of
interstitial lung disease, suggesting that gefitinib-induced interstitial lung
disease is an off-target effect not elicited by erlotinib.

PMID: 23324306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;33(6):1198-209. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01054-12. Epub 2013 Jan 
14.

FOSL1 controls the assembly of endothelial cells into capillary tubes by direct
repression of av and ß3 integrin transcription.

Evellin S(1), Galvagni F, Zippo A, Neri F, Orlandini M, Incarnato D, Dettori D,
Neubauer S, Kessler H, Wagner EF, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Chimica e Farmacia, Università degli Studi di
Siena, Siena, Italy.

To form three-dimensional capillary tubes, endothelial cells must establish
contacts with the extracellular matrix that provides signals for their
proliferation, migration, and differentiation. The transcription factor Fosl1
plays a key role in the vasculogenic and angiogenic processes as Fosl1 knockout
embryos die with vascular defects in extraembryonic tissues. Here, we show that
Fosl1(-/-) embryonic stem cells differentiate into endothelial cells but fail to 
correctly assemble into primitive capillaries and to form tube-like structures.
FOSL1 silencing affects in vitro angiogenesis, increases cell adhesion, and
decreases cell mobility of primary human endothelial cells (HUVEC). We further
show that FOSL1 is a repressor of av and ß3 integrin expression and that the
down-modulation of avß3 rescues the angiogenic phenotype in FOSL1-silenced HUVEC,
while the ectopic expression of avß3 alone reproduces the phenotypic alterations 
induced by FOSL1 knockdown. FOSL1 represses the transcription of both av and ß3
integrin genes by binding together with JunD to their proximal promoter via the
transcription factor SP1. These data suggest that FOSL1-dependent negative
regulation of avß3 expression on endothelial cells is required for endothelial
assembly into vessel structures.

PMCID: PMC3592019
PMID: 23319049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 20;109(47):19408-13. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1216363109. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Sensitivity of human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines to targeted inhibition of BET
epigenetic signaling proteins.

Lockwood WW(1), Zejnullahu K, Bradner JE, Varmus H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Section, Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. william.lockwood@nih.gov

Bromodomain and extra terminal domain (BET) proteins function as epigenetic
signaling factors that associate with acetylated histones and facilitate
transcription of target genes. Inhibitors targeting the activity of BET proteins 
have shown potent antiproliferative effects in hematological cancers through the 
suppression of c-MYC and downstream target genes. However, as the epigenetic
landscape of a cell varies drastically depending on lineage, transcriptional
coactivators such as BETs would be expected to have different targets in cancers 
derived from different cells of origin, and this may influence the activity and
mechanism of action of BET inhibitors. To test this hypothesis, we treated a
panel of lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) cell lines with the BET inhibitor JQ1 and
found that a subset is acutely susceptible to BET inhibition. In contrast to
blood tumors, we show that LAC cells are inhibited by JQ1 through a mechanism
independent of c-MYC down-regulation. Through gene expression profiling, we
discovered that the oncogenic transcription factor FOSL1 and its targets are
suppressed by JQ1 in a dose-dependant manner. Knockdown of BRD4 also decreased
FOSL1 levels, and inhibition of FOSL1 phenocopied the effects of JQ1 treatment,
suggesting that loss of this transcription factor may be partly responsible for
the cytotoxic effects of BET inhibition in LAC cells, although ectopic expression
of FOSL1 alone did not rescue the phenotype. Together, these findings suggest
that BET inhibitors may be useful in solid tumors and that cell-lineage-specific 
differences in transcriptional targets of BETs may influence the activity of
inhibitors of these proteins in different cancer types.

PMCID: PMC3511085
PMID: 23129625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2013 Feb;44(2):98-108. doi:
10.1016/j.domaniend.2012.09.005. Epub 2012 Oct 8.

Prostaglandin F2a regulation of mRNA for activating protein 1 transcriptional
factors in porcine corpora lutea (CL): lack of induction of JUN and JUND in CL
without luteolytic capacity.

Diaz FJ(1), Luo W, Wiltbank MC.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology-Reproductive Physiology Program, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Porcine corpora lutea (CL) develop sensitivity to regression by prostaglandin F2a
(PGF2a), termed luteolytic capacity, about 13 d after estrus. We postulated that 
PGF2a regulation of activating protein 1 (AP-1) transcriptional factor expression
underlies acquisition of luteolytic capacity. CL were collected from gilts on day
9 (estrous cycle) or day 17 (pseudopregnancy) before or after PGF2a treatment
with mRNA measured for FOS, FOSB, FOSL1, FOSL2, JUN, JUNB, and JUND and the AP-1 
target genes CCL2 and SERPINE1. At 0.5 h after PGF2a, both day-9 and day-17 CL
had increased (P < 0.01) mRNA for FOS (2,225% and 1,817%), JUNB (237% and 358%), 
and FOSB (1,060% and 925%). Intriguingly, at 0.5 h after PGF2a there was
increased (P < 0.01) mRNA encoding JUN (1,099%) and JUND (300%) in day-17 but not
day-9 CL. At 10 h after PGF2a there was elevated FOSB mRNA in day-17 (771%) but
not day-9 CL and no PGF2a-induced change in FOS, JUN, JUND, and JUNB mRNA in
day-9 or day-17 CL. Treatment with PGF2a increased mRNA for AP-1-responsive
genes, CCL2 at 0.5 h (202%) and CCL2 and SERPINE1 at 10 h (719% and 1,515%), only
in day-17 CL. Thus, many of the fos family of transcription factors are
dramatically induced by PGF2a in CL with or without luteolytic capacity. However,
PGF only induced JUN and JUND expression in CL with luteolytic capacity, a
finding that may be key for understanding the acquisition of luteolytic capacity,
given that JUN is the only AP-1 family member with strong N-terminal
trans-activation activity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23089279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Pathol. 2012 Dec;181(6):2067-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.08.021. Epub
2012 Sep 29.

Role of WNT/ß-catenin signaling in rejuvenating myogenic differentiation of aged 
mesenchymal stem cells from cardiac patients.

Brunt KR(1), Zhang Y, Mihic A, Li M, Li SH, Xue P, Zhang W, Basmaji S, Tsang K,
Weisel RD, Yau TM, Li RK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Surgery and Toronto General Research Institute,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Autologous stem cell therapy has not been as effective as forecasted from
preclinical studies. Patient age was reported as an important contributing
factor. The goal of this study was to uncover age-dependent mechanisms of stem
cell dysfunction and to investigate possible means to restore the cellular
function. Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were isolated from
cardiovascular patients. Cell proliferation and number of colonies were inversely
correlated with patient age. Myogenic differentiation of MSCs in culture was
induced with 5-azacytidine. Differentiation correlated with age, with less
differentiation in MSCs from aged patients. We performed real-time PCR to
identify genes in the WNT/ß-catenin signaling network and found that transcript
levels of CTNNB1, LEF1, FZD8, WNT3A, and SFRP4 were negatively correlated with
age, whereas FOSL1, LRP6, and FZD6 were positively correlated with age. Protein
evaluation showed that ß-catenin nuclear translocation correlated with age and
was lower in aged MSCs. Aged MSCs treated with lithium chloride-to increase the
bioavailability of ß-catenin-recovered their capacity for myogenic
differentiation through myocyte enhancer factor 2C but not with the knockdown of 
ß-catenin using small-interfering RNA. This study may be the first to relate
reduced nuclear ß-catenin bioavailability in MSCs from aged patients. Most
important, this abnormality was potentially recoverable, providing a target for
improving the function of bone marrow stem cells and their clinical utility in
aged patients.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 2013 Sep 5;32(36):4294-303. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.432. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

MicroRNA-34 suppresses breast cancer invasion and metastasis by directly
targeting Fra-1.

Yang S(1), Li Y, Gao J, Zhang T, Li S, Luo A, Chen H, Ding F, Wang X, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.

MicroRNAs have key roles in tumor metastasis. Here, we describe the regulation
and function of miR-34a and miR-34c (miR-34a/c) in breast cancer metastasis.
Expression analysis verified that miR-34a/c expression is significantly decreased
in metastatic breast cancer cells and human primary breast tumors with lymph node
metastases. Overexpression of miR-34a/c could inhibit breast cancer cell
migration and invasion in vitro and distal pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Further 
studies revealed that Fos-related antigen 1 (Fra-1 or Fosl1) is a downstream
target of miR-34a/c as miR-34a/c bound directly to the 3'untranslated region of
Fra-1, subsequently reducing both the mRNA and protein levels of Fra-1. Silencing
of Fra-1 recapitulated the effects of miR-34a/c overexpression, whereas enforced 
expression of Fra-1 reverses the suppressive effects of miR-34a/c. Moreover,
significant downregulation of miR-34a in metastatic breast cancer tissues was
found to be inversely correlated with Fra-1 expression. Our results demonstrate
that miR-34a/c functions as a metastasis suppressor to regulate breast cancer
migration and invasion through targeting Fra-1 oncogene and suggest a therapeutic
application of miR-34 in breast cancer.

PMID: 23001043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e42661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042661. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Differential glioma-associated tumor antigen expression profiles of human glioma 
cells grown in hypoxia.

Ge L(1), Cornforth AN, Hoa NT, Delgado C, Chiou SK, Zhou YH, Jadus MR.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic and Molecular Health Care Group, Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Long Beach, California, United States of America.

Human U251 and D54 glioma cells were tested for expression of 25
glioma-associated tumor antigen precursor proteins (TAPP) under hypoxic (1% O(2))
or normoxic (21% O(2)) conditions. Hypoxic glioma cell lines increased their mRNA
expression for nine TAPP (Aim2, Art-4, EphA2, EZH2, Fosl1, PTH-rP, Sox 11, Whsc2 
and YKL-40), as assessed by quantitative reverse transcriptase
real-time/polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Increased differences with three
hypoxic-induced TAPP: EZH2, Whsc2 and YKL-40 were shown at the protein levels by 
fluorescent antibody staining and quantitative electrophoretic analysis. Two TAPP
(MRP3 and Trp1) were down-regulated by hypoxia in glioma cell lines. Growing the 
glioma cells under hypoxia for 13 days, followed by returning them back to
normoxic conditions for 7 days, and restored the original normoxic TAPP profile. 
Thus, hypoxia was an environmental factor that stimulated the transient
expression of these antigens. Intracranial xenografts grown in nude mice derived 
from U251 cells that had been cultured under neurosphere stem cell conditions
showed increased expression of Whsc2 or YKL-40, demonstrating that these in vitro
properties of glioma also occur in vivo. Whsc2-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes
killed the hypoxic U251 glioma cells better than normoxic glioma cells. The
antigens expressed by hypoxic tumor cells may be a better source of starting
tumor material for loading dendritic cells for novel immunotherapy of glioma
using tumor-associated antigens.

PMCID: PMC3434178
PMID: 22957023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43260. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043260. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

Dietary heme-mediated PPARa activation does not affect the heme-induced
epithelial hyperproliferation and hyperplasia in mouse colon.

Ijssennagger N(1), de Wit N, Müller M, van der Meer R.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
noortje.ijssennagger@wur.nl

Red meat consumption is associated with an increased colon cancer risk. Heme,
present in red meat, injures the colon surface epithelium by luminal cytotoxicity
and reactive oxygen species. This surface injury is overcompensated by
hyperproliferation and hyperplasia of crypt cells. Transcriptome analysis of
mucosa of heme-fed mice showed, besides stress- and proliferation-related genes, 
many upregulated lipid metabolism-related PPARa target genes. The aim of this
study was to investigate the role of PPARa in heme-induced hyperproliferation and
hyperplasia. Male PPARa KO and WT mice received a purified diet with or without
heme. As PPARa is proposed to protect against oxidative stress and lipid
peroxidation, we hypothesized that the absence of PPARa leads to more surface
injury and crypt hyperproliferation in the colon upon heme-feeding. Heme induced 
luminal cytotoxicity and lipid peroxidation and colonic hyperproliferation and
hyperplasia to the same extent in WT and KO mice. Transcriptome analysis of
colonic mucosa confirmed similar heme-induced hyperproliferation in WT and KO
mice. Stainings for alkaline phosphatase activity and expression levels of
Vanin-1 and Nrf2-targets indicated a compromised antioxidant defense in heme-fed 
KO mice. Our results suggest that the protective role of PPARa in antioxidant
defense involves the Nrf2-inhibitor Fosl1, which is upregulated by heme in PPARa 
KO mice. We conclude that PPARa plays a protective role in colon against
oxidative stress, but PPARa does not mediate heme-induced hyperproliferation.
This implies that oxidative stress of surface cells is not the main determinant
of heme-induced hyperproliferation and hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3419209
PMID: 22905243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 1;18(21):5911-23. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1257.
Epub 2012 Aug 15.

Src Inhibition with saracatinib reverses fulvestrant resistance in ER-positive
ovarian cancer models in vitro and in vivo.

Simpkins F(1), Hevia-Paez P, Sun J, Ullmer W, Gilbert CA, da Silva T, Pedram A,
Levin ER, Reis IM, Rabinovich B, Azzam D, Xu XX, Ince TA, Yang JY, Verhaak RG, Lu
Y, Mills GB, Slingerland JM.

Author information: 
(1)Braman Family Breast Cancer Institute and Division of Biostatistics,
Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University of Miami Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

PURPOSE: More effective, less toxic treatments for recurrent ovarian cancer are
needed. Although more than 60% of ovarian cancers express the estrogen receptor
(ER), ER-targeted drugs have been disappointing due to drug resistance. In other 
estrogen-sensitive cancers, estrogen activates Src to phosphorylate p27 promoting
its degradation and increasing cell-cycle progression. Because Src is activated
in most ovarian cancers, we investigated whether combined Src and ER blockade by 
saracatinib and fulvestrant would circumvent antiestrogen resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: ER and Src were assayed in 338 primary ovarian cancers. Dual
ER and Src blockade effects on cell cycle, ER target gene expression, and
survival were assayed in ERa+ ovarian cancer lines, a primary human ovarian
cancer culture in vitro, and on xenograft growth.
RESULTS: Most primary ovarian cancers express ER. Src activity was greater in
ovarian cancer lines than normal epithelial lines. Estrogen activated Src, ER-Src
binding, and ER translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus. Estrogen-mediated
mitogenesis was via ERa, not ERß. While each alone had little effect, combined
saracatinib and fulvestrant increased p27 and inhibited cyclin E-Cdk2 and
cell-cycle progression. Saracatinib also impaired induction of ER-target genes
c-Myc and FOSL1; this was greatest with dual therapy. Combined therapy induced
autophagy and more effectively inhibited ovarian cancer xenograft growth than
monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Saracatinib augments effects of fulvestrant by opposing
estrogen-mediated Src activation and target gene expression, increasing
cell-cycle arrest, and impairing survival, all of which would oppose antiestrogen
resistance in these ER+ ovarian cancer models. These data support further
preclinical and clinical evaluation of combined fulvestrant and saracatinib in
ovarian cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3698880
PMID: 22896656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neuroendocrinol. 2012 Dec;24(12):1542-52. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.2012.02362.x.

Selective up-regulation of JunD transcript and protein expression in
vasopressinergic supraoptic nucleus neurones in water-deprived rats.

Yao ST(1), Gouraud SS, Qiu J, Cunningham JT, Paton JF, Murphy D.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. song.yao@florey.edu.au

The magnocellular neurones (MCN) of the supraoptic nucleus (SON) undergo
reversible changes during dehydration. We hypothesise that alterations in
steady-state transcript levels might be partially responsible for this
plasticity. In turn, regulation of transcript abundance might be mediated by
transcription factors. We have previously used microarrays to identify changes in
the expression of mRNAs encoding transcription factors in response to water
deprivation. We observed down-regulation of 11 and up-regulation of 31
transcription factor transcripts, including members of the activator protein-1
gene family, namely c-fos, c-jun, fosl1 and junD. Because JunD expression and
regulation within the SON has not been previously described, we have used in situ
hybridisation and the quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction to confirm the array results, demonstrating a significant increase in
JunD mRNA levels following 24 and 72 h of water deprivation. Western blot and
immunohistochemistry revealed a significant increase in JunD protein expression
following dehydration. Double-staining fluorescence immunohistochemistry with a
neurone-specific marker (NeuN) demonstrated that JunD staining is predominantly
neuronal. Additionally, JunD immunoreactivity is observed primarily in
vasopressin-containing neurones with markedly less staining seen in
oxytocin-containing MCNs. Furthermore, JunD is highly co-expressed with c-Fos in 
MCNs of the SON following dehydration. These results suggest that JunD plays a
role in the regulation of gene expression within MCNs of the SON in association
with other Fos and Jun family members.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neuroendocrinology © 2012 British Society for
Neuroendocrinology.

PMCID: PMC3499652
PMID: 22827527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Physiol Genomics. 2012 Aug 1;44(15):754-63. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00027.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

NFE2L2 pathway polymorphisms and lung function decline in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Sandford AJ(1), Malhotra D, Boezen HM, Siedlinski M, Postma DS, Wong V, Akhabir
L, He JQ, Connett JE, Anthonisen NR, Paré PD, Biswal S.

Author information: 
(1)UBC James Hogg Research Centre, Providence Heart + Lung Institute, St. Paul's 
Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. andrew.sandford@hli.ubc.ca

An oxidant-antioxidant imbalance in the lung contributes to the development of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that is caused by a complex
interaction of genetic and environmental risk factors. Nuclear erythroid
2-related factor 2 (NFE2L2 or NRF2) is a critical molecule in the lung's defense 
mechanism against oxidants. We investigated whether polymorphisms in the NFE2L2
pathway affected the rate of decline of lung function in smokers from the Lung
Health Study (LHS)(n = 547) and in a replication set, the Vlagtwedde-Vlaardingen 
cohort (n = 533). We selected polymorphisms in NFE2L2 in genes that positively or
negatively regulate NFE2L2 transcriptional activity and in genes that are
regulated by NFE2L2. Polymorphisms in 11 genes were significantly associated with
rate of lung function decline in the LHS. One of these polymorphisms, rs11085735 
in the KEAP1 gene, was previously shown to be associated with the level of lung
function in the Vlagtwedde-Vlaardingen cohort but not with decline of lung
function. Of the 23 associated polymorphisms in the LHS, only rs634534 in the
FOSL1 gene showed a significant association in the Vlagtwedde-Vlaardingen cohort 
with rate of lung function decline, but the direction of the association was not 
consistent with that in the LHS. In summary, despite finding several nominally
significant polymorphisms in the LHS, none of these associations were replicated 
in the Vlagtwedde-Vlaardingen cohort, indicating lack of effect of polymorphisms 
in the NFE2L2 pathway on the rate of decline of lung function.

PMCID: PMC3774584
PMID: 22693272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Odontology. 2013 Jul;101(2):133-9. doi: 10.1007/s10266-012-0067-0. Epub 2012 Jun 
8.

Effect of titanium surface topographies on human bone marrow stem cells
differentiation in vitro.

Perrotti V(1), Palmieri A, Pellati A, Degidi M, Ricci L, Piattelli A, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Dental School, University of Chieti-Pescara, Via F. Sciucchi 63, 66100,
Chieti, Italy.

Coating characteristics of dental implants such as composition and topography
regulate cell response during implant healing. The aim of this study was to
assess how surface topography can affect osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by analyzing the expression levels of bone-related 
genes and MSCs marker. Thirty disk-shaped, commercially pure Grade 2 titanium
samples (10 × 2 mm) with 3 different surface topographies (DENTSPLY-Friadent
GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) were used in the present study: 10 Ti machined disks
(control), 10 Ti sandblasted and acid-etched disks (DPS(®)) and 10 sandblasted
and acid-etched disks at high temperature (Plus(®)). Samples were processed for
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. By
comparing machined and Plus(®) disks, quantitative real-time RT-PCR showed a
significant reduction of the bone-related genes osteocalcin (BGLAP) and
osteoblast transcriptional factor (RUNX2). The comparison between DPS(®) and
Plus(®) disks showed a slight induction of all the genes examined (RUNX2, ALPL,
COL1A1, COL3A1, ENG, FOSL1, SPP1, and SP7); only the expression of BGLAP remained
stable. The present study, demonstrated that implant surface topography affects
osteoblast gene expression. Indeed, Plus(®) surface produces an effect on MSCs in
the late differentiation stages.

PMID: 22678711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Lab Invest. 2012 May;92(5):735-43. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.46. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

FOSL1 as a candidate target gene for 11q12 rearrangements in desmoplastic
fibroblastoma.

Macchia G(1), Trombetta D, Möller E, Mertens F, Storlazzi CT, Debiec-Rychter M,
Sciot R, Nord KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Skåne
University Hospital, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
gemmamacchia@biologia.uniba.it

Desmoplastic fibroblastoma (DF) is a benign fibroblastic/myofibroblastic tumor.
Cytogenetic analyses have revealed consistent rearrangement of chromosome band
11q12, strongly suggesting that this region harbors a gene of pathogenetic
importance. To identify the target gene of the 11q12 rearrangements, we analyzed 
six cases diagnosed as DF using chromosome banding, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), single-nucleotide polymorphism array and gene expression
approaches. Different structural rearrangements involving 11q12 were found in
five of the six cases. Metaphase FISH analyses in two of them mapped the 11q12
breakpoints to an ~20-kb region, harboring FOSL1. Global gene expression
profiling followed by quantitative real-time PCR showed that FOSL1 was expressed 
at higher levels in DF with 11q12 rearrangements than in desmoid-type
fibromatoses. Furthermore, FOSL1 was not upregulated in the single case of DF
that did not show cytogenetic involvement of 11q12; instead this tumor was found 
to display a hemizygous loss on 5q, including the APC (adenomatous polyposis
coli) locus, raising the possibility that it actually was a misdiagnosed Gardner 
fibroma. 5'RACE-PCR in two 11q12-positive DF did not identify any fusion
transcripts. Thus, in agreement with the finding at chromosome banding analysis
that varying translocation partners are involved in the 11q12 rearrangement, the 
molecular data suggest that the functional outcome of the 11q12 rearrangements is
deregulated expression of FOSL1.

PMID: 22411068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Implant Dent. 2012 Apr;21(2):118-23. doi: 10.1097/ID.0b013e31824bc948.

Anatase-based implants nanocoating on stem cells derived from adipose tissue.

Zollino I(1), Girardi A, Palmieri A, Cura F, Sollazzo V, Brunelli G, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of a new anatase
coating with antibacterial properties (Bactercline anatase coating [BAC]) on
dental implants in the commitment of stem cells derived from adipose tissue to
osteoblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, the quantitative expression of specific genes, such as transcriptional 
factors (runx2 and sp7), bone-related genes (spp1, col1a1, col3a1, alpl, and
fosl1), and mesenchymal stem cells marker (eng), was examined.
RESULTS: BAC caused induction of bone-related genes such as sp7, fosl1, alpl, and
spp1. In contrast, the expression of runx2, col3a1, and col1a1 was decreased in
stem cells treated with BAC with respect to untreated cells.
CONCLUSION: The obtained results are relevant to better understand the molecular 
mechanism of bone regeneration and as a model for comparing other materials with 
similar clinical effects.

PMID: 22382753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2011 Mar;150(5):632-4.

Effects of expression of transcriptional factor AP-1 FOSL1 gene on psoriatic
process.

Sobolev VV(1), Zolotorenko AD, Soboleva AG, Elkin AM, Il'ina SA, Serov DN,
Potekaev NN, Tkachenko SB, Minnibaev MT, Piruzyan AL.

Author information: 
(1)N. I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Moscow, Russia.

We performed quantitative analysis of FOSL1 gene expression in lesional psoriatic
skin. The expression of this gene in lesional psoriatic skin was significantly
increased compared to that in unaffected areas. Enhanced FOSL1 expression
significantly correlated with high psoriasis area and severity index (PASI). High
level of FOSL1 gene expression was proposed to be a marker of pathological
process activity in psoriasis.

PMID: 22235402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Mar 7;209(2):136-45. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2011.11.015. Epub
2011 Dec 9.

Gene expression profiling of A549 cells exposed to Milan PM2.5.

Gualtieri M(1), Longhin E, Mattioli M, Mantecca P, Tinaglia V, Mangano E,
Proverbio MC, Bestetti G, Camatini M, Battaglia C.

Author information: 
(1)POLARIS Research Center, Department of Environmental Science, University of
Milano Bicocca, 1, piazza della Scienza, I-20126 Milan, Italy.
maurizio.gualtieri@unimib.it

BACKGROUND: Particulate matter (PM) has been associated to adverse health effects
in exposed population and DNA damage has been extensively reported in in vitro
systems exposed to fine PM (PM2.5). The ability to induce gene expression profile
modulation, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and strand breaks to DNA 
molecules has been investigated in A549 cells exposed to winter and summer Milan 
PM2.5.
RESULTS: A549 cells, exposed to 10 µg/cm(2) of both winter and summer PM2.5,
showed increased cytotoxicity at 24h and a significant increase of ROS at 3h of
treatment. Despite these similar effects winter PM induced a higher number of
gene modulation in comparison with summer PM. Both PMs modulated genes related to
the response to xenobiotic stimuli (CYP1A1, CYP1B1, TIPARP, ALDH1A3, AHRR) and to
the cell-cell signalling (GREM1) pathways with winter PM2.5 inducing higher fold 
increases. Moreover the winter fraction modulated also JUN (cell-cell
signalling), GDF15, SIPA1L2 (signal transduction), and HMOX1 (oxidative stress). 
Two genes, epiregulin (EREG) and FOS-like antigen1 (FOSL1), were significantly
up-regulated by summer PM2.5. The results obtained with the microarray approach
have been confirmed by qPCR and by the analysis of CYP1B1 expression. Comet assay
evidenced that winter PM2.5 induced more DNA strand breaks than the summer one.
CONCLUSION: Winter PM2.5 is able to induce gene expression alteration, ROS
production and DNA damage. These effects are likely to be related to the CYP
enzyme activation in response to the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)
adsorbed on particle surface.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22178795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 18;286(46):40104-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C111.296707. Epub 2011
Oct 3.

Molecular characterization of the microRNA-138-Fos-like antigen 1 (FOSL1)
regulatory module in squamous cell carcinoma.

Jin Y(1), Wang C, Liu X, Mu W, Chen Z, Yu D, Wang A, Dai Y, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

MicroRNA-138 is one of the most frequently down-regulated microRNAs in cancer. We
recently identified 51 candidate targets of microRNA-138 (Jiang, L., Dai, Y.,
Liu, X., Wang, C., Wang, A., Chen, Z., Heidbreder, C. E., Kolokythas, A., and
Zhou, X. (2011) Hum. Genet. 129, 189-197). Among these candidates, Fos-like
antigen 1 (FOSL1) is a member of Fos gene family and is a known proto-oncogene.
In this study, we first confirmed the microRNA-138-mediated down-regulation of
FOSL1 in squamous cell carcinoma cell lines. We then demonstrated the effect of
this microRNA-138-FOSL1 regulatory module on downstream genes (homolog of Snail 2
(Snai2) expression and the Snai2-mediated repression of E-cadherin expression),
as well as its contributions to tumorigenesis. The microRNA-138-directed
recruitment of FOSL1 mRNA to the RNAi-induced silencing complex was confirmed by 
a ribonucleoprotein-immunoprecipitation assay. Three canonical and three high
affinity non-canonical microRNA-138 (miR-138) targeting sites were identified on 
the FOSL1 mRNA: one in the 5'-UTR, three overlapping sites in the coding
sequences, and two overlapping sites in the 3'-UTR. The direct targeting of
miR-138 to these sites was confirmed using luciferase reporter gene assays. In
summary, we describe an important microRNA regulatory module, which may play an
important role in cancer initiation and progression. Our results also provide
evidence that microRNAs target both canonical and non-canonical targeting sites
located in all areas of the mRNA molecule (e.g. 5'-UTR, coding sequences, and
3'-UTR).

PMCID: PMC3220531
PMID: 21969367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;31(23):4801-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05780-11. Epub 2011 Sep 
26.

FOSL1 is integral to establishing the maternal-fetal interface.

Kent LN(1), Rumi MA, Kubota K, Lee DS, Soares MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Remodeling of uterine spiral arteries by trophoblast cells is a requisite process
for hemochorial placentation and successful pregnancy. The rat exhibits deep
intrauterine trophoblast invasion and accompanying trophoblast-directed vascular 
modification. The involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K), AKT, and
Fos-like antigen 1 (FOSL1) in regulating invasive trophoblast and hemochorial
placentation was investigated using Rcho-1 trophoblast stem cells and rat models.
Disruption of PI3K/AKT with small-molecule inhibitors interfered with the
differentiation-dependent elaboration of a signature invasive-vascular remodeling
trophoblast gene expression profile and trophoblast invasion. AKT
isoform-specific knockdown also affected the signature invasive-vascular
remodeling trophoblast gene expression profile. Nuclear FOSL1 increased during
trophoblast cell differentiation in a PI3K/AKT-dependent manner. Knockdown of
FOSL1 disrupted the expression of a subset of genes associated with the
invasive-vascular remodeling trophoblast phenotype, including the matrix
metallopeptidase 9 gene (Mmp9). FOSL1 was shown to occupy regions of the Mmp9
promoter in trophoblast cells critical for the regulation of Mmp9 gene
expression. Inhibition of FOSL1 expression also abrogated trophoblast invasion,
as assessed in vitro and following in vivo trophoblast-specific lentivirally
delivered FOSL1 short hairpin RNA (shRNA). In summary, FOSL1 is a key downstream 
effector of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway responsible for development of
trophoblast lineages integral to establishing the maternal-fetal interface.

PMCID: PMC3232930
PMID: 21947281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Sci Signal. 2011 Aug 9;4(186):pt5. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002258.

miR-221/222 targeting of trichorhinophalangeal 1 (TRPS1) promotes
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer.

Stinson S(1), Lackner MR, Adai AT, Yu N, Kim HJ, O'Brien C, Spoerke J,
Jhunjhunwala S, Boyd Z, Januario T, Newman RJ, Yue P, Bourgon R, Modrusan Z,
Stern HM, Warming S, de Sauvage FJ, Amler L, Yeh RF, Dornan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics and Cancer Cell Biology, Genentech, Inc., 
South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Compared with the luminal subtype, the basal-like subtype of breast cancer has an
aggressive clinical behavior, but the reasons for this difference between the two
subtypes are poorly understood. We identified microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-221 and
miR-222 (miR-221/222) as basal-like subtype-specific miRNAs that decrease
expression of epithelial-specific genes and increase expression of
mesenchymal-specific genes. In addition, expression of these miRNAs increased
cell migration and invasion, which collectively are characteristics of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The basal-like transcription factor
FOSL1 (also known as Fra-1) directly stimulated the transcription of miR-221/222,
and the abundance of these miRNAs decreased with inhibition of MEK
(mitogen-activated or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase kinase),
placing miR-221/222 downstream of the RAS pathway. The miR-221/222-mediated
reduction in E-cadherin abundance depended on their targeting of the 3'
untranslated region (3'UTR) of TRPS1 (trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type 1),
which is a member of the GATA family of transcriptional repressors. TRPS1
inhibited EMT by directly repressing expression of ZEB2 (Zinc finger
E-box-binding homeobox 2). Therefore, miR-221/222 may contribute to the
aggressive clinical behavior of basal-like breast cancers.

PMID: 21868360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr-Jun;24(2 Suppl):59-64.

Polylactide-polyglycolide resorbable plates stimulates adipose tissue-derived
stem cells towards osteoblasts differentiation.

Sollazzo V(1), Lucchese A, Palmieri A, Zollino I, Iaccarino C, Carnevali G,
Pezzetti F, Brunelli G, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

Polylactide, polyglycolide materials or devices have been utilized routinely
during maxillofacial, craniofacial, and orthopaedic reconstructive surgical
procedures.(1) These materials combine the benefits of rigid fixation with the
advantages of biodegradation, avoiding the need for implant removal and
minimizing the risk of other complications.(2) To study how polylactide,
polyglycolide acids plates (PLPG plates) can induce osteoblast differentiation
and proliferation in mesenchymal stem cells, the expression levels of bone
related genes (RUNX2, SP7, ALPL, SPP1, COL1A1, COL3A1 and FOSL1) and mesenchymal 
stem cells marker (ENG) were measured in adipose derived stem cells (ADSCs) and
normal osteoblast (NO) cultivated on PLPG plates after 15 and 30 days of
treatment using real time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction.
Significantly differentially expressed genes among ADSCs and NO were SP7, ENG,
FOSL1, RUNX, ALPL and SPP1 in the first 15 days of treatment and SP7, ENG FOSL1, 
COL3A1 COL1A1, SPP1 and ALPL after 30 days. The present study demonstrated that
PLPG plates strongly influences the behavior of ADSCs in vitro by enhancing
proliferation, differentiation and deposition of matrix.

PMID: 21781447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Sci Signal. 2011 Jun 14;4(177):ra41. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001538.

TRPS1 targeting by miR-221/222 promotes the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition 
in breast cancer.

Stinson S(1), Lackner MR, Adai AT, Yu N, Kim HJ, O'Brien C, Spoerke J,
Jhunjhunwala S, Boyd Z, Januario T, Newman RJ, Yue P, Bourgon R, Modrusan Z,
Stern HM, Warming S, de Sauvage FJ, Amler L, Yeh RF, Dornan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics and Cancer Cell Biology, Genentech Inc.,
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

The basal-like subtype of breast cancer has an aggressive clinical behavior
compared to that of the luminal subtype. We identified the microRNAs (miRNAs)
miR-221 and miR-222 (miR-221/222) as basal-like subtype-specific miRNAs and
showed that expression of miR-221/222 decreased expression of epithelial-specific
genes and increased expression of mesenchymal-specific genes, and increased cell 
migration and invasion in a manner characteristic of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The transcription factor FOSL1 (also 
known as Fra-1), which is found in basal-like breast cancers but not in the
luminal subtype, stimulated the transcription of miR-221/222, and the abundance
of these miRNAs decreased with inhibition of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) or MEK (mitogen-activated or extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase
kinase), placing miR-221/222 downstream of the RAS pathway. Furthermore,
miR-221/222-mediated reduction in E-cadherin abundance depended on their
targeting the 3' untranslated region of the GATA family transcriptional repressor
TRPS1 (tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type 1), which inhibited EMT by
decreasing ZEB2 (zinc finger E-box-binding homeobox2) expression. We conclude
that by promoting EMT, miR-221/222 may contribute to the more aggressive clinical
behavior of basal-like breast cancers.

PMID: 21673316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Steroids. 2011 Sep-Oct;76(10-11):1063-8. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.04.011.
Epub 2011 May 5.

Inhibition of FOSL1 overexpression in antiestrogen-resistant MCF-7 cells
decreases cell growth and increases vacuolization and cell death.

Pennanen PT(1), Sarvilinna NS, Toimela T, Ylikomi TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Medical School, FIN-33014, University of Tampere, 
Finland. pasi.pennanen@uta.fi

Elevated activator protein-1 (AP-1) activity in breast cancer cells has been
linked to Tamoxifen (TAM) resistance. Fos-like antigen-1 (FOSL1) is a member of
the AP-1 transcription factor and is overexpressed in a variety of human cancers 
including breast tumors. We have previously established an estrogen-independent
and antiestrogen Toremifene (TOR)-resistant subline of MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
In these cells, the expression of FOSL1 is upregulated when compared to the
parental cells. In the present study, partial inhibition of FOSL1 expression in
these cells by small interfering RNA resulted in a marked decrease of cell
growth. The inhibition of cell growth paralleled with changes in cell morphology 
such as increased formation of vacuoles followed by an increase in the number of 
dead cells. The inhibition of FOSL1 expression in these cells also restored
sensitivity to TOR. Our results suggest that chemotherapy targeting
overexpression of FOSL1 could be a potent strategy for treating endocrine
resistant breast cancers.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21570421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cell Sci. 2011 May 1;124(Pt 9):1465-76. doi: 10.1242/jcs.079855. Epub 2011 Apr 
12.

Elevated Fra-1 expression causes severe lipodystrophy.

Luther J(1), Driessler F, Megges M, Hess A, Herbort B, Mandic V, Zaiss MM,
Reichardt A, Zech C, Tuckermann JP, Calkhoven CF, Wagner EF, Schett G, David JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, D91054
Erlangen, Germany.

A shift from osteoblastogenesis to adipogenesis is one of the underlying
mechanisms of decreased bone mass and increased fat during aging. We now uncover 
a new role for the transcription factor Fra-1 in suppressing adipogenesis.
Indeed, Fra1 (Fosl1) transgenic (Fra1tg) mice, which developed progressive
osteosclerosis as a result of accelerated osteoblast differentiation, also
developed a severe general lipodystrophy. The residual fat of these mice appeared
immature and expressed lower levels of adipogenic markers, including the fatty
acid transporter Cd36 and the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein Cebpa. Consequently 
accumulation of triglycerides and free fatty acids were detected in the serum of 
fasting Fra1tg mice. Fra-1 acts cell autonomously because the adipogenic
differentiation of Fra1 transgenic primary osteoblasts was drastically reduced,
and overexpression of Fra-1 in an adipogenic cell line blocked their
differentiation into adipocytes. Strikingly, Cebpa was downregulated in the
Fra-1-overexpressing cells and Fra-1 could bind to the Cebpa promoter and
directly suppress its activity. Thus, our data add to the known common systemic
control of fat and bone mass, a new cell-autonomous level of control of cell fate
decision by which the osteogenic transcription factor Fra-1 opposes adipocyte
differentiation by inhibiting C/EBPa.

PMID: 21486951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Oncogene. 2011 Sep 8;30(36):3821-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.101. Epub 2011 Apr 4.

Interstitial lung disease induced by gefitinib and toll-like receptor ligands is 
mediated by Fra-1.

Takada Y(1), Gresh L, Bozec A, Ikeda E, Kamiya K, Watanabe M, Kobayashi K, Asano 
K, Toyama Y, Wagner EF, Matsuo K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Tissue Biology, School of Medicine, Keio University,
Tokyo, Japan.

The role of the AP-1 transcription factor Fra-1 (encoded by Fosl1) in
inflammatory responses associated with lung disease is largely unknown. Here, we 
show that Fra-1 overexpression in mice reduced proinflammatory cytokine
production in response to injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a Toll-like
receptor (TLR)-ligand. Unexpectedly, Fra-1 transgenic mice died rapidly following
LPS treatment, showing severe interstitial lung disease and displaying massive
accumulation of macrophages and overproduction of several chemokines, including
macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1, encoded by Ccl2). To assess the
clinical relevance of Fra-1 in lung pathology, mice were treated with the
anticancer drug gefitinib (Iressa), which can lead to interstitial lung disease
in patients. Gefitinib-treated mice showed increased Fosl1 and Ccl2 expression
and developed interstitial lung disease in response to LPS, endogenous TLR
ligands and chemotherapy. Moreover, deletion of Fra-1 or blocking MCP-1 receptor 
signaling in mice attenuated gefitinib-enhanced lethality in response to LPS.
Importantly, human alveolar macrophages showed enhanced LPS-induced FOSL1 and
CCL2 expression after gefitinib treatment. These results indicate that Fra-1 is
an important mediator of interstitial lung disease following gefitinib treatment.

PMID: 21460858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Biol Chem. 2011 Apr 1;286(13):11254-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.194332. Epub 2011
Jan 20.

Differential regulation of gene expression by protein kinase C isozymes as
determined by genome-wide expression analysis.

Caino MC(1), von Burstin VA, Lopez-Haber C, Kazanietz MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC) isozymes are key signal transducers involved in normal
physiology and disease and have been widely implicated in cancer progression.
Despite our extensive knowledge of the signaling pathways regulated by PKC
isozymes and their effectors, there is essentially no information on how
individual members of the PKC family regulate gene transcription. Here, we report
the first PKC isozyme-specific analysis of global gene expression by microarray
using RNAi depletion of diacylglycerol/phorbol ester-regulated PKCs. A thorough
analysis of this microarray data revealed unique patterns of gene expression
controlled by PKCa, PKCd, and PKCe, which are remarkably different in cells
growing in serum or in response to phorbol ester stimulation. PKCd is the most
relevant isoform in controlling the induction of genes by phorbol ester
stimulation, whereas PKCe predominantly regulates gene expression in serum. We
also established that two PKCd-regulated genes, FOSL1 and BCL2A1, mediate the
apoptotic effect of phorbol esters or the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide in
prostate cancer cells. Our studies offer a unique opportunity for establishing
novel transcriptional effectors for PKC isozymes and may have significant
functional and therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC3064181
PMID: 21252239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Acta Biochim Pol. 2010;57(4):521-7. Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Identification of novel putative regulators of the major apoptotic nuclease DNA
Fragmentation Factor.

Hanus J(1), Kalinowska-Herok M, Widlak P.

Author information: 
(1)Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center, Institute of Oncology, Gliwice,
Poland.

Yeast two- and three-hybrid systems were used to screen cDNA libraries from HeLa 
cells and human brain tissue to identify novel protein partners of DNA
Fragmentation Factor, the major apoptotic nuclease. The two-hybrid system
revealed the DFF45 inhibitory subunit of the nuclease as the only identified
partner of the DFF40 catalytic subunit. Similar analysis revealed several protein
candidates that potentially interact with the DFF45 subunit: FBXO28, FOSL1, PGK1,
PCNT, FHL1 and GFAP. Recombinant GFAP protected DFF45 against cleavage with
caspase-3 and prevented activation of the DFF nuclease in vitro. In addition,
three-hybrid system results revealed a putative novel protein partner of the
DFF40-DFF45 heterodimer. The candidate cDNA contained two open reading frames
that mapped to an intron of the GBF1 gene. Products of the candidate cDNA derived
from a cell-free transcription/translation system inhibited DNA cleavage by
recombinant caspase-activated DFF. This putative partner of DFF may have
functional importance in regulating the apoptotic response because its RNAi
silencing facilitated cleavage of the DFF45 inhibitor subunit and affected
chromatin fragmentation in HeLa cells undergoing apoptosis. This hypothetical
protein, named DRIG based on an acronym specifying its genomic location, could be
a novel factor involved in regulation of DFF40 apoptotic nuclease.

PMID: 21152448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 2;5(11):e13809. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013809.

Profiling gene expression induced by protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR2)
activation in human kidney cells.

Suen JY(1), Gardiner B, Grimmond S, Fairlie DP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

Protease-Activated Receptor-2 (PAR2) has been implicated through genetic knockout
mice with cytokine regulation and arthritis development. Many studies have
associated PAR2 with inflammatory conditions (arthritis, airways inflammation,
IBD) and key events in tumor progression (angiogenesis, metastasis), but they
have relied heavily on the use of single agonists to identify physiological roles
for PAR2. However such probes are now known not to be highly selective for PAR2, 
and thus precisely what PAR2 does and what mechanisms of downstream regulation
are truly affected remain obscure. Effects of PAR2 activation on gene expression 
in Human Embryonic Kidney cells (HEK293), a commonly studied cell line in PAR2
research, were investigated here by comparing 19,000 human genes for intersecting
up- or down-regulation by both trypsin (an endogenous protease that activates
PAR2) and a PAR2 activating hexapeptide (2f-LIGRLO-NH(2)). Among 2,500 human
genes regulated similarly by both agonists, there were clear associations between
PAR2 activation and cellular metabolism (1,000 genes), the cell cycle, the MAPK
pathway, HDAC and sirtuin enzymes, inflammatory cytokines, and anti-complement
function. PAR-2 activation up-regulated four genes more than 5 fold (DUSP6, WWOX,
AREG, SERPINB2) and down-regulated another six genes more than 3 fold (TXNIP,
RARG, ITGB4, CTSD, MSC and TM4SF15). Both PAR2 and PAR1 activation resulted in
up-regulated expression of several genes (CD44, FOSL1, TNFRSF12A, RAB3A, COPEB,
CORO1C, THBS1, SDC4) known to be important in cancer. This is the first
widespread profiling of specific activation of PAR2 and provides a valuable
platform for better understanding key mechanistic roles of PAR2 in human
physiology. Results clearly support the development of both antagonists and
agonists of human PAR2 as potential disease modifying therapeutic agents.

PMCID: PMC2970545
PMID: 21072196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Oct;6(10):607-11. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.133. Epub
2010 Aug 10.

Novel functions for NF<U+03BA>B: inhibition of bone formation.

Krum SA(1), Chang J, Miranda-Carboni G, Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Orthopaedic Hospital, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, David Geffen
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

NF<U+03BA>B is a family of transcription factors involved in immunity and the normal
functioning of many tissues. It has been well studied in osteoclasts, and new
data indicate an important role for NF<U+03BA>B in the negative regulation of bone
formation. In this article, we discuss how NF<U+03BA>B activation affects osteoblast
function and bone formation. In particular, we describe how reduced NF<U+03BA>B activity
in osteoblasts results in an increase in bone formation via enhanced c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity, which regulates FOSL1 (also known as Fra1)
expression. Furthermore, we discuss how estrogen and NF<U+03BA>B crosstalk in
osteoblasts acts to oppositely regulate bone formation. Future NF<U+03BA>B-targeting
treatments for osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory bone
diseases could lead to increased bone formation concurrent with decreased bone
resorption.

PMCID: PMC3078572
PMID: 20703218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jul 21;10:386. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-386.

Gene expression analysis after receptor tyrosine kinase activation reveals new
potential melanoma proteins.

Teutschbein J(1), Haydn JM, Samans B, Krause M, Eilers M, Schartl M, Meierjohann 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Wurzburg,
Wurzburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Melanoma is an aggressive tumor with increasing incidence. To develop
accurate prognostic markers and targeted therapies, changes leading to malignant 
transformation of melanocytes need to be understood. In the Xiphophorus melanoma 
model system, a mutated version of the EGF receptor Xmrk (Xiphophorus melanoma
receptor kinase) triggers melanomagenesis. Cellular events downstream of Xmrk,
such as the activation of Akt, Ras, B-Raf or Stat5, were also shown to play a
role in human melanomagenesis. This makes the elucidation of Xmrk downstream
targets a useful method for identifying processes involved in melanoma formation.
METHODS: Here, we analyzed Xmrk-induced gene expression using a microarray
approach. Several highly expressed genes were confirmed by realtime PCR, and
pathways responsible for their induction were revealed using small molecule
inhibitors. The expression of these genes was also monitored in human melanoma
cell lines, and the target gene FOSL1 was knocked down by siRNA. Proliferation
and migration of siRNA-treated melanoma cell lines were then investigated.
RESULTS: Genes with the strongest upregulation after receptor activation were
FOS-like antigen 1 (Fosl1), early growth response 1 (Egr1), osteopontin (Opn),
insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (Igfbp3), dual-specificity
phosphatase 4 (Dusp4), and tumor-associated antigen L6 (Taal6). Interestingly,
most genes were blocked in presence of a SRC kinase inhibitor. Importantly, we
found that FOSL1, OPN, IGFBP3, DUSP4, and TAAL6 also exhibited increased
expression levels in human melanoma cell lines compared to human melanocytes.
Knockdown of FOSL1 in human melanoma cell lines reduced their proliferation and
migration.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, the data show that the receptor tyrosine kinase Xmrk is a
useful tool in the identification of target genes that are commonly expressed in 
Xmrk-transgenic melanocytes and melanoma cell lines. The identified molecules
constitute new possible molecular players in melanoma development. Specifically, 
a role of FOSL1 in melanomagenic processes is demonstrated. These data are the
basis for future detailed analyses of the investigated target genes.

PMCID: PMC2912872
PMID: 20663135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Genetika. 2010 Jan;46(1):104-10.

[Expression of the FOSL1 gene in psoriasis and atherosclerosis].

[Article in Russian]

Sobolev VV, Zolotarenko AD, Soboleva AG, Sautin ME, Il'ina SA, Sarkisova MK,
Golukhova EZ, Elkin AM, Bruskin SA, Abdeev RM.

Psoriatic and atherosclerotic plaques were examined using the real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Expression of the FOSL1 gene proved to substantially
increase in both psoriatic lesions of the skin and atherosclerotic lesions of
vessels as compared with nonlesion samples.

PMID: 20198886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Oral Maxillofac Res. 2010 Apr 1;1(1):e4. doi: 10.5037/jomr.2010.1104.
eCollection 2010.

Early effects of p-15 on human bone marrow stem cells.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A(2), Girardi A(2), Farinella F(3), Carinci F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara Italy. (2)Department of
Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna Italy. 
(3)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ferrara, Ferrara Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Peptide-15 (P-15) is an analogue of the cell binding domain of
collagen. P-15 has been shown to facilitate physiological to process in a way
similar to collagen, to serve as anchorage for cells, and to promote the binding,
migration and differentiation of cells. However, how P-15 alters osteoblast
activity to promote bone formation is poorly understood. To study the
osteoinductive properties of peptide P-15, we analyzed the expression levels of
bone related genes in human mesenchymal stem cells treated with this biomaterial.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Using real time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain
Reaction the quantitative expression of specific genes, like transcriptional
factors (RUNX2 and SP7), bone related genes (SPP1, COL1A1, COL3A1, BGLAP, ALPL,
and FOSL1) and mesenchymal stem cells marker (ENG) were examined.
RESULTS: P-15 causes a considerable induction of osteoblast transcriptional
factor like osterix (SP7) and of the bone related genes osteopontin (SPP1) and
osteocalcin (BGLAP). In contrast the expression of endoglin (ENG) was markedly
decreased in stem cells treated with P-15 respect to untreated cells, indicating 
the differentiation effect of this biomaterial on stem cells.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows the effect of P-15 on mesenchymal stem cells
in the early differentiation stages: P-15 is an inducer of osteogenesis on human 
stem cells as indicated by the activation of bone related markers SP7, SPP1 and
BGLAP.The results may allow a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of 
bone regeneration and as a model for comparing other materials with similar
clinical effects.

PMCID: PMC3886042
PMID: 24421960  [PubMed]


84. Oman Med J. 2010 Jan;25(1):26-31. doi: 10.5001/omj.2010.7.

Bio-Oss®acts on Stem cells derived from Peripheral Blood.

Sollazzo V, Palmieri A, Scapoli L, Martinelli M, Girardi A, Alviano F, Pellati A,
Perrotti V, Carinci F.

OBJECTIVES: This study aims to study how Bio-Oss® can induce osteoblast
differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells, the expression levels of bone related 
genes and mesenchymal stem cells markers using real time Reverse
Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction.
METHODS: PB-hMSCs stem preparations were obtained for gradient centrifugation
from peripheral blood of healthy anonymous volunteers, using the Acuspin
System-Histopaque 1077. The samples were then cultured for 7 days for RNA
processing, and the expression was quantified using real time PCR.
RESULTS: Bio-Oss® caused an induction of osteoblast transcriptional factor like
RUNX2 and of bone related genes; SPP1 and FOSL1. In contrast, the expression of
ENG was significantly decreased in stem cells treated with Bio-Oss® with respect 
to untreated cells, indicating the differentiation effect of this biomaterial on 
stem cells.
CONCLUSION: The results obtained can be relevant to enhance the understanding of 
the molecular mechanism of bone regeneration and can act as a model for comparing
other materials with similar clinical effects.

PMCID: PMC3215382
PMID: 22125694  [PubMed]


85. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2010 Winter;7(1):28-34.

PerioGlas® Acts on Human Stem Cells Isolated from Peripheral Blood.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A, Scapoli L, Martinelli M, Girardi A, Pezzetti F,
Morselli P, Farinella F, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Assistant Professor, Orthopedic Clinic, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy.

BACKGROUND: PerioGlas® (PG) is an alloplastic material used for grafting
periodontal osseous defects since 1995. In animal models, it has been proven that
PG achieves histologically good repair of sur-gically created defects. In
clinical trials, PG was effective as an adjunct to conventional surgery in the
treatment of intrabony defects. Because the molecular events due to PG that are
able to alter osteob-last activity to promote bone formation are poorly
understood, we investigated the expression of os-teoblastic related genes in
mesenchymal stem cells exposed to PG.
METHODS: The expression levels of bone related genes like RUNX2, SP7, SPP1,
COL1A1, COL3A1, BGLAP, ALPL, and FOSL1 and mesenchymal stem cells marker (CD105) 
were analyzed, using real time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Pearson's chi-square (<U+03C7>(2)) test was used to detect markers with significant
differences in gene expression.
RESULTS: PG caused induction of osteoblast transcriptional factor (like RUNX2),
bone related genes osteopontin (SPP1), osteocalcin (BGLAP) and alkaline
phosphatase (ALPL). All had statistical sig-nificant P values (< 0.05).
CONCLUSION: PG has a differentiation effect on mesenchymal stem cells derived
from peripheral blood. The obtained results can be relevant to better
understanding of the molecular mechanism of bone regeneration and as a model for 
comparing other materials with similar clinical effects.

PMCID: PMC3065339
PMID: 21448444  [PubMed]


86. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2009 Nov-Dec;23(6):406-18. doi: 10.1002/jbt.20304.

Oncogene expression profiles in K6/ODC mouse skin and papillomas following a
chronic exposure to monomethylarsonous acid.

Delker DA(1), Geter DR, Roop BC, Ward WO, Ahlborn GJ, Allen JW, Nelson GM, Ouyang
M, Welsh W, Chen Y, O'Brien T, Kitchin KT.

Author information: 
(1)National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Office of
Research and Development Environmental Carcinogenesis Division, United States
Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
don.delker@hsc.utah.edu

We have previously observed that a chronic drinking water exposure to
monomethylarsonous acid [MMA(III)], a cellular metabolite of inorganic arsenic,
increases tumor frequency in the skin of keratin VI/ornithine decarboxylase
(K6/ODC) transgenic mice. To characterize gene expression profiles predictive of 
MMA(III) exposure and mode of action of carcinogenesis, skin and papilloma RNA
was isolated from K6/ODC mice administered 0, 10, 50, and 100 ppm MMA(III) in
their drinking water for 26 weeks. Following RNA processing, the resulting cRNA
samples were hybridized to Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430A 2.0 GeneChips(R).
Micoarray data were normalized using MAS 5.0 software, and statistically
significant genes were determined using a regularized t-test. Significant changes
in bZIP transcription factors, MAP kinase signaling, chromatin remodeling, and
lipid metabolism gene transcripts were observed following MMA(III) exposure as
determined using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery 2.1 (DAVID) (Dennis et al., Genome Biol 2003;4(5):P3). MMA(III) also
caused dose-dependent changes in multiple Rho guanine nucleotide triphosphatase
(GTPase) and cell cycle related genes as determined by linear regression
analyses. Observed increases in transcript abundance of Fosl1, Myc, and Rac1
oncogenes in mouse skin support previous reports on the inducibility of these
oncogenes in response to arsenic and support the relevance of these genomic
changes in skin tumor induction in the K6/ODC mouse model.

PMID: 20024957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell. 2009 Sep 18;138(6):1122-36. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.07.031.

Histone crosstalk between H3S10ph and H4K16ac generates a histone code that
mediates transcription elongation.

Zippo A(1), Serafini R, Rocchigiani M, Pennacchini S, Krepelova A, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Molecolare Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.

The phosphorylation of the serine 10 at histone H3 has been shown to be important
for transcriptional activation. Here, we report the molecular mechanism through
which H3S10ph triggers transcript elongation of the FOSL1 gene. Serum stimulation
induces the PIM1 kinase to phosphorylate the preacetylated histone H3 at the
FOSL1 enhancer. The adaptor protein 14-3-3 binds the phosphorylated nucleosome
and recruits the histone acetyltransferase MOF, which triggers the acetylation of
histone H4 at lysine 16 (H4K16ac). This histone crosstalk generates the
nucleosomal recognition code composed of H3K9acS10ph/H4K16ac determining a
nucleosome platform for the bromodomain protein BRD4 binding. The recruitment of 
the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb) via BRD4 induces the
release of the promoter-proximal paused RNA polymerase II and the increase of its
processivity. Thus, the single phosphorylation H3S10ph at the FOSL1 enhancer
triggers a cascade of events which activate transcriptional elongation.

PMID: 19766566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Anticancer Drugs. 2009 Jan;20(1):51-8. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e32831845e1.

Gene expression changes during the development of estrogen-independent and
antiestrogen-resistant growth in breast cancer cell culture models.

Pennanen PT(1), Sarvilinna NS, Ylikomi TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Medical School, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland. pasi.pennanen@uta.fi

Erratum in
    Anticancer Drugs. 2009 Nov;20(10):956.

We have established estrogen-independent and antiestrogen-resistant cell lines
from hormone-dependent MCF-7 breast cancer cells by long-term culture in the
absence of estrogen, or in the presence of antiestrogen toremifene, respectively.
By using a cDNA microarray we compared gene expression profiles among
estrogen-independent, antiestrogen-resistant and long-term estrogen-treated MCF-7
cells. We also determined how the expression of the differentially expressed
genes has developed during the long-term culture of the cell lines. Of the
screened 1176 cancer-related genes, FOSL1, TIMP1, L1CAM, GDF15, and MYBL2 were
found to be differentially expressed between the cell lines. A change in FOSL1
and TIMP1 expression could be attributed to the development of antiestrogen
resistance, whereas induced L1CAM expression was implicated in the development of
estrogen-independent growth of the cells. Estrogen regulated genes GDF15 and
L1CAM became regulated by toremifene in the later passage number of
toremifene-resistant cells, which might be an indication of the developed
estrogen-agonistic activity of toremifene in these cells. Our findings suggest a 
pattern where the hormone-responsive cancer cells, which survive E2 deprivation
and/or antiestrogen treatment, first acquire necessary changes in gene expression
for transition to maximal growth in the new hormonal environment. Then, after
prolonged treatment with antiestrogen, the antiestrogen-resistant cells may
eventually generate an E2-agonistic response to antiestrogen, probably acquiring 
additional growth advantage.

PMID: 19343000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Neurosurg. 2009 Aug;111(2):211-8. doi: 10.3171/2008.9.JNS08551.

Candidate genes for sensitivity and resistance of human glioblastoma multiforme
cell lines to erlotinib. Laboratory investigation.

Halatsch ME(1), Löw S, Mursch K, Hielscher T, Schmidt U, Unterberg A, Vougioukas 
VI, Feuerhake F.

Author information: 
(1)Neurochirurgische Klinik und Poliklinik, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität,
Heidelberg, Germany. halatsch@aol.com

OBJECT: The authors have previously reported that erlotinib, an EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, exerts widely variable antiproliferative effects on 9 human
glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) cell lines in vitro and in vivo. These effects were
independent of EGFR baseline expression levels, raising the possibility that more
complex genetic properties form the molecular basis of the erlotinib-sensitive
and erlotinib-resistant GBM phenotypes. The aim of the present study was to
determine candidate genes for mediating the cellular response of human GBMs to
erlotinib.
METHODS: Complementary RNA obtained in cell lines selected to represent the
sensitive, somewhat responsive, and resistant phenotypes were hybridized to
CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarrays.
RESULTS: Expression analysis of 814 prospectively selected genes involved in
major proliferation and apoptosis signaling pathways identified 19 genes whose
expression significantly correlated with phenotype. Functional annotation
analysis revealed that 2 genes (DUSP4 and STAT1) were significantly associated
with sensitivity to erlotinib, and 10 genes (CACNG4, FGFR4, HSPA1B, HSPB1,
NFATC1, NTRK1, RAC1, SMO, TCF7L1, and TGFB3) were associated with resistance to
erlotinib. Moreover, 5 genes (BDNF, CARD6, FOSL1, HSPA9B, and MYC) involved in
antiapoptotic pathways were unexpectedly found to be associated with sensitivity.
Gene expressions were confirmed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on an analysis of gene expressions in cell lines with
sensitive, somewhat responsive, and resistant phenotypes, the authors propose
candidate genes for GBM response to erlotinib. The 10 gene candidates for
conferring GBM resistance to erlotinib may represent therapeutic targets for
enhancing the efficacy of erlotinib against GBMs. Five additional genes warrant
further investigation into their role as putative cotargets of erlotinib.

PMID: 19301967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009 Feb;32(2):203-8.

Evaluation of the skin irritation using a DNA microarray on a reconstructed human
epidermal model.

Niwa M(1), Nagai K, Oike H, Kobori M.

Author information: 
(1)Katakura Chikkarin Co., Ltd, Ibaraki, Japan.

To avoid the need to use animals to test the skin irritancy potential of
chemicals and cosmetics, it is important to establish an in vitro method based on
the reconstructed human epidermal model. To evaluate skin irritancy efficiently
and sensitively, we determined the gene expression induced by a topically-applied
mild irritant sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) in a reconstructed human epidermal
model LabCyte EPI-MODEL (LabCyte) using a DNA microarray carrying genes that were
related to inflammation, immunity, stress and housekeeping. The expression and
secretion of IL-1alpha in reconstructed human epidermal culture is known to be
induced by irritation. We detected the induction of IL-1alpha expression and its 
secretion into the cell culture medium by treatment with 0.075% SDS for 18 h in
LabCyte culture using DNA microarray, quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and ELISA. DNA microarray analysis indicated
that the expression of 10 of the 205 genes carried on the DNA microarray was
significantly induced in a LabCyte culture by 0.05% or 0.075% SDS irritation for 
18 h. RT-PCR analysis confirmed that SDS treatment significantly induced the
expressions of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RN), FOS-like antigen 1
(FOSL1), heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A (HSPA1) and myeloid differentiation primary
response gene (88) (MYD88), as well as the known marker genes for irritation
IL-1beta and IL-8 in a LabCyte culture. Our results showed that a DNA microarray 
is a useful tool for efficiently evaluating mild skin irritation using a
reconstructed human epidermal model.

PMID: 19182376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Br J Cancer. 2008 Oct 21;99(8):1330-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604565. Epub 2008 Sep
30.

Identification of novel neuroendocrine-specific tumour genes.

Hofsli E(1), Wheeler TE, Langaas M, Laegreid A, Thommesen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
eva.hofsli@stolav.no

Neuroendocrine tumours (NETs) comprise a heterogenous group of malignancies with 
an often unpredictable course, and with limited treatment options. Thus, new
diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic markers are needed. To shed new lights
into the biology of NETs, we have by cDNA transcript profiling, sought to
identify genes that are either up- or downregulated in NE as compared with non-NE
tumour cells. A panel of six NET and four non-NET cell lines were examined, and
out of 12 743 genes examined, we studied in detail the 200 most significantly
differentially expressed genes in the comparison. In addition to potential new
diagnostic markers (NEFM, CLDN4, PEROX2), the results point to genes that may be 
involved in the tumorigenesis (BEX1, TMEPAI, FOSL1, RAB32), and in the processes 
of invasion, progression and metastasis (MME, STAT3, DCBLD2) of NETs.
Verification by real time qRT-PCR showed a high degree of consistency to the
microarray results. Furthermore, the protein expression of some of the genes were
examined. The results of our study has opened a window to new areas of research, 
by uncovering new candidate genes and proteins to be further investigated in the 
search for new prognostic, predictive, and therapeutic markers in NETs.

PMCID: PMC2570516
PMID: 18827820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cytokine. 2008 May;42(2):205-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2008.02.001. Epub 2008 Mar
20.

Cigarette smoke extract induced cytokine and chemokine gene expression changes in
COPD macrophages.

Kent L(1), Smyth L, Clayton C, Scott L, Cook T, Stephens R, Fox S, Hext P, Farrow
S, Singh D.

Author information: 
(1)Education and Research Centre, South Manchester University Hospitals
Trust/University of Manchester, Wythenshawe Hospital, Southmoor Road, Manchester 
M23 9LT, UK. lauren_m_kent@yahoo.co.uk

Macrophages are key inflammatory cells in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). The transcriptional regulation of inflammatory signalling pathways by
cigarette smoke (CS) in COPD macrophages is not well understood. We have studied 
the effects of acute CS exposure on COPD macrophage cytokine, chemokine and
signal transduction gene expression profiles. Monocyte derived macrophages (MDMs)
from whole blood from patients with COPD (n=6) were stimulated with 1%, 10% and
25% CS extract (CSE) for 6h for microarray and quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (Q-PCR) analysis. We observed a CSE dose dependant increase in the
numbers of significantly regulated genes; 24, 340 and 627 genes at 1%, 10% and
25% CSE, respectively. IL-8 mRNA levels were up-regulated by 10% CSE (2.25-fold
increase, 95% CI 1.28-4.00). In contrast a range of other cytokines and
chemokines were down-regulated at both 10% and 25% CSE, including IL-1beta, -6,
-10 and -18, chemokine ligands CCL-2, -3, -4, -5, -8, -15, -20 and CXCL-1, -2 and
-10. Q-PCR and microarray data were highly correlated (r=0.95, p=0.0001).
NF-kappaB component p50 and IkappaBalpha expression were suppressed by CSE, while
there was up-regulation of the AP-1 components c-Jun, FOSL1 and FOSL2. Acute CSE 
exposure decreased macrophage inflammatory gene expression, with the exception of
increased IL-8. There was diverse regulation of key inflammatory signal pathway
genes. The effects of acute CS exposure appear to encompass both up-regulation of
chemotaxis mechanisms through IL-8, but also down-regulation of innate immunity.

PMID: 18358739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Hyperthermia. 2007 Sep;23(6):529-37.

Identification of genes responsive to paeoniflorin, a heat shock protein-inducing
compound, in human leukemia U937 cells.

Salunga TL(1), Tabuchi Y, Takasaki I, Feril LB Jr, Zhao QL, Ohtsuka K, Tsuneyama 
K, Kondo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

PURPOSE AND BACKGROUND: Paeoniflorin (PF) isolated from peony root (Paeoniae
radix) has been used as a herbal medicine in East Asia for its anti-allergic,
anti-inflammatory, and immunoregulatory effects. PF is known to cause apoptosis
and to be a chemical heat shock protein (HSP) inducer. With this information, the
effects on the gene expression in human leukemia U937 cells treated with PF were 
investigated.
METHODS: U937 cells, a human myelomonocytic cell line, were treated with PF at
different concentrations (0-640 microg/ml). Expression level of Hsp70 was
monitored by Western blotting. Gene expression was evaluated using high-density
oligonucleotide microarrays and computational gene expression analysis tools and 
the results were verified by real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: Although cell viability was not affected after PF treatment at a high
concentration of 640 microg/ml, PF treatment (80-640 microg/ml) significantly
elevated Hsp70 expression in a concentration-dependent manner. When the cells
were treated with PF (160 microg/ml; 30 min), 35 up-regulated and 29
down-regulated genes were identified. Among the differentially expressed genes, a
significant genetic network containing CDC2, FOSL1 and EGR1 was associated with
biological functions such as cell death, gene expression or cellular growth and
proliferation.
CONCLUSION: The present results indicate that PF affects the expression of many
genes including Hsp70 and will provide a better understanding on the molecular
mechanism of action of this compound in inducing HSPs in cells.

PMID: 17952766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;9(8):932-44. Epub 2007 Jul 22.

PIM1-dependent phosphorylation of histone H3 at serine 10 is required for
MYC-dependent transcriptional activation and oncogenic transformation.

Zippo A(1), De Robertis A, Serafini R, Oliviero S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Molecolare Università di Siena, Via Fiorentina 1,
53100 Siena, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;9(8):873-5.

The serine/threonine kinase human Pim1 (hereafter PIM1) cooperates with human
c-Myc (hereafter MYC) in cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis. However, the
nature of this cooperation is still unknown. Here we show that, after stimulation
with growth factor, PIM1 forms a complex with the dimer of MYC with MAX
(Myc-associated factor X) via the MYC BoxII (MBII) domain. MYC recruits PIM1 to
the E boxes of the MYC-target genes FOSL1 (FRA-1) and ID2, and PIM1
phosphorylates serine 10 of histone H3 (H3S10) on the nucleosome at the
MYC-binding sites, contributing to their transcriptional activation. MYC and PIM1
colocalize at sites of active transcription, and expression profile analysis
revealed that PIM1 contributes to the regulation of 20% of the MYC-regulated
genes. Moreover, PIM1-dependent H3S10 phosphorylation contributes to MYC
transforming capacity. These results establish a new function for PIM1 as a MYC
cofactor that phosphorylates the chromatin at MYC-target loci and suggest that
nucleosome phosphorylation, at E boxes, contributes to MYC-dependent
transcriptional activation and cellular transformation.

PMID: 17643117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2007 Apr;27(4):512-4.

[Gene expression profiles of K562 cells treated with total saponin of Panax
ginseng].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou Y(1), Ma WL, Qu RM, Xiang Z, Li CZ, Zheng WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou
510515, China. lzhouye@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of the total saponin of Panax ginseng (TSPG)
on gene expression profile of K562 cells using microarray technique.
METHODS: The total RNA were extracted and purified from K562 cells treated by 200
microg/ml TSPG for 3 days, and untreated K562 cells cultured in parallel served
as the control. cRNAs were synthesized and labeled with Cy3 and Cy5 respectively.
The labeled cRNA fragments were hybridized with Agilent human 1B 60 mer
oligonucleotide microarray, which was then scanned to reveal the changes of gene 
expression profile in relation to TSPG treatment.
RESULTS: Totally 362 differentially expressed genes were identified in
TSPG-treated K562 cells, including 20 up-regulated ones (consisting of
metabolism-associated genes, signal transduction-associated genes and cell
receptor-associated genes etc) and 342 down-regulated ones (consisting of
immunity and defense-associated genes, DNA-binding and transcription genes,
metabolism-associated genes and cell cycle-associated genes etc). Changes in
expressions of FOSL1, E2F2, CCNE2 and ODZ1 were confirmed by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: TSPG may induce changes in the gene expression profile in k562 cells
possibly relevant to the anti-tumor mechanism of TSPG.

PMID: 17545047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neuron. 2007 Feb 1;53(3):387-97.

NMDA-receptor activation induces calpain-mediated beta-catenin cleavages for
triggering gene expression.

Abe K(1), Takeichi M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2007 Feb 1;53(3):317-9.

The canonical Wnt-beta-catenin signaling pathway is important for a variety of
developmental phenomena as well as for carcinogenesis. Here, we show that, in
hippocampal neurons, NMDA-receptor-dependent activation of calpain induced the
cleavage of beta-catenin at the N terminus, generating stable, truncated forms.
These beta-catenin fragments accumulated in the nucleus and induced
Tcf/Lef-dependent gene transcription. We identified Fosl1, one of the
immediate-early genes, as a target of this signaling pathway. In addition,
exploratory behavior by mice resulted in a similar cleavage of beta-catenin, as
well as activation of the Tcf signaling pathway, in hippocampal neurons. Both
beta-catenin cleavage and Tcf-dependent gene transcription were suppressed by
calpain inhibitors. These findings reveal another pathway for
beta-catenin-dependent signaling, in addition to the canonical Wnt-beta-catenin
pathway, and suggest that this other pathway could play an important role in
activity-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 17270735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Gene. 2006 Sep 1;379:1-11. Epub 2006 May 6.

Fra-1 a target for cancer prevention or intervention.

Young MR(1), Colburn NH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Prevention, National Cancer Institute-Frederick,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA. youngm@ncifcrf.gov

The transcription factor activator protein-1 (AP-1) has been implicated as a
driver of carcinogenesis since its original characterization. Oncogenic
transcription factors like AP-1 are becoming new targets for cancer intervention.
Inhibitors of AP-1 have been shown to block tumor promotion, transformation,
progression and invasion. The Fos related antigen-1 (Fra-1) is activated in
multiple cancers and gene ablation can suppress the invasive phenotypes of many
tumor cell lines. This review focuses on the regulation of fosl1 expression,
stabilization and activation of the Fra-1 polypeptide and on Fra-1-mediated
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16784822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Clin Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;12(10):3222-8.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein G shows tumor suppressive effect against 
oral squamous cell carcinoma cells.

Shin KH(1), Kang MK, Kim RH, Christensen R, Park NH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Dentistry, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095-1668, USA.

PURPOSE: Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNP) are nucleic acid
binding proteins involved in RNA processing. We found that hnRNP G is expressed
in normal human oral epithelial cells while frequently not found in the cells
derived from human oral squamous cell carcinomas (HOSCC). The current study was
designed to test the hypothesis that hnRNP G is a tumor suppressor.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated the expression levels of hnRNP G protein in 
normal, precancerous, and malignant oral tissues by in situ immunohistochemistry.
In addition, wild-type or mutant hnRNP G was ectopically overexpressed in HOSCC
cells and their effects on cellular replication kinetics, colonogenic efficiency,
anchorage-independent growth, and in vivo tumorigenicity were determined.
RESULTS: In situ immunohistochemical staining showed robust presence of hnRNP G
in the basal cell layers of normal oral epithelium but the level of its staining 
was markedly reduced in dysplastic or cancerous tissues. Ectopic expression of
wild-type hnRNP G in cancer cells lacking hnRNP G expression or containing mutant
hnRNP G resulted in severe retardation of proliferation, reduction of colonogenic
efficiency, loss of anchorage-independent growth, and reduction of in vivo
tumorigenicity in immunocompromised mice. In addition, hnRNP G overexpression led
to up-regulation of the expression of TXNIP, a cell cycle inhibitory gene, and
significantly reduced the expression of the genes that promote cellular
proliferation, such as EGR1, JUND, JUNB, FOS, FOSL1, ROS, and KIT.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that hnRNP G is a tumor suppressor against
HOSCC but its mechanisms of action remain to be further investigated.

PMID: 16707624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Cancer. 2006 Sep 15;119(6):1276-84.

Microarray analyses in bladder cancer cells: inhibition of hTERT expression
down-regulates EGFR.

Kraemer K(1), Schmidt U, Fuessel S, Herr A, Wirth MP, Meye A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.

The human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) contributes to the immortal
phenotype of the majority of cancers. Targeting hTERT by transfection with
antisense oligonucleotides (AS-ODNs) induced immediate growth inhibition in human
bladder cancer (BCa) cells. The molecular basis of the antiproliferative capacity
of hTERT AS-ODNs was investigated by oligonucleotide microarray analyses and was 
compared to effects caused by siRNA-mediated knock-down of hTERT in EJ28 BCa
cells. Two different AS-ODNs -- both down-regulated the expression of hTERT --
changed the expression of different genes mainly involved in stress response
(including EGR1, ATF3 and GDF15), but without an association to telomerase
function. This indicates that the immediate growth inhibition was caused, at
least in part, by off-target effects. In comparison to that the blockade of the
expression of hTERT using 2 different siRNAs was accompanied by the
down-regulation of the oncogenes FOS-like antigen 1 (FOSL1) and epidermal growth 
factor receptor (EGFR), known to be overexpressed in BCa. We show here for the
first time that repression of the hTERT transcript number decreased the
expression of EGFR both at the mRNA and protein levels, suggesting a potential
new function of hTERT in the regulation of EGFR-stimulated proliferation.
Furthermore, the suppression of hTERT by siRNAs caused an enhancement of the
antiproliferative capacity of the chemotherapeutics mitomycin C and cisplatin.
The results presented herein may support the hypothesis that hTERT promotes the
growth of tumor cells by mechanisms independent from telomere lengthening. The
detailed clarification of these processes will shed light on the question,
whether telomerase inhibitors might constitute suitable anticancer tools.

PMID: 16615118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2005 Sep 1;61(Pt 9):812-7. Epub
2005 Aug 31.

The structure at 2.5 A resolution of human basophilic leukemia-expressed protein 
BLES03.

Bitto E(1), Bingman CA, Robinson H, Allard ST, Wesenberg GE, Phillips GN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Eukaryotic Structural Genomics, Department of Biochemistry,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

The crystal structure of the human basophilic leukemia-expressed protein (BLES03,
p5326, Hs.433573) was determined by single-wavelength anomalous diffraction and
refined to an R factor of 18.8% (Rfree = 24.5%) at 2.5 A resolution. BLES03 shows
no detectable sequence similarity to any functionally characterized proteins
using state-of-the-art sequence-comparison tools. The structure of BLES03 adopts 
a fold similar to that of eukaryotic transcription initiation factor 4E (eIF4E), 
a protein involved in the recognition of the cap structure of eukaryotic mRNA. In
addition to fold similarity, the electrostatic surface potentials of BLES03 and
eIF4E show a clear conservation of basic and acidic patches. In the crystal
lattice, the acidic amino-terminal helices of BLES03 monomers are bound within
the basic cavity of symmetry-related monomers in a manner analogous to the
binding of mRNA by eIF4E. Interestingly, the gene locus encoding BLES03 is
located between genes encoding the proteins DRAP1 and FOSL1, both of which are
involved in transcription initiation. It is hypothesized that BLES03 itself may
be involved in a biochemical process that requires recognition of nucleic acids.

PMCID: PMC1978119
PMID: 16511166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Respir Res. 2006 Feb 21;7:32.

Lung fibroblasts from patients with emphysema show markers of senescence in
vitro.

Müller KC(1), Welker L, Paasch K, Feindt B, Erpenbeck VJ, Hohlfeld JM, Krug N,
Nakashima M, Branscheid D, Magnussen H, Jörres RA, Holz O.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Grosshansdorf, Center for Pneumology and Thoracic Surgery, D-22927
Grosshansdorf, Germany. kc.mueller@pulmoresearch.de

BACKGROUND: The loss of alveolar walls is a hallmark of emphysema. As fibroblasts
play an important role in the maintenance of alveolar structure, a change in
fibroblast phenotype could be involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. In a 
previous study we found a reduced in vitro proliferation rate and number of
population doublings of parenchymal lung fibroblasts from patients with emphysema
and we hypothesized that these findings could be related to a premature cellular 
aging of these cells. In this study, we therefore compared cellular senescence
markers and expression of respective genes between lung fibroblasts from patients
with emphysema and control patients without COPD.
METHODS: Primary lung fibroblasts were obtained from 13 patients with moderate to
severe lung emphysema (E) and 15 controls (C) undergoing surgery for lung tumor
resection or volume reduction (n = 2). Fibroblasts (8E/9C) were stained for
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase (SA-beta-Gal). In independent cultures, 
DNA from lung fibroblasts (7E/8C) was assessed for mean telomere length. Two
exploratory 12 k cDNA microarrays were used to assess gene expression in pooled
fibroblasts (3E/3C). Subsequently, expression of selected genes was evaluated by 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) in fibroblasts of individual patients (10E/9C) and
protein concentration was analyzed in the cell culture supernatant.
RESULTS: The median (quartiles) percentage of fibroblasts positive for
SA-beta-Gal was 4.4 (3.2;4.7) % in controls and 16.0 (10.0;24.8) % in emphysema
(p = 0.001), while telomere length was not different. Among the candidates for
differentially expressed genes in the array (factor > or = 3), 15 were
upregulated and 121 downregulated in emphysema. qPCR confirmed the upregulation
of insulin-like growth factor-binding protein (IGFBP)-3 and IGFBP-rP1 (p = 0.029,
p = 0.0002), while expression of IGFBP-5, -rP2 (CTGF), -rP4 (Cyr61), FOSL1,
LOXL2, OAZ1 and CDK4 was not different between groups. In line with the gene
expression we found increased cell culture supernatant concentrations of IGFBP-3 
(p = 0.006) in emphysema.
CONCLUSION: These data support the hypothesis that premature aging of lung
fibroblasts occurs in emphysema, via a telomere-independent mechanism. The
upregulation of the senescence-associated IGFBP-3 and -rP1 in emphysema suggests 
that inhibition of the action of insulin and insulin-like growth factors could be
involved in the reduced in vitro-proliferation rate.

PMCID: PMC1435750
PMID: 16504044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):867-74.

Differential gene expression analysis reveals generation of an autocrine loop by 
a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor in glioma cells.

Ramnarain DB(1), Park S, Lee DY, Hatanpaa KJ, Scoggin SO, Otu H, Libermann TA,
Raisanen JM, Ashfaq R, Wong ET, Wu J, Elliott R, Habib AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 6001
Forest Park ND4.136, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene is commonly amplified and
rearranged in glioblastoma multiforme leading to overexpression of wild-type and 
mutant EGFRs. Expression of wild-type EGFR ligands, such as transforming growth
factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) or heparin-binding EGF (HB-EGF), is also often increased
in gliomas resulting in an autocrine loop that contributes to the growth autonomy
of glioma cells. Glioblastoma multiformes express a characteristic EGFR mutant
(EGFRvIII, de 2-7) that does not bind ligand, signals constitutively, and is more
tumorigenic than the wild-type receptor. However, the downstream signals that
mediate this increased tumorigenicity are not well understood. We hypothesized
that signals induced specifically by EGFRvIII and not the wild-type receptor are 
more likely to mediate its increased tumorigenic activity and examined the gene
expression profiles resulting from inducible expression of comparable levels of
either wild-type EGFR or EGFRvIII in a U251-MG glioma cell line. Expression of
EGFRvIII resulted in specific up-regulation of a small group of genes.
Remarkably, all these genes, which include TGFA, HB-EGF, EPHA2, IL8, MAP4K4,
FOSL1, EMP1, and DUSP6, influence signaling pathways known to play a key role in 
oncogenesis and function in interconnected networks. Increased expression of
EGFRvIII-induced genes was validated by real-time PCR. The mutant receptor does
not bind ligand, and EGFRvIII-induced expression of TGF-alpha and HB-EGF suggests
that EGFRvIII plays a role in generating an autocrine loop using the wild-type
EGFR in glioma. It also raises the possibility that EGFRvIII may signal, at least
in part, through the wild-type receptor. Indeed, we show that inhibiting the
activity of HB-EGF, a potent mitogen, with neutralizing antibodies reduces cell
proliferation induced by expression of EGFRvIII. This suggests that the
EGFRvIII-HB-EGF-wild-type EGFR autocrine loop plays an important role in signal
transduction by EGFRvIII in glioma cells. We also show by immunohistochemistry
that HB-EGF expression correlates with the presence of EGFRvIII in glioblastoma
multiforme. Thus, our study provides a new insight into oncogenic signaling by
EGFRvIII and improves our understanding of how autocrine loops are generated in
glioma.

PMID: 16424019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Mar 14;11(10):1463-72.

Identify lymphatic metastasis-associated genes in mouse hepatocarcinoma cell
lines using gene chip.

Song B(1), Tang JW, Wang B, Cui XN, Hou L, Sun L, Mao LM, Zhou CH, Du Y, Wang LH,
Wang HX, Zheng RS, Sun L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116027, Liaoning
Province, China.

AIM: In order to obtain lymphogenous metastasis-associated genes, we compared the
transcriptional profiles of mouse hepatocarcinoma cell lines Hca-F with highly
lymphatic metastasis potential and Hca-P with low lymphatic metastasis potential.
METHODS: Total RNA was isolated from Hca-F and Hca-P cells and synthesized into
double-stranded cDNA. In vitro transcription double-stranded cDNA was labeled
with biotin (i.e. biotin-labeled cRNA, used as the probe). The cRNA probes
hybridized with Affymetrix GeneChip(r) MOE430A (containing 22 690 transcripts,
including 14 500 known mouse genes and 4 371 ESTs) respectively and the signals
were scanned by the GeneArray Scanner. The results were then analyzed by
bioinformatics.
RESULTS: Out of the 14 500 known genes investigated, 110 (0.8%) were up regulated
at least 2(3) fold. Among the total 4 371 ESTs, 17 ESTs (0.4%) (data were not
presented) were up regulated at least 2(3) fold. According to the Gene Ontology
and TreeView analysis, the 110 genes were further classified into two groups:
differential biological process profile and molecular function profile.
CONCLUSION: Using high-throughput gene chip method, a large number of genes and
their cellular functions about angiogenesis, cell adhesion, signal transduction, 
cell motility, transport, microtubule-based process, cytoskeleton organization
and biogenesis, cell cycle, transcription, chaperone activity, motor activity,
protein kinase activity, receptor binding and protein binding might be involved
in the process of lymphatic metastasis and deserve to be used as potential
candidates for further investigation. Cyclin D1, Fosl1, Hsp47, EGFR and AR, and
Cav-1 are selected as the possible candidate genes of the metastatic phenotype,
which need to be validated in later experiments. ESTs (data were not presented)
might indicate novel genes associated with lymphatic metastasis. Validating the
function of these genes is helpful to identify the key or candidate gene/pathway 
responsible for lymphatic metastasis, which might be used as the diagnostic
markers and the therapeutic targets for lymphatic metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4305688
PMID: 15770722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):709-14.

Establishment and gene analysis of a cisplatin-resistant cell line, Sa-3R,
derived from oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Nakatani K(1), Nakamura M, Uzawa K, Wada T, Seki N, Tanzawa H, Fujita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, Kimiidera 811-1, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Cisplatin (CDDP) is widely used for chemotherapy of many malignancies, especially
of oral squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). However, because the mechanism of
resistance to CDDP is unclear, we established a CDDP-resistant cell line, Sa-3R, 
from a CDDP-sensitive cell line, Sa-3, which was derived from moderately
differentiated SCC of the lower gingiva. The 3-(3,4-dimethyl-thiazol-2-yl)
2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay indicated that Sa-3R has 7.5-fold greater
resistance to CDDP than Sa-3. Comparing gene expression levels in the cell lines 
using an in-house cDNA microarray, which represented 2,201 oral disease origin
genes, many differentially expressed genes were identified. The ATP-binding
cassette transporter genes (MDR-1, MRP-1, and MRP-2), and FANCONI, GRP58,
FLJ12089, and SPINT-2 were up-regulated, whereas FOSL1, MRPS27, and PGK-1 were
down-regulated. These results were confirmed by semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The Sa-3/Sa-3R cell lines could be
useful to identify the candidates responsible for the mechanism of
CDDP-resistance and the up- or down-regulated genes identified by the gene
expression profiles in the Sa-3R cell line may be, in part, associated with the
mechanism.

PMID: 15756446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Pancreas. 2005 Mar;30(2):158-67.

RPL38, FOSL1, and UPP1 are predominantly expressed in the pancreatic ductal
epithelium.

Sahin F(1), Qiu W, Wilentz RE, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Grosmark A, Su GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Establishing more effective treatment of pancreatic cancer requires
an understanding of the molecular events leading to the onset and progression of 
this disease. The biology of tumorigenesis may be better understood if cell
type-specific genes in the pancreas are more recognized. This recognition may be 
as important as discovering a disease-responsible gene. Identification of a
ductal epithelium-specific gene can contribute not only to our knowledge of
pancreatic tumorigenesis, tumor marker discovery, and effective drug targeting
but also is crucial for making a reliable animal model.
METHODS: We used the x-Profiler engine online to compare the SAGE (Serial
Analysis of Gene Expression) libraries derived from 2 short-term cultures of
normal human ductal epithelial cells from the pancreas against 34 other SAGE
libraries generated from other normal human tissues to identify the best
candidate gene specific for the ductal epithelium of the pancreas.
RESULTS: We identified 3 genes, ribosomal protein L38 (RPL38), uridine
phosphorylase (UPP1), and FOS-like antigen-1 (FOSL1), predominantly expressed in 
the pancreatic ductal epithelium. The expression patterns of these 3 genes were
confirmed by virtual Northern analysis, semi-quantitative RT-PCR, and in situ
hybridization.
CONCLUSION: Although the expressions of these 3 genes are not completely
restricted to the ductal epithelium of the pancreas, we showed that they have
more specific expression patterns than CK19 and MUC1. We also demonstrated that
all 3 genes are highly expressed in a panel of pancreatic cancer cell lines and
can potentially be useful in tumor targeting or as tumor markers.

PMCID: PMC1373783
PMID: 15714138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Blood. 2003 Dec 15;102(13):4608-17. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Reduced expression of NFAT-associated genes in UCB versus adult CD4+ T
lymphocytes during primary stimulation.

Kaminski BA(1), Kadereit S, Miller RE, Leahy P, Stein KR, Topa DA, Radivoyevitch 
T, Veigl ML, Laughlin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Case Western Reserve University, 11100 Euclid Ave, Wearn 433, Cleveland, OH
44106-5065, USA.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the blunted allo-responsiveness 
of umbilical cord blood (UCB) T cells have not been fully elucidated. Protein
expression of NFATc2 (nuclear factor of activated T cells c2), a critical
transcription factor necessary for up-regulation of multiple cytokines known to
amplify T-cell allogeneic responses, is reduced in UCB T cells. Affymetrix
oligonucleotide microarrays were used to compare gene expression of primary
purified CD4+ UCB T cells to adult peripheral blood CD4+ T cells (AB) at
baseline, 6, and 16 hours of primary stimulation. NFAT-regulated genes exhibited 
lower expression in UCB CD4+ T cells including the following:
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 3 (IL-3), IL-4,
IL-5, IL-13, IL-2 receptor alpha (IL-2Ralpha; CD25), CD40L, and macrophage
inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP-1alpha). Transcription factors involved in the 
NFAT pathway including C/EBPbeta, JunB, and Fosl1 (Fra-1), as well as Th1- and
Th2-related transcription factors STAT4 (signal transducers and activators of
transcription 4), T-bet, and c-maf showed reduced expression in UCB compared with
AB during primary stimulation. Reduced cytokine, chemokine, and receptor
expression was also found in UCB. Gene array data were confirmed using RNase
protection assays, flow cytometry, and quantitative multiplexed cytokine
measurements. Reduced global expression of NFAT-associated genes, as well as
cytokines and chemokines, in UCB CD4+ T cells may contribute to the decreased
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) observed after UCB transplantation.

PMID: 12946996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncogene. 2003 Jul 31;22(31):4924-32.

Microarray analysis uncovers retinoid targets in human bronchial epithelial
cells.

Ma Y(1), Koza-Taylor PH, DiMattia DA, Hames L, Fu H, Dragnev KH, Turi T, Beebe
JS, Freemantle SJ, Dmitrovsky E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, 
NH 03755, USA.

Retinoids, the natural and synthetic derivatives of vitamin A, have a role in
cancer treatment and prevention. There is a need to reveal mechanisms that
account for retinoid response or resistance. This study identified candidate
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) target genes linked to growth suppression in BEAS-2B
human bronchial epithelial cells. Microarray analyses were performed using
Affymetrix arrays. A total of 11 RA-induced species were validated by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), Western or Northern analyses.
Three of these species were novel candidate RA-target genes in human bronchial
epithelial cells. These included: placental bone morphogenetic protein (PLAB),
polyamine oxidase isoform 1 (PAOh1) and E74-like factor 3 (ELF3). Expression
patterns were studied in RA-resistant BEAS-2B-R1 cells. In BEAS-2B-R1 cells, RA
dysregulated the expression of the putative lymphocyte G0/G1 switch gene (G0S2), 
heme oxygenase 1 (HMOX1), tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced protein 2
(TNFAIP2), inhibitor of DNA binding 1(Id1), fos-like antigen 1 (FOSL1),
transglutaminase 2 (TGM2), asparagine synthetase (ASNS), PLAB, PAOh1 and ELF3,
while prominent induction of insulin-like growth-factor-binding protein 6
(IGFBP6) still occurred. In summary, this study identified 11 candidate RA-target
genes in human bronchial epithelial cells including three novel species.
Expression studies in BEAS-2B-R1 cells indicated that several were directly
implicated in RA signaling, since their aberrant expression was linked to RA
resistance of human bronchial epithelial cells.

PMID: 12894236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Acta Otolaryngol. 2003 Jun;123(5):575-82.

Mucosal expression of genes encoding possible upstream regulators of Na+
transport during pneumococcal otitis media.

Li HS(1), Doyle WJ, Swarts JD, Lo CY, Hebda PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh
Pennsylvania 15213, USA. shengli@pitt.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recently, we reported that gene transcripts encoding 3 Na+ transport
proteins (pump, channel and exchanger) in the middle ear mucosa (MEM) were
simultaneously suppressed at 12 and 48 h after Streptococcus pneumoniae (SP)
challenge of rat middle ears.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: From cDNA microarray screening of those specimens, several 
gene clusters, including Nos2 and the transcription factors Fos, Fosl1, Jun and
Nfkb1, were identified as possible upstream regulators of Na+ transport protein
expression. The altered expression of those genes in MEM was validated and
quantified using real-time polymerase chain reaction and MEM protein expression
for Atp1a1, Nos2 and Nfkb1 was studied using Western blot and/or
immunohistochemistry assays.
RESULTS: At both time-points. Atp1a1 mRNA and protein were decreased and Nos2
mRNA and protein were increased in MEM. While Nfkb1 protein was decreased at
those times. the corresponding mRNA was increased at 12 h but decreased at 48 h. 
Gene expression for Fos was suppressed at both times, while that for Fosl1 and
Jun was augmented at 12 h and suppressed at 48 h. Immunohistochemical study of
specimens challenged with SP showed a swollen MEM with infiltration of
inflammatory cells that stained positive for Nos2.
CONCLUSION: Given the known activities of Nos2, these results can be interpreted 
as evidencing a transcriptional suppression of Na+ transport protein synthesis
secondary to upregulated Nos2 expression during SP infection of the rat MEM. This
proposed signaling pathway does not require the continuous upregulation of Nfkb1 
or the other assayed transcription factors as early as 12 h after middle ear
infection.

PMID: 12875578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Cancer. 2003 Aug 20;106(2):187-97.

Expression profiling of CC531 colon carcinoma cells reveals similar regulation of
beta-catenin target genes by both butyrate and aspirin.

Germann A(1), Dihlmann S, Hergenhahn M, Doeberitz Mv, Koesters R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology, University Hospital 
of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The CC531 cell line has been widely used to study different aspects of tumor
growth and metastasis and provides an excellent experimental platform to develop 
novel antitumor strategies. To characterize the CC531 model at the molecular
level, we screened for mutations in genes covering important signal-transduction 
pathways that are known to play major roles during colon carcinogenesis, the wnt 
and the ki-ras signaling pathways. We found both a prototypic beta-catenin
(Ctnnb1) mutation (Thr(41)Ile) and a ki-ras (G12D) mutation, providing
unambiguous evidence for the constitutive activation of these pathways in CC531
cells. We further established comprehensive gene expression profiles of CC531
cells and investigated the molecular response to 2 antitumor drugs, butyrate and 
aspirin. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we screened the expression levels of 
7,700 genes and identified a total of 398 genes whose expression was
significantly changed upon treatment with butyrate. When using aspirin, 121 genes
were significantly altered. Interestingly, 36 genes were regulated by both
butyrate and aspirin and 35 of them were regulated in the same direction. We
found 7 differentially expressed genes, cyclin D1, cyclin E, c-myc, Fosl1, c-fos,
Cd44 and follistatin, which are known targets of the beta-catenin and/or the ras 
pathway. In all cases, butyrate and aspirin reversed the changes in expression
normally found in response to active signaling of these oncogenic pathways. The
microarray data are available (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12800193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Toxicology. 2003 May 1;187(1):39-48.

Low-level arsenite induced gene expression in HEK293 cells.

Zheng XH(1), Watts GS, Vaught S, Gandolfi AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Arizona, 1723 E Mabel
Street, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Chronic, low-level exposure to arsenic frequently results in skin, lung, bladder,
and kidney cancer. Since arsenic is primarily excreted via the kidney, this study
focused on this target tissue. Gene array was used as a sensitive low-level
monitor of the impact of arsenic on this target tissue. Arsenite [As(III)] was
chosen as the chemical species of arsenic since As(III) species are touted as the
cellular toxic form of arsenic. Human embryonic kidney cell line HEK293 cells
were incubated with 1, 10, and 25 microM arsenite [As(III)] for 6 or 24 h. Total 
RNA from treated and control cells was isolated, reverse transcribed, and labeled
with Cy3 or Cy5, and hybridized to a human cDNA microarray. Hybridizations were
performed four times using independent total RNA preparations to ensure
reproducibility. Raw data from 10 and 25 microM treated cells exposed for 6 h was
normalized within, and between, hybridizations followed by identification of
genes affected by arsenite exposure based on practical significance (2-fold
change up or down) and reproducibility (affected in four of six measurements). In
these studies, 20 genes (HMOX1, MT1E, or FOSL1, etc.) were up-regulated, and 19
genes (MYC, JAK1, or CENPE, etc.) were down-regulated. Genes identified at 10 and
25 microM arsenic exposure were then examined after 1 microM treatment for 6 or
24 h. Expression of affected genes showed a dose-dependent (1-25 microM) trend
that was apparently not time-dependent (6 vs. 24 h). The affected genes indicate 
that even this realistic, low-level arsenite exposure was recognized by the
HEK293 cells (e.g. metallothionein genes) and produced an oxidative stress (e.g. 
heme oxygenase gene). These affected genes were characterized as stress response 
genes, proto-oncogene, signaling molecules, transcription factors, chemokine
receptors, proteolytic enzymes, ESTs, and unknown genes. These findings imply
that arsenite induces complex cellular injury and the cellular adaptation to
As(III) is associated with alterations in the expression of many genes.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 12679051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Neurochem. 2002 Mar;80(6):1089-94.

Fra-1 substitutes for c-Fos in AP-1-mediated signal transduction in retinal
apoptosis.

Wenzel A(1), Iseli HP, Fleischmann A, Hafezi F, Grimm C, Wagner EF, Remé CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland.
Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Lack of the AP-1 member c-Fos protects photoreceptors against light-induced
apoptosis, a model for retinal degeneration. In mice, light damage increases the 
activity of the transcription factor AP-1, while pharmacological suppression of
AP-1 prevents apoptosis, suggesting the involvement of pro-apoptotic AP-1 target 
genes. Recently, however, it was shown that photoreceptors expressing Fra-1 in
place of c-Fos (Fos (Fosl1/Fosl1) ) are apoptosis competent despite the lack of
transactivation domains in Fra-1. Here, we show that morphological features of
light-induced apoptosis were indistinguishable in Fos (Fosl1/Fosl1) and wild-type
mice. Furthermore, light exposure comparably increased AP-1 activity in both
genotypes. Opposite to wild-type mice, Fra-1, but not c-Fos, was detectable in
AP-1 complexes of Fos (Fosl1/Fosl1) mice. Importantly, AP-1 responsiveness for
glucocorticoid receptor-mediated inhibition was preserved in Fos (Fosl1/Fosl1)
mice. Thus, Fra-1 takes over for c-Fos in pro- and anti-apoptotic signal
transduction. As Fra-1 lacks transactivation domains, AP-1 may not induce, but
rather suppress genes in retinal light damage.

PMID: 11953459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nat Genet. 2000 Feb;24(2):184-7.

Fosl1 is a transcriptional target of c-Fos during osteoclast differentiation.

Matsuo K(1), Owens JM, Tonko M, Elliott C, Chambers TJ, Wagner EF.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells derived from haematopoietic precursors of
the monocyte-macrophage lineage. Mice lacking Fos (encoding c-Fos) develop
osteopetrosis due to an early differentiation block in the osteoclast lineage.
c-Fos is a component of the dimeric transcription factor activator protein-1
(Ap-1), which is composed mainly of Fos (c-Fos, FosB, Fra-1 and Fra-2) and Jun
proteins (c-Jun, JunB and JunD). Unlike Fra-1 (encoded by Fosl1), c-Fos contains 
transactivation domains required for oncogenesis and cellular transformation. The
mechanism by which c-Fos exerts its specific function in osteoclast
differentiation is not understood. Here we show by retroviral-gene transfer that 
all four Fos proteins, but not the Jun proteins, rescue the differentiation block
in vitro. Structure-function analysis demonstrated that the major
carboxy-terminal transactivation domains of c-Fos and FosB are dispensable and
that Fra-1 (which lacks transactivation domains) has the highest rescue activity.
Moreover, a transgene expressing Fra-1 rescues the osteopetrosis of c-Fos-mutant 
mice in vivo. The osteoclast differentiation factor Rankl (also known as TRANCE, 
ODF and OPGL; refs 8-11) induces transcription of Fosl1 in a c-Fos-dependent
manner, thereby establishing a link between Rank signalling and the expression of
Ap-1 proteins in osteoclast differentiation.

PMID: 10655067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


