
1. Sci Adv. 2016 Mar 18;2(3):e1501473. eCollection 2016.

FOXA1 defines cancer cell specificity.

Zhang G(1), Zhao Y(1), Liu Y(1), Kao LP(1), Wang X(1), Skerry B(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL 32224, USA.

A transcription factor functions differentially and/or identically in multiple
cell types. However, the mechanism for cell-specific regulation of a
transcription factor remains to be elucidated. We address how a single
transcription factor, forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1), forms cell-specific
genomic signatures and differentially regulates gene expression in four human
cancer cell lines (HepG2, LNCaP, MCF7, and T47D). FOXA1 is a pioneer
transcription factor in organogenesis and cancer progression. Genomewide mapping 
of FOXA1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing annotates that target genes 
associated with FOXA1 binding are mostly common to these cancer cells. However,
most of the functional FOXA1 target genes are specific to each cancer cell type. 
Further investigations using CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing technology indicate that 
cell-specific FOXA1 regulation is attributable to unique FOXA1 binding, genetic
variations, and/or potential epigenetic regulation. Thus, FOXA1 controls the
specificity of cancer cell types. We raise a "flower-blooming" hypothesis for
cell-specific transcriptional regulation based on these observations.

PMID: 27034986  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Oncol. 2016 Feb 27. pii: S1574-7891(16)00035-1. doi:
10.1016/j.molonc.2016.02.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Amplification of WHSC1L1 regulates expression and estrogen-independent activation
of ERa in SUM-44 breast cancer cells and is associated with ERa over-expression
in breast cancer.

Irish JC(1), Mills JN(2), Turner-Ivey B(3), Wilson RC(4), Guest ST(5), Rutkovsky 
A(6), Dombkowski A(7), Kappler CS(8), Hardiman G(9), Ethier SP(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86
Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, Wayne
State University School of Medicine, 540 E Canfield St, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.
Electronic address: jirish9@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425,
USA. Electronic address: millsjn@musc.edu. (3)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: turnerbp@musc.edu. (4)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: wilsorc@musc.edu. (5)Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: guests@musc.edu. (6)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC
29425, USA. Electronic address: rutkovsk@musc.edu. (7)Department of Cancer
Biology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 E Canfield St, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA. Electronic address: domski@wayne.edu. (8)Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86 Jonathan Lucas St,
Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: kapplerc@musc.edu. (9)Department
of Medicine and Public Health, Medical University of South Carolina, 171 Ashley
Ave, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: hardiman@musc.edu.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Hollings Cancer Center, 86
Jonathan Lucas St, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address:
ethier@musc.edu.

The 8p11-p12 amplicon occurs in approximately 15% of breast cancers in aggressive
luminal B-type tumors. Previously, we identified WHSC1L1 as a driving oncogene
from this region. Here, we demonstrate that over-expression of WHSC1L1 is linked 
to over-expression of ERa in SUM-44 breast cancer cells and in primary human
breast cancers. Knock-down of WHSC1L1, particularly WHSC1L1-short, had a dramatic
effect on ESR1 mRNA and ERa protein levels. SUM-44 cells do not require exogenous
estrogen for growth in vitro; however, they are dependent on ERa expression, as
ESR1 knock-down or exposure to the selective estrogen receptor degrader
fulvestrant resulted in growth inhibition. ChIP-Seq experiments utilizing ERa
antibodies demonstrated extensive ERa binding to chromatin in SUM-44 cells under 
estrogen-free conditions. ERa bound to ERE and FOXA1 motifs under estrogen-free
conditions and regulated expression of estrogen-responsive genes. Short-term
treatment with estradiol enhanced binding of ERa to chromatin and influenced
expression of many of the same genes to which ERa was bound under estrogen-free
conditions. Finally, knock-down of WHSC1L1 in SUM-44 cells resulted in loss of
ERa binding to chromatin under estrogen-free conditions, which was restored upon 
exposure to estradiol. These results indicate the SUM-44 cells are a good model
of a subset of luminal B breast cancers that have the 8p11-p12 amplicon,
over-express WHSC1L1, and over-express ERa, but are independent of estrogen for
binding to chromatin and regulation of gene expression. Breast cancers such as
these, that are dependent on ERa activity but independent of estradiol, are a
major cause of breast cancer mortality.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27005559  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 17;11(3):e0151785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151785.
eCollection 2016.

An Examination of the Association between FOXA1 Staining Level and Biochemical
Recurrence following Salvage Radiation Therapy for Recurrent Prostate Cancer.

Heckman MG(1), Robinson JL(2), Tzou KS(3), Parker AS(1), Wu KJ(4), Hilton TW(1), 
Howat WJ(2), Miller JL(2), Kreinest PA(5), Pisansky TM(6), Schild SE(7), Peterson
JL(3), Vallow LA(3), Carroll JS(2), Buskirk SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida,
United States of America. (2)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology,
Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, United States of America. (4)Department of
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, United States of America.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, United
States of America. (6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America. (7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Mayo
Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Standardly collected clinical and pathological patient information
has demonstrated only moderate ability to predict risk of biochemical recurrence 
(BCR) of prostate cancer in men undergoing salvage radiation therapy (SRT) for a 
rising PSA after radical prostatectomy (RP). Although elevated FOXA1 staining has
been associated with poor patient outcomes following RP, it has not been studied 
in the specific setting of SRT after RP. The aim of this study was to evaluate
the association between FOXA1 staining level and BCR after SRT for recurrent
prostate cancer.
METHODS: A total of 141 men who underwent SRT at our institution were included.
FOXA1 staining levels in primary tumor samples were detected using
immunohistochemistry. FOXA1 staining percentage and intensity were measured and
multiplied together to obtain a FOXA1 H-score (range 0-12) which was our primary 
staining measure. P-values = 0.0056 were considered as statistically significant 
after applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons.
RESULTS: There was not a significant association between FOXA1 H-score and risk
of BCR when considering H-score as an ordinal variable or as a categorical
variable (all P=0.090). Similarly, no significant associations with BCR were
observed for FOXA1 staining percentage or staining intensity (all P=0.14).
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 staining level does not appear to have a major impact on risk 
of BCR after SRT.

PMCID: PMC4795739
PMID: 26986977  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

QTL Mapping of Endocochlear Potential Differences between C57BL/6J and BALB/cJ
mice.

Ohlemiller KK(1), Kiener AL(2), Gagnon PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington
University School of Medicine, Fay and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and
Deafness, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO,
63110, USA. kohlemiller@wustl.edu. (2)Department of Speech and Hearing Science,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington University School of Medicine, Fay
and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and Deafness, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.

We reported earlier that the endocochlear potential (EP) differs between C57BL/6J
(B6) and BALB/cJ (BALB) mice, being lower in BALBs by about 10 mV (Ohlemiller et 
al. Hear Res 220: 10-26, 2006). This difference corresponds to strain differences
with respect to the density of marginal cells in cochlear stria vascularis. After
about 1 year of age, BALB mice also tend toward EP reduction that correlates with
further marginal cell loss. We therefore suggested that early sub-clinical
features of the BALB stria vascularis may predispose these mice to a condition
modeling Schuknecht's strial presbycusis. We further reported (Ohlemiller et al. 
J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 12: 45-58, 2011) that the acute effects of a 2-h 110 dB
SPL noise exposure differ between B6 and BALB mice, such that the EP remains
unchanged in B6 mice, but is reduced by 40-50 mV in BALBs. In about 25 % of
BALBs, the EP does not completely recover, so that permanent EP reduction may
contribute to noise-induced permanent threshold shifts in BALBs. To identify
genes and alleles that may promote natural EP variation as well as noise-related 
EP reduction in BALB mice, we have mapped related quantitative trait loci (QTLs) 
using 12 recombinant inbred (RI) strains formed from B6 and BALB (CxB1-CxB12). EP
and strial marginal cell density were measured in B6 mice, BALB mice, their F1
hybrids, and RI mice without noise exposure, and 1-3 h after broadband noise
(4-45 kHz, 110 dB SPL, 2 h). For unexposed mice, the strain distribution patterns
for EP and marginal cell density were used to generate preliminary QTL maps for
both EP and marginal cell density. Six QTL regions were at least statistically
suggestive, including a significant QTL for marginal cell density on chromosome
12 that overlapped a weak QTL for EP variation. This region, termed Maced
(Marginal cell density QTL) supports the notion of marginal cell density as a
genetically influenced contributor to natural EP variation. Candidate genes for
Maced notably include Foxg1, Foxa1, Akap6, Nkx2-1, and Pax9. Noise exposure
produced significant EP reductions in two RI strains as well as significant EP
increases in two RI strains. QTL mapping of the EP in noise-exposed RI mice
yielded four suggestive regions. Two of these overlapped with QTL regions we
previously identified for noise-related EP reduction in CBA/J mice (Ohlemiller et
al. Hear Res 260: 47-53, 2010) on chromosomes 5 and 18 (Nirep). The present map
may narrow the Nirep interval to a ~10-Mb region of proximal Chr. 18 that
includes Zeb1, Arhgap12, Mpp7, and Gjd4. This study marks the first exploration
of natural gene variants that modulate the EP. Their orthologs may underlie some 
human hearing loss that originates in the lateral wall.

PMID: 26980469  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. J Pathol. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1002/path.4716. [Epub ahead of print]

Down-regulation of TRPS1 stimulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
metastasis through repression of FOXA1.

Huang JZ(1), Chen M(1), Zeng M(1), Xu SH(1), Zou FY(1), Chen(2,)(3), Yan
GR(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Life and Health Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China;
Biomedicine Research Center, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medicine 
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Biomedicine Research Center and Department of
Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medicine University,
Guangzhou, China. (3)Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric Diseases of Guangdong
Province, Key Laboratory of Reproduction and Genetics of Guangdong Higher
Education Institutes, Guangzhou, China.

The tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome 1 gene (TRPS1), which was initially found to
be associated with tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome, is critical for the
development and differentiation of bone, hair follicles and kidney. However, its 
role in cancer progression is largely unknown. In this study, we demonstrated
that down-regulation of TRPS1 correlated with distant metastasis, tumour
recurrence and poor survival rate in cancer patients. TRPS1 was frequently
down-regulated in high-metastatic cancer cell lines from breast, colon and
nasopharynx. Silencing of TRPS1 stimulated epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT), migration and invasion in vitro and metastasis in vivo, while TRPS1
over-expression exhibited the opposite effects. Using quantitative proteomics,
FOXA1 a negative regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) was shown
to be down-regulated by TRPS1 knockdown. Ectopic expression of FOXA1 blocked the 
enhancement of EMT, migration and invasion induced by TRPS1 silencing.
Mechanistically, TRPS1, acting as a transcription activator, directly induced
FOXA1 transcription by binding to the FOXA1 promoter. We further showed that
down-regulation of TRPS1 was induced by miR-373 binding to the 3'UTR of TRPS1.
Over-expression of TRPS1, but not TRPS1-3'UTR, blocked the enhancement of
migration and invasion induced by miR-373. Taken together, we consider that
down-regulation of TRPS1 by miR-373, acting as a transcriptional activator,
promotes EMT and metastasis by repressing FOXA1 transcription, expanding upon its
previously reported role as a transcription repressor.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969828  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Nat Genet. 2016 Apr;48(4):387-97. doi: 10.1038/ng.3523. Epub 2016 Mar 7.

Gene regulatory mechanisms underpinning prostate cancer susceptibility.

Whitington T(1), Gao P(2,)(3), Song W(2,)(3), Ross-Adams H(4), Lamb AD(4,)(5),
Yang Y(2,)(3), Svezia I(2,)(3), Klevebring D(1), Mills IG(6,)(7,)(8), Karlsson
R(1), Halim S(4,)(9), Dunning MJ(4), Egevad L(10,)(11), Warren AY(12), Neal
DE(13), Grönberg H(1), Lindberg J(1), Wei GH(2,)(3), Wiklund F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (3)Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(4)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. (5)Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (6)Prostate 
Cancer Research Group, Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway, Nordic EMBL
Partnership, University of Oslo and Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Molecular Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (8)Prostate Cancer UK/Movember Centre of
Excellence for Prostate Cancer Research, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell
Biology, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK. (9)Cancer Research UK Beatson
Institute, Glasgow, UK. (10)Department of Pathology and Cytology, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (11)Department of Oncology-Pathology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (12)Department of Pathology,
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK. (13)Nuffield Department of Surgical
Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Molecular characterization of genome-wide association study (GWAS) loci can
uncover key genes and biological mechanisms underpinning complex traits and
diseases. Here we present deep, high-throughput characterization of gene
regulatory mechanisms underlying prostate cancer risk loci. Our methodology
integrates data from 295 prostate cancer chromatin immunoprecipitation and
sequencing experiments with genotype and gene expression data from 602 prostate
tumor samples. The analysis identifies new gene regulatory mechanisms affected by
risk locus SNPs, including widespread disruption of ternary androgen receptor
(AR)-FOXA1 and AR-HOXB13 complexes and competitive binding mechanisms. We
identify 57 expression quantitative trait loci at 35 risk loci, which we validate
through analysis of allele-specific expression. We further validate predicted
regulatory SNPs and target genes in prostate cancer cell line models. Finally,
our integrated analysis can be accessed through an interactive visualization
tool. This analysis elucidates how genome sequence variation affects disease
predisposition via gene regulatory mechanisms and identifies relevant genes for
downstream biomarker and drug development.

PMID: 26950096  [PubMed - in process]


8. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4896. [Epub ahead of print]

Forkhead box O1 promotes INS-1 cell apoptosis by reducing the expression of CD24.

Ma Y(1), Wang X(1), Peng Y(1), Ding X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai First People's Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Type 2 diabetes seriously affects human health and burdens public health systems.
Pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis contributes to a reduction in ß-cell mass, which is
responsible for the occurrence of type 2 diabetes. However, the mechanism that
underlies this effect remains unclear. In the present study, the role of forkhead
box O1 (Foxo1) was investigated (which is a key regulatory factor in ß-cell
function) in the apoptotic behavior of ß-cells and a potential underlying
mechanism was determined. It was demonstrated that Foxo1 overexpression
significantly reduced the proliferation of INS-1 cells and increased the
apoptosis of INS-1 cells, in contrast to foxm1, foxp, foxa1, foxc and foxb1
overexpression. The present study aimed to investigate potential underlying
mechanisms using bioinformatics, including Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, and
biological experiments, including flow cytometry, cell counting kit-8,
immunofluorescence, western blotting, reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis and lentiviral transfection. Further
experiments conclusively showed that cluster of differentiation (CD)24 expression
was significantly decreased when INS-1 cells were treated with Foxo1. Animal
experiments showed high CD24 expression in the pancreatic islets of diabetic
Goto-Kakizaki rats. Moreover, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that CD24
expression was associated with the adaptive immune response of ß-cells. Finally, 
no significant differences in the proliferation and apoptosis of CD24
overexpressing INS-1 cells were observed after Foxo1 treatment. These results
suggested that Foxo1 overexpression in ß-cells was able to increase apoptosis by 
inhibiting CD24 expression. This study may provide an approach for the treatment 
and prevention of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 26935354  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 3;6:22462. doi: 10.1038/srep22462.

4C-seq revealed long-range interactions of a functional enhancer at the 8q24
prostate cancer risk locus.

Cai M(1,)(2,)(3), Kim S(1), Wang K(2,)(3,)(4), Farnham PJ(5,)(6), Coetzee
GA(7,)(8), Lu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (2)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Division of
Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (4)Department of Psychiatry, University
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (5)Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (7)Department of Preventive Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (8)Department of
Urology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
CA 90033, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified >100 independent
susceptibility loci for prostate cancer, including the hot spot at 8q24. However,
how genetic variants at this locus confer disease risk hasn't been fully
characterized. Using circularized chromosome conformation capture (4C) coupled
with next-generation sequencing and an enhancer at 8q24 as "bait", we identified 
genome-wide partners interacting with this enhancer in cell lines LNCaP and
C4-2B. These 4C-identified regions are distributed in open nuclear compartments, 
featuring active histone marks (H3K4me1, H3K4me2 and H3K27Ac). Transcription
factors NKX3-1, FOXA1 and AR (androgen receptor) tend to occupy these 4C regions.
We identified genes located at the interacting regions, and found them linked to 
positive regulation of mesenchymal cell proliferation in LNCaP and C4-2B, and
several pathways (TGF beta signaling pathway in LNCaP and p53 pathway in C4-2B). 
Common genes (e.g. MYC and POU5F1B) were identified in both prostate cancer cell 
lines. However, each cell line also had exclusive genes (e.g. ELAC2 and PTEN in
LNCaP and BRCA2 and ZFHX3 in C4-2B). In addition, BCL-2 identified in C4-2B might
contribute to the progression of androgen-refractory prostate cancer. Overall,
our work reveals key genes and pathways involved in prostate cancer onset and
progression.

PMCID: PMC4776156
PMID: 26934861  [PubMed - in process]


10. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 27. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7778. [Epub ahead of print]

Significance of the NOR1-FOXA1/HDAC2-Slug regulatory network in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of tumor cells.

Wang W(1,)(2,)(3), Yi M(4), Chen S(1,)(2), Li J(2), Li G(5), Yang J(6), Zheng
P(2), Zhang H(2), Xiong W(2), McCarthy JB(6), Li G(2), Li X(2), Xiang B(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hunan Provincial Cancer Hospital and Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Xiangya
Medical School, The Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China.
(2)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, The Central South
University, Changsha 410078, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Affiliated
Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining, 272029, Shandong, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, The Central South University,
Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. (5)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck
Surgery, Xiangya Hospital, The Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan,
China. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Masonic Cancer Center,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process is believed to play a crucial
role in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) progression, a squamous cell carcinoma of 
the head and neck with the tendency to metastasize early. At present, much
attention has been given to the inducer of EMT involved in NPC progression, while
antagonists have been less intensively characterized. In this study, unbiased
analysis of EMT-associated gene expression patterns was performed using data
mining of global gene expression profiles derived from NPC samples, leading to
the successful identification of NOR1, FOXA1, and Slug, all of which showed
aberrant expression during NPC progression. The effect of tumor suppressor NOR1
on Slug-induced NPC cells during the EMT process was investigated by use of
ectopic expression and RNA interference methods. The molecular mechanisms
underlying the tumor-suppressing effect of NOR1 on Slug-induced EMT were thought 
to be dependent on the cooperation of NOR1 with the FOXA1-HDAC2 complex. We also 
showed that FOXA1 and HDAC2 bind the slug promoter and directly repress its
transcription. Our data revealed a previously unrecognized role of the
NOR1-FOXA1/HDAC2-Slug network in the regulation of the EMT process and
aggressiveness of NPC.

PMID: 26934447  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 1;11(3):e0150070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150070.
eCollection 2016.

Computational Characterization of Osteoporosis Associated SNPs and Genes
Identified by Genome-Wide Association Studies.

Qin L(1), Liu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Wu G(1), Chen J(1), Ye W(1), Yang J(2), Huang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 430079,
China. (2)College of Computer Sciences, Central China Normal University, Wuhan,
430079, China.

OBJECTIVES: Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revealed many SNPs and
genes associated with osteoporosis. However, influence of these SNPs and genes on
the predisposition to osteoporosis is not fully understood. We aimed to identify 
osteoporosis GWASs-associated SNPs potentially influencing the binding affinity
of transcription factors and miRNAs, and reveal enrichment signaling pathway and 
"hub" genes of osteoporosis GWAS-associated genes.
METHODS: We conducted multiple computational analyses to explore function and
mechanisms of osteoporosis GWAS-associated SNPs and genes, including SNP
conservation analysis and functional annotation (influence of SNPs on
transcription factors and miRNA binding), gene ontology analysis, pathway
analysis and protein-protein interaction analysis.
RESULTS: Our results suggested that a number of SNPs potentially influence the
binding affinity of transcription factors (NFATC2, MEF2C, SOX9, RUNX2, ESR2,
FOXA1 and STAT3) and miRNAs. Osteoporosis GWASs-associated genes showed
enrichment of Wnt signaling pathway, basal cell carcinoma and Hedgehog signaling 
pathway. Highly interconnected "hub" genes revealed by interaction network
analysis are RUNX2, SP7, TNFRSF11B, LRP5, DKK1, ESR1 and SOST.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided the targets for further experimental assessment
and further insight on osteoporosis pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4773152
PMID: 26930606  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 29. pii: jbc.M115.677583. [Epub ahead of print]

Loss of Interdependent Binding by the FoxO1 and FoxA1/A2 Forkhead Transcription
Factors Culminates in Perturbation of Active Chromatin Marks and Binding of
Transcriptional Regulators at Insulin Sensitive Genes.

Yalley A(1), Schill D(1), Hatta M(1), Johnson N(1), Cirillo LA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Wisconsin, United States. (2)Medical College of Wisconsin, 
United States lcirillo@mcw.edu.

FoxO1 binds to insulin response elements located in the promoters of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase),
activating their expression. Insulin-mediated phosphorylation of FoxO1 promotes
cytoplasmic translocation, inhibiting FoxO1-mediated transactivation. We have
previously demonstrated that FoxO1 opens and remodels chromatin assembled from
the IGFBP1 promoter via a highly conserved winged-helix motif. This finding,
which established FoxO1 as a pioneer factor, suggested a model whereby FoxO1
chromatin remodeling at regulatory targets facilitates binding and recruitment of
additional regulatory factors. However, the impact of FoxO1 phosphorylation on
its ability to bind chromatin and the consequence of FoxO1 loss on recruitment of
neighboring transcription factors at its regulatory targets in liver chromatin is
unknown. In this study, we demonstrate that an amino acid substitution that
mimics insulin-mediated phosphorylation of a serine in the winged-helix DNA
binding motif curtails FoxO1 nucleosome binding. We also demonstrate that
shRNA-mediated loss of FoxO1 binding to the IGFBP1 and G6Pase promoters in HepG2 
cells significantly reduces binding of RNA polymerase II and the pioneer factors 
FoxA1/A2. Knockdown of FoxA1 similarly reduced binding of RNA polymerase II and
FoxO1. Reduction in acetylation of H3K27 accompanies loss of FoxO1 and FoxA1/A2
binding. Interdependent binding of FoxO1 and FoxA1/A2 possibly entails
cooperative binding, since FoxO1 and FoxA1/A2 facilitate one anothers binding to 
IGFPB1 promoter DNA. These results illustrate how transcription factors can
nucleate transcriptional events in chromatin in response to signaling events and 
suggest a model for regulation of hepatic glucose metabolism through
interdependent FoxO/FoxA binding.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 26929406  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. J Clin Oncol. 2016 Feb 29. pii: JCO640334. [Epub ahead of print]

Genomic Characterization of Primary Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer.

Desmedt C(1), Zoppoli G(2), Gundem G(2), Pruneri G(2), Larsimont D(2), Fornili
M(2), Fumagalli D(2), Brown D(2), Rothé F(2), Vincent D(2), Kheddoumi N(2), Rouas
G(2), Majjaj S(2), Brohée S(2), Van Loo P(2), Maisonneuve P(2), Salgado R(2), Van
Brussel T(2), Lambrechts D(2), Bose R(2), Metzger O(2), Galant C(2), Bertucci
F(2), Piccart-Gebhart M(2), Viale G(2), Biganzoli E(2), Campbell PJ(2), Sotiriou 
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Christine Desmedt, Gabriele Zoppoli, Denis Larsimont, Debora Fumagalli, David 
Brown, Françoise Rothé, Delphine Vincent, Naima Kheddoumi, Ghizlane Rouas, Samira
Majjaj, Sylvain Brohée, Roberto Salgado, Martine Piccart-Gebhart, and Christos
Sotiriou, Institut Jules Bordet; Christine Galant, Cliniques Universitaires Saint
Luc, Brussels; Peter Van Loo, University of Leuven; Thomas Van Brussel and
Diether Lambrechts, VIB Vesalius Research Center, Leuven, Belgium; Gabriele
Zoppoli, University of Genoa and Istituto di Ricerca a Carattere
Clinico-Scientifico San Martino-National Cancer Institute, Genoa; Giancarlo
Pruneri, Patrick Maisonneuve, and Giuseppe Viale, European Institute of Oncology;
Marco Fornili and Elia Biganzoli, University of Milan, Fondazione Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; 
Gunes Gundem and Peter J. Campbell, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridgeshire; Peter Van Loo, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom; Ron Bose, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Otto
Metzger, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; and François Bertucci,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France. christine.desmedt@bordet.be.
(2)Christine Desmedt, Gabriele Zoppoli, Denis Larsimont, Debora Fumagalli, David 
Brown, Françoise Rothé, Delphine Vincent, Naima Kheddoumi, Ghizlane Rouas, Samira
Majjaj, Sylvain Brohée, Roberto Salgado, Martine Piccart-Gebhart, and Christos
Sotiriou, Institut Jules Bordet; Christine Galant, Cliniques Universitaires Saint
Luc, Brussels; Peter Van Loo, University of Leuven; Thomas Van Brussel and
Diether Lambrechts, VIB Vesalius Research Center, Leuven, Belgium; Gabriele
Zoppoli, University of Genoa and Istituto di Ricerca a Carattere
Clinico-Scientifico San Martino-National Cancer Institute, Genoa; Giancarlo
Pruneri, Patrick Maisonneuve, and Giuseppe Viale, European Institute of Oncology;
Marco Fornili and Elia Biganzoli, University of Milan, Fondazione Istituto di
Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; 
Gunes Gundem and Peter J. Campbell, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,
Cambridgeshire; Peter Van Loo, The Francis Crick Institute, London, United
Kingdom; Ron Bose, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Otto
Metzger, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; and François Bertucci,
Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

PURPOSE: Invasive lobular breast cancer (ILBC) is the second most common
histologic subtype after invasive ductal breast cancer (IDBC). Despite clinical
and pathologic differences, ILBC is still treated as IDBC. We aimed to identify
genomic alterations in ILBC with potential clinical implications.
METHODS: From an initial 630 ILBC primary tumors, we interrogated oncogenic
substitutions and insertions and deletions of 360 cancer genes and genome-wide
copy number aberrations in 413 and 170 ILBC samples, respectively, and correlated
those findings with clinicopathologic and outcome features.
RESULTS: Besides the high mutation frequency of CDH1 in 65% of tumors,
alterations in one of the three key genes of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
pathway, PIK3CA, PTEN, and AKT1, were present in more than one-half of the cases.
HER2 and HER3 were mutated in 5.1% and 3.6% of the tumors, with most of these
mutations having a proven role in activating the human epidermal growth factor
receptor/ERBB pathway. Mutations in FOXA1 and ESR1 copy number gains were
detected in 9% and 25% of the samples. All these alterations were more frequent
in ILBC than in IDBC. The histologic diversity of ILBC was associated with
specific alterations, such as enrichment for HER2 mutations in the mixed,
nonclassic, and ESR1 gains in the solid subtype. Survival analyses revealed that 
chromosome 1q and 11p gains showed independent prognostic value in ILBC and that 
HER2 and AKT1 mutations were associated with increased risk of early relapse.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that we can now begin to individualize the
treatment of ILBC, with HER2, HER3, and AKT1 mutations representing
high-prevalence therapeutic targets and FOXA1 mutations and ESR1 gains deserving 
urgent dedicated clinical investigation, especially in the context of endocrine
treatment.

© 2016 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMID: 26926684  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Genesis. 2016 Feb 26. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22929. [Epub ahead of print]

Foxa1 is essential for mammary duct formation.

Liu Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Skerry B(1), Wang X(1), Colin-Cassin C(1), Radisky DC(1),
Kaestner KH(2), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 san Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL, 32224. (2)Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 19104.

INTRODUCTION: The transcription factor forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) plays a
critical role in the proliferation of human breast cancer cells, particularly
estrogen receptor alpha (ERa)-positive luminal breast cancer cells. However,
genetic studies of the requirement for Foxa1 in mammary tumor formation in mice
have been hampered by the lack of a conditional gene ablation.
METHODS: We examined three mouse models of mammary-specific ablation of Foxa1 in 
ductal epithelial cells to identify the best system for complete and
mammary-specific ablation of Foxa1.
RESULTS: We found that MMTV-Cre and MMTV-rtTA;Tet-On-Cre led to partial deletion 
of Foxa1 and attenuated mammary duct formation, whereas Krt14-Cre led to complete
ablation of Foxa1 and abolished mammary duct formation, in Foxa1(loxP/loxP) mice.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that Foxa1 is essential for mammary duct
formation, and reveal a series of mouse models in which mammary expression of
Foxa1 can be attenuated or completely blocked. Our study also suggests a
potentially powerful model for complete ablation of Foxa1 in mammary epithelial
cells using Krt14-driven Cre expression in an inducible manner, such as
Krt14-rtTA;Tet-On-Cre. This model system will facilitate further in vivo
functional studies of Foxa1 or other factors in mammary gland development and
tumor formation and progression. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26919034  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7545. [Epub ahead of print]

MiR-194 inhibits the proliferation, invasion, migration, and enhances the
chemosensitivity of non-small cell lung cancer cells by targeting forkhead box A1
protein.

Zhu X(1), Li D(1), Yu F(1), Jia C(1), Xie J(1), Ma Y(1), Fan S(1), Cai H(1), Luo 
Q(1), Lv Z(1), Fan L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China. (2)Department of Respiration, 
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
PR China.

Recent studies have implied that miRNAs may play a crucial role in tumor
progression and may be involved in the modulation of some drug resistance in
cancer cells. Earlier studies have demonstrated that miR-194 was involved in
tumor metastasis and drug resistance in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC),
whereas their expression and roles on NSCLC still need further elucidation. In
the current study, we found that miR-194 is decreased in NSCLC samples compared
with adjacent non-cancerous lung samples, and low expression of miR-194 predicts 
poor patient survival. Both in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that ectopic 
stable expression miR-194 suppressed proliferation, migration, invasion and
metastasis and induced apoptosis in NSCLC cells and that this suppression could
be reversed by reintroducing forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), a functional target of
miR-194. In addition, miR-194 was downregulated in in cisplatin-resisted human
NSCLC cell line-A549/DDP and overexpression of miR-194 increases cisplatin
sensitivity. These findings suggested that miR-194 inhibits proliferation and
metastasis and reverses cisplatin-resistance of NSCLC cells and may be useful as 
a new potential therapeutic target for NSCLC.

PMID: 26909612  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Cancer Sci. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.1111/cas.12909. [Epub ahead of print]

SERPINI1 regulates the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in an orthotopic
implantation model of colorectal cancer.

Matsuda Y(1), Miura K(2), Yamane J(3), Shima H(4), Fujibuchi W(3), Ishida K(5),
Fujishima F(6), Ohnuma S(1), Sasaki H(1), Nagao M(1), Tanaka N(1), Satoh K(7),
Naitoh T(1), Unno M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 
Miyagi, Japan. (2)Department of Surgery, Miyagi Cancer Center,, Natori, Miyagi,
Japan. (3)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
Kyoto, Japan. (4)Division of Cancer Chemotherapy, Miyagi Cancer Center Research
Institute, Natori, Miyagi, Japan. (5)Department of Molecular Diagnostic
Pathology, Iwate Medical University School of Medicine, Morioka, Iwate, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Hospital, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(7)Division of Cancer Stem Cell, Miyagi Cancer Center Research Institute, Natori,
Miyagi, Japan.

An increasingly accepted concept is that the progression of colorectal cancer is 
accompanied by the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). In our study, in
order to characterize the properties of the EMT in 16 colorectal cancer cell
lines, the cells were first orthotopically implanted into nude mice, and the
tumors in vivo, as well as cells cultured in vitro, were immunostained for EMT
markers. The immunostaining revealed that seven of the cells had an epithelial
phenotype with a high expression of E-cadherin, whereas other cells exhibited
opposite patterns, such as a high expression of vimentin (CX-1, COLO205, CloneA, 
HCT116 and SW48). Among the cells with an expression of vimentin, some expressed 
vimentin in the orthotopic tumors but not in the cultured cells (SW480, SW620 and
COLO320). We evaluated the above findings in combination with microarray
analyses, and selected five genes: CHST11, SERPINI1, AGR2, FBP1 and FOXA1. Next, 
we downregulated the expression of the SERPINI1 with siRNA in the cells, the
results of which showed reverse-EMT changes at the protein level and in the
cellular morphology. Along with immunohistochemical analyses, finally we
confirmed the effect of the intracellular and secreted SERPINI1 protein of SW620 
cells, which supported the importance of the SERPINI1 in the EMT. The development
of therapeutic strategies targeting the EMT is ongoing, including methods
targeting TGF-ß signaling pathway as well as Wnt pathway. SERPINI1 is an
important regulator of the EMT, and our findings help to elucidate the signaling 
pathways of the EMT, hopefully clarifying therapeutic pathways as well. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26892864  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Feb 5;50(4):1065-82. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150733.

Meta-Analysis of Transcriptome Data Related to Hippocampus Biopsies and
iPSC-Derived Neuronal Cells from Alzheimer's Disease Patients Reveals an
Association with FOXA1 and FOXA2 Gene Regulatory Networks.

Wruck W, Schröter F, Adjaye J.

Although the incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is continuously increasing in 
the aging population worldwide, effective therapies are not available. The
interplay between causative genetic and environmental factors is partially
understood. Meta-analyses have been performed on aspects such as polymorphisms,
cytokines, and cognitive training. Here, we propose a meta-analysis approach
based on hierarchical clustering analysis of a reliable training set of
hippocampus biopsies, which is condensed to a gene expression signature. This
gene expression signature was applied to various test sets of brain biopsies and 
iPSC-derived neuronal cell models to demonstrate its ability to distinguish AD
samples from control. Thus, our identified AD-gene signature may form the basis
for determination of biomarkers that are urgently needed to overcome current
diagnostic shortfalls. Intriguingly, the well-described AD-related genes APP and 
APOE are not within the signature because their gene expression profiles show a
lower correlation to the disease phenotype than genes from the signature. This is
in line with the differing characteristics of the disease as early-/late-onset or
with/without genetic predisposition. To investigate the gene signature's systemic
role(s), signaling pathways, gene ontologies, and transcription factors were
analyzed which revealed over-representation of response to stress, regulation of 
cellular metabolic processes, and reactive oxygen species. Additionally, our
results clearly point to an important role of FOXA1 and FOXA2 gene regulatory
networks in the etiology of AD. This finding is in corroboration with the
recently reported major role of the dopaminergic system in the development of AD 
and its regulation by FOXA1 and FOXA2.

PMID: 26890743  [PubMed - in process]


18. Neural Plast. 2016;2016:6097107. doi: 10.1155/2016/6097107. Epub 2015 Dec 31.

Neuroprotective Transcription Factors in Animal Models of Parkinson Disease.

Blaudin de Thé FX(1), Rekaik H(1), Prochiantz A(1), Fuchs J(1), Joshi RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS 
UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231
Paris Cedex 05, France.

A number of transcription factors, including En1/2, Foxa1/2, Lmx1a/b, Nurr1,
Otx2, and Pitx3, with key roles in midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neuron
development, also regulate adult mDA neuron survival and physiology. Mouse models
with targeted disruption of some of these genes display several features
reminiscent of Parkinson disease (PD), in particular the selective and
progressive loss of mDA neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc). The
characterization of these animal models has provided valuable insights into
various mechanisms of PD pathogenesis. Therefore, the dissection of the
mechanisms and survival signalling pathways engaged by these transcription
factors to protect mDA neuron from degeneration can suggest novel therapeutic
strategies. The work on En1/2-mediated neuroprotection also highlights the
potential of protein transduction technology for neuroprotective approaches in
PD.

PMCID: PMC4736191
PMID: 26881122  [PubMed - in process]


19. Gene. 2016 May 15;582(2):137-42. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2016.02.001. Epub 2016 Feb
3.

sMicroRNA-1290 inhibits cells proliferation and migration by targeting FOXA1 in
gastric cancer cells.

Lin M(1), Shi C(1), Lin X(1), Pan J(2), Shen S(1), Xu Z(2), Chen Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou,
Fujian Province 350001, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Fujian Medical
University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian Province 350001, China. (3)Department
of Oncology, Fujian Medical University Union Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian Province
350001, China. Electronic address: qiang_c@yeah.net.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Gastric cancer is the third leading cause of cancer-related
deaths in the world with high mortality rate due to the lack of markers in early 
detection and effective therapies. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a critical part of
epigenetic regulations in tumor, have been shown to be closely related to the
initiation, development, invasion, metastasis and prognosis of gastric cancer.
The present study aims to investigate the expression of miR-1290 in gastric tumor
cells and to elucidate the target gene of miR-1290 in SGC-7901 gastric cancer
cells.
METHODOLOGY: The fluorescence in situ hybridization, real time PCR and Western
blot were used to investigate the expression of miR-1290 in gastric tumor cells
and clinical gastric tumor samples. The effect of miR-1290 expression on gastric 
tumor cells was studied using Synthetic miR-1290 inhibitor transfection, in vitro
wound healing assay and flow cytometry analysis. Bioinformatics and Luciferase
reporter assay were used to predict and validate the target gene of miR-1290.
RESULTS: Our results revealed that miR-1290 was highly expressed in SGC-7901
gastric cancer cells as well as in clinical gastric cancer samples, which was
correlated with clinical stages, depth of invasion and lymph node metastasis.
Synthetic miR-1290 inhibitor transfection significantly inhibited the
proliferation and migration of SGC-7901 cells. Bioinformatics analysis and
luciferase reporter assay suggested that miR-1290 functioned in gastric cancer
cells by targeting FOXA1 gene.
CONCLUSION: miR-1290 promotes gastric tumor cells proliferation and metastasis
through FOXA1, which could be used as a marker for diagnosis and a target for
therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26851540  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 31. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7092. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation of functional hepatocytes from human spermatogonial stem cells.

Chen Z(1), Sun M(1), Yuan Q(1), Niu M(1), Yao C(1), Hou J(1), Wang H(1), Wen
L(1), Liu Y(1), Li Z(2), He Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji- Med X Clinical
Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China. (2)Department of Urology, Ren Ji
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai Institute
of Andrology, Shanghai 200001, China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Assisted
Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai 200127, China. (4)Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

To generate functional human hepatocytes from stem cells and/or extra-hepatic
tissues could provide an important source of cells for treating liver diseases.
Spermatogonial stem cells (SSCs) have an unlimited plasticity since they can
dedifferentiate and transdifferentiate to other cell lineages. However,
generation of mature and functional hepatocytes from human SSCs has not yet been 
achieved. Here we have for the first time reported direct transdifferentiation of
human SSCs to mature and functional hepatocytes by three-step induction using the
defined condition medium. Human SSCs were first transdifferentiated to hepatic
stem cells, as evidenced by their morphology and biopotential nature of
co-expressing hepatocyte and cholangiocyte markers but not hallmarks for
embryonic stem cells. Hepatic stem cells were further induced to differentiate
into mature hepatocytes identified by their morphological traits and strong
expression of CK8, CK18, ALB, AAT, TF, TAT, and cytochrome enzymes rather than
CK7 or CK19. Significantly, mature hepatocytes derived from human SSCs assumed
functional attributes of human hepatocytes, because they could produce albumin,
remove ammonia, and uptake and release indocyanine green. Moreover, expression of
ß-CATENIN, HNF4A, FOXA1 and GATA4 was upregulated during the transdifferentiation
of human SSCs to mature hepatocytes. Collectively, human SSCs could directly
transdifferentiate to mature and functional hepatocytes. This study could offer
an invaluable source of human hepatocytes for curing liver disorders and drug
toxicology screening and provide novel insights into mechanisms underlying human 
liver regeneration.

PMID: 26840458  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Jan 8;9:191-202. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S91748. eCollection
2016.

Bioinformatics analysis of hepatitis C virus genotype 2a-induced human
hepatocellular carcinoma in Huh7 cells.

Xu P(1), Wu M(2), Chen H(1), Xu J(1), Wu M(3), Li M(4), Qian F(4), Xu J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Inspection Center, Affiliated Infectious Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China; Key Laboratory of TB
Prevention and Cure of Suzhou City, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic
of China. (2)Key Laboratory of TB Prevention and Cure of Suzhou City, Suzhou,
Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China; Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Affiliated Infectious Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province,
People's Republic of China. (3)Inspection Center, Affiliated Infectious Hospital 
of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Affiliated Infectious Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, People's Republic of China. (5)Key
Laboratory of TB Prevention and Cure of Suzhou City, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province,
People's Republic of China; Department of Infectious Diseases, Affiliated
Infectious Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a liver cancer that could be induced by
hepatitis C virus genotype 2a Japanese fulminant hepatitis-1 (JFH-1) strain. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms of HCC. The
microarray data GSE20948 includes 14 JFH-1- and 14 mock (equal volume of medium
[control])-infected Huh7 samples. The data were downloaded from the Gene
Expression Omnibus. After data processing, soft cluster analyses were performed
to identify co-regulated genes with similar temporal expression patterns.
Functional and pathway enrichment analyses, as well as functional annotation
analysis, were performed. Subsequently, combined networks of protein-protein
interaction network, microRNA regulatory network, and transcriptional regulatory 
network were constructed. Hub nodes, modules, and five clusters of co-regulated
genes were also identified. In total, 173 up and 207 down co-regulated genes were
separately identified in JFH-1-infected Huh7 cells compared with those of control
cells. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that up co-regulated genes were
related to skeletal system morphogenesis and neuron differentiation and down
co-regulated genes were related to steroid/cholesterol/sterol metabolisms. Hub
genes (such as IRF1, GBP1, ICAM1, Foxa1, DHCR7, HMGCS2, and MSMO1) were
identified. Transcription factors IRF1 and Foxa1 were the targets of miR-130a,
miR-17-5p, and miR-20a. PPARGC1A was targeted by miR-29 family, and MSMO1 was the
target of miR-23 family. Hub nodes (such as IRF1, GBP1, ICAM1, Foxa1, DHCR7,
HMGCS2, and MSMO1) and microRNAs might be used as candidate biomarkers of
JFH-1-infected HCC.

PMCID: PMC4712971
PMID: 26811688  [PubMed]


22. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan 15. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25494. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcription Factors and Medium Suitable for Initiating the Differentiation of
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells to the Hepatocyte Lineage.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Motoyoshi Y(3), Sugiyama T(4), Yamamoto S(5),
Ishige N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu
Hospital, 934-5 Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan.
(2)Department of Radiology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 
934-5 Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (3)Department of
Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (4)Department of
Rheumatology, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, National Hospital Organization, Shimoshizu Hospital, 934-5
Shikawatashi, Yotsukaido City, Chiba, 284-0003, Japan.

Transcription factors and culture media were investigated to determine the
condition to initiate the differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells most efficiently. The expression of genes in human adult liver was compared
with that in 201B7 cells (iPS cells) using cDNA microarray analysis. Episomal
plasmids expressing transcription factors were constructed. 201B7 cells were
transfected with the episomal plasmids and cultured in ReproFF (feeder-free media
maintaining pluripotency), Leibovitz-15 (L15), William's E (WE), or Dulbecco's
Modified Eagle Medium/Nutrient F-12 Ham (DF12) for seven days. RNA was isolated
and subjected to real-time quantitative PCR to analyze the expression of
alpha-feto protein (AFP) and albumin. cDNA microarray analysis revealed 16
transcription factors that were upregulated in human adult liver relative to that
in 201B7 cells. Episomal plasmids expressing these 16 genes were transfected into
201B7 cells. CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA), CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta (CEBPB), forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), and forkhead box A3 (FOXA3)
up-regulated AFP and down-regulated Nanog. These four genes were further
analyzed. The expression of AFP and albumin was the highest in 201B7 cells
transfected with the combination of CEBPA, CEBPB, FOXA1, and FOXA3 and cultured
in WE. The combination of CEBPA, CEBPB, FOXA1, and FOXA3 was suitable for 201B7
cells to initiate differentiation to the hepatocyte lineage and WE was the most
suitable medium for culture after transfection. This article is protected by
copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773721  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Oncogene. 2016 Jan 11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.496. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXA1 acts upstream of GATA2 and AR in hormonal regulation of gene expression.

Zhao JC(1), Fong KW(1), Jin HJ(1), Yang YA(1), Kim J(1), Yu J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA.

Hormonal regulation of gene expression by androgen receptor (AR) is tightly
controlled by many transcriptional cofactors, including pioneer factors FOXA1 and
GATA2, which, however, exhibit distinct expression patterns and functional roles 
in prostate cancer. Here, we examined how FOXA1, GATA2 and AR crosstalk and
regulate hormone-dependent gene expression in prostate cancer cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing analysis revealed that FOXA1 reprograms both AR
and GATA2 cistrome by preferably recruiting them to FKHD-containing genomic
sites. By contrast, GATA2 is unable to shift AR or FOXA1 to GATA motifs. Rather, 
GATA2 co-occupancy enhances AR and FOXA1 binding to nearby ARE and FKHD sites,
respectively. Similarly, AR increases, but not reprograms, GATA2 and FOXA1
cistromes. Concordantly, GATA2 and AR strongly enhance the transcriptional
program of each other, whereas FOXA1 regulates GATA2- and AR-mediated gene
expression in a context-dependent manner due to its reprogramming effects. Taken 
together, our data delineated for the first time the distinct mechanisms by which
GATA2 and FOXA1 regulate AR cistrome and suggest that FOXA1 acts upstream of
GATA2 and AR in determining hormone-dependent gene expression in prostate
cancer.Oncogene advance online publication, 11 January 2016;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.496.

PMID: 26751772  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Jan 6. pii: gkv1528. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrative analysis identifies targetable CREB1/FoxA1 transcriptional
co-regulation as a predictor of prostate cancer recurrence.

Sunkel B(1), Wu D(2), Chen Z(2), Wang CM(3), Liu X(4), Ye Z(3), Horning AM(3),
Liu J(3), Mahalingam D(3), Lopez-Nicora H(5), Lin CL(3), Goodfellow PJ(4),
Clinton SK(6), Jin VX(3), Chen CL(3), Huang TH(3), Wang Q(7).

Author information: 
(1)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of Molecular 
Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH 43210, USA The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (4)The Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (5)Department of
Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (6)The Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Division of
Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (7)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology 
and Medical Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA The Ohio
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
qianben.wang@osumc.edu.

Identifying prostate cancer-driving transcription factors (TFs) in addition to
the androgen receptor promises to improve our ability to effectively diagnose and
treat this disease. We employed an integrative genomics analysis of master TFs
CREB1 and FoxA1 in androgen-dependent prostate cancer (ADPC) and
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) cell lines, primary prostate cancer
tissues and circulating tumor cells (CTCs) to investigate their role in defining 
prostate cancer gene expression profiles. Combining genome-wide binding site and 
gene expression profiles we define CREB1 as a critical driver of pro-survival,
cell cycle and metabolic transcription programs. We show that CREB1 and FoxA1
co-localize and mutually influence each other's binding to define disease-driving
transcription profiles associated with advanced prostate cancer. Gene expression 
analysis in human prostate cancer samples found that CREB1/FoxA1 target gene
panels predict prostate cancer recurrence. Finally, we showed that this signaling
pathway is sensitive to compounds that inhibit the transcription co-regulatory
factor MED1. These findings not only reveal a novel, global transcriptional
co-regulatory function of CREB1 and FoxA1, but also suggest CREB1/FoxA1 signaling
is a targetable driver of prostate cancer progression and serves as a biomarker
of poor clinical outcomes.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26743006  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Horm Cancer. 2016 Apr;7(2):84-103. doi: 10.1007/s12672-015-0239-9. Epub 2016 Jan 
4.

Moving Beyond the Androgen Receptor (AR): Targeting AR-Interacting Proteins to
Treat Prostate Cancer.

Foley C(1,)(2), Mitsiades N(3,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Suite R407, MS: BCM187, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. (2)Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Suite R407, MS: BCM187,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor 
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Suite R407, MS: BCM187, Houston, TX,
77030, USA. mitsiade@bcm.edu. (4)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Suite R407, MS: BCM187, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
mitsiade@bcm.edu. (5)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 77030, USA. mitsiade@bcm.edu. (6)Center for Drug Discovery, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. mitsiade@bcm.edu.

Medical or surgical castration serves as the backbone of systemic therapy for
advanced and metastatic prostate cancer, taking advantage of the importance of
androgen signaling in this disease. Unfortunately, resistance to castration
emerges almost universally. Despite the development and approval of new and more 
potent androgen synthesis inhibitors and androgen receptor (AR) antagonists,
prostate cancers continue to develop resistance to these therapeutics, while
often maintaining their dependence on the AR signaling axis. This highlights the 
need for innovative therapeutic approaches that aim to continue disrupting AR
downstream signaling but are orthogonal to directly targeting the AR itself. In
this review, we discuss the preclinical research that has been done, as well as
clinical trials for prostate cancer, on inhibiting several important families of 
AR-interacting proteins, including chaperones (such as heat shock protein 90
(HSP90) and FKBP52), pioneer factors (including forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1)
and GATA-2), and AR transcriptional coregulators such as the p160 steroid
receptor coactivators (SRCs) SRC-1, SRC-2, SRC-3, as well as lysine deacetylases 
(KDACs) and lysine acetyltransferases (KATs). Researching the effect of-and
developing new therapeutic agents that target-the AR signaling axis is critical
to advancing our understanding of prostate cancer biology, to continue to improve
treatments for prostate cancer and for overcoming castration resistance.

PMID: 26728473  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cancer Sci. 2016 Mar;107(3):281-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12870. Epub 2016 Feb 19.

FOXA1 expression affects the proliferation activity of luminal breast cancer stem
cell populations.

Tachi K(1,)(2), Shiraishi A(2), Bando H(3), Yamashita T(2), Tsuboi I(2), Kato
T(2,)(4), Hara H(3), Ohneda O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast-Thyroid-Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of 
Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(3)Department of Breast-Thyroid-Endocrine Surgery, Institute of Clinical
Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. (4)Ph.D. Program in Human
Biology, School of Integrative and Grobal Majors, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan.

The expression of estrogen receptor is the key in most breast cancers (BC) and
binding of estrogen receptor to the genome correlates to Forkhead protein (FOXA1)
expression. We herein assessed the correlation between the cancer stem cell (CSC)
population and FOXA1 expression in luminal BC. We established luminal BC cells
derived from metastatic pleural effusion and analyzed the potency of CSC and
related factors with established luminal BC cell lines. We also confirmed that
mammosphere cultures have an increased aldehyde dehydrogenase-positive
population, which is one of the CSC markers, compared with adherent culture
cells. Using a quantitative PCR analysis, we found that mammosphere forming cells
showed a higher expression of FOXA1 and stemness-related genes compared with
adherent culture cells. Furthermore, the growth activity and colony-forming
activity of 4-hydroxytamoxifen-treated BC cells were inhibited in a mammosphere
assay. Interestingly, 4-hydroxytamoxifen-resistant cells had significantly
increased FOXA1 gene expression levels. Finally, we established short hairpin RNA
of FOXA1 (shFOXA1) MCF-7 cells and investigated the relationship between
self-renewal potential and FOXA1 expression. As a result, we found no significant
difference in the number of mammospheres but decreased colony formation in
shFOXA1 MCF-7 cells compared with control. These results suggest that the
expression of FOXA1 appears to be involved in the proliferation of immature BC
cells rather than the induction of stemness-related genes and self-renewal
potency of CSCs.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 26708273  [PubMed - in process]


27. Endocrinology. 2016 Feb;157(2):536-47. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1725. Epub 2015 Dec
22.

a-Cell Dysfunctions and Molecular Alterations in Male Insulinopenic Diabetic Mice
Are Not Completely Corrected by Insulin.

Dusaulcy R(1), Handgraaf S(1), Heddad-Masson M(1), Visentin F(1), Vesin C(1),
Reimann F(1), Gribble F(1), Philippe J(1), Gosmain Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diabetes Laboratory (R.D., S.H., M.H.-M., F.V., J.P., Y.G.),
Division of Endocrinology-Diabetes-Hypertension and Nutrition, University
Hospital/University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland; Cambridge
Institute for Medical Research (F.R., F.G.), Wellcome Trust/Medical Research
Council, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom; and Department of
Cell Physiology and Metabolism (C.V.), University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 
Geneva, Switzerland.

Glucagon and a-cell dysfunction are critical in the development of hyperglycemia 
during diabetes both in humans and rodents. We hypothesized that a-cell
dysfunction leading to dysregulated glucagon secretion in diabetes is due to both
a lack of insulin and intrinsic defects. To characterize a-cell dysfunction in
diabetes, we used glucagon-Venus transgenic male mice and induced insulinopenic
hyperglycemia by streptozotocin administration leading to alterations of glucagon
secretion. We investigated the in vivo impact of insulinopenic hyperglycemia on
glucagon-producing cells using FACS-sorted a-cells from control and diabetic
mice. We demonstrate that increased glucagonemia in diabetic mice is mainly due
to increases of glucagon release and biosynthesis per cell compared with controls
without changes in a-cell mass. We identified genes coding for proteins involved 
in glucagon biosynthesis and secretion, a-cell differentiation, and potential
stress markers such as the glucagon, Arx, MafB, cMaf, Brain4, Foxa1, Foxa3,
HNF4a, TCF7L2, Glut1, Sglt2, Cav2.1, Cav2.2, Nav1.7, Kir6.2/Sur1, Pten, IR,
NeuroD1, GPR40, and Sumo1 genes, which were abnormally regulated in diabetic
mice. Importantly, insulin treatment partially corrected a-cell function and
expression of genes coding for proglucagon, or involved in glucagon secretion,
glucose transport and insulin signaling but not those coding for cMAF, FOXA1, and
a-cell differentiation markers as well as GPR40, NEUROD1, CAV2.1, and SUMO1. Our 
results indicate that insulinopenic diabetes induce marked a-cell dysfunction and
molecular alteration, which are only partially corrected by in vivo insulin
treatment.

PMID: 26696123  [PubMed - in process]


28. Endocrinology. 2016 Mar;157(3):1094-109. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1312. Epub 2015 Dec
17.

Nfib Regulates Transcriptional Networks That Control the Development of Prostatic
Hyperplasia.

Grabowska MM(1), Kelly SM(1), Reese AL(1), Cates JM(1), Case TC(1), Zhang J(1),
DeGraff DJ(1), Strand DW(1), Miller NL(1), Clark PE(1), Hayward SW(1),
Gronostajski RM(1), Anderson PD(1), Matusik RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery (M.M.G., T.C.C., J.Z., N.L.M., P.E.C., S.W.H., 
R.J.M.), Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology (J.M.C.), and
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center (P.E.C., R.J.M.), Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232; Department of Biological Sciences (S.M.K.,
A.L.R., P.D.A.), Salisbury University, Salisbury, Maryland 21801; Department of
Pathology (D.J.G.), Penn State University College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania 17033; Department of Urology (D.W.S.), University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390; Department of Cancer Biology
(S.W.H.), NorthShore HealthSystem Research Institute, Evanston, Illinois 60201;
Department of Biochemistry, Genetics, Genomics and Bioinformatics Program
(R.M.G.), University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14203; and Department of Cell 
and Developmental Biology (R.J.M.), Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37235.

A functional complex consisting of androgen receptor (AR) and forkhead box A1
(FOXA1) proteins supports prostatic development, differentiation, and disease. In
addition, the interaction of FOXA1 with cofactors such as nuclear factor I (NFI) 
family members modulates AR target gene expression. However, the global role of
specific NFI family members has yet to be described in the prostate. In these
studies, chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by DNA sequencing in
androgen-dependent LNCaP prostate cancer cells demonstrated that 64.3% of NFIB
binding sites are associated with AR and FOXA1 binding sites. Interrogation of
published data revealed that genes associated with NFIB binding sites are
predominantly induced after dihydrotestosterone treatment of LNCaP cells, whereas
NFIB knockdown studies demonstrated that loss of NFIB drives increased AR
expression and superinduction of a subset of AR target genes. Notably, genes
bound by NFIB only are associated with cell division and cell cycle. To define
the role of NFIB in vivo, mouse Nfib knockout prostatic tissue was rescued via
renal capsule engraftment. Loss of Nfib expression resulted in prostatic
hyperplasia, which did not resolve in response to castration, and an expansion of
an intermediate cell population in a small subset of grafts. In human benign
prostatic hyperplasia, luminal NFIB loss correlated with more severe disease.
Finally, some areas of intermediate cell expansion were also associated with NFIB
loss. Taken together, these results show a fundamental role for NFIB as a
coregulator of AR action in the prostate and in controlling prostatic
hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC4769366 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26677878  [PubMed - in process]


29. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:17826. doi: 10.1038/srep17826.

The ratio of FoxA1 to FoxA2 in lung adenocarcinoma is regulated by LncRNA HOTAIR 
and chromatin remodeling factor LSH.

Wang R(1), Shi Y(2,)(3,)(4), Chen L(2,)(3,)(4), Jiang Y(2,)(3,)(4), Mao
C(2,)(3,)(4), Yan B(2,)(3,)(4), Liu S(5), Shan B(6), Tao Y(2,)(3,)(4), Wang
X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital of 
Central South University, Changsha, China. (2)Cancer Research Institute, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410078 China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Hunan, 410078 China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Hunan, 410078 China.
(5)Center for Medicine Research, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078 China. (6)College of Medical Sciences, Washington State
University Spokane, 412 E. Spokane Falls Boulevard, Spokane, WA 99202, USA.

The lncRNA HOTAIR is a critical regulator of cancer progression. Chromatin
remodeling factor LSH is critical for normal development of plants and mammals.
However, the underlying mechanisms causing this in cancer are not entirely clear.
The functional diversification of the FOXA1 and FOXA2 contributes to the target
genes during evolution and carcinogenesis. Little is known about the ratio of
FOXA1 to FOXA2 in cancer. We here found that both HOTAIR and LSH overexpression
was significantly correlated with poor survival in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma cancer (ADC). Also, the ratio of FOXA1 and FOXA2 is linked with
poor survival in patients with lung ADC. HOTAIR regulates the ratio of FOXA1 to
FOXA2 and migration and invasion. HOTAIR and the ratio of FOXA1 to FOXA2 are
negatively correlated. HOTAIR knockdown inhibits migration and invasion. HOTAIR
is associated with LSH, and this association linked with the binding of LSH in
the promoter of FOXA1, not FOXA2. Targeted inhibition of HOTAIR suppresses the
migratory and invasive properties. These data suggest that HOTAIR is an important
mediator of the ratio of FOXA1 and FOXA2 and LSH involves in, and suggest that
HOTAIR inhibition may represent a promising therapeutic option for suppressing
lung ADC progression.

PMCID: PMC4675985
PMID: 26658322  [PubMed - in process]


30. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Dec 10. pii: gkv1350. [Epub ahead of print]

Quantification of transcription factor-DNA binding affinity in a living cell.

Belikov S(1), Berg OG(2), Wrange Ö(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177
Stockholm, Sweden orjan.wrange@ki.se. (2)Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Uppsala University, BMC Box 596, SE-75124 Uppsala, Sweden.

The apparent dissociation constant (Kd) for specific binding of glucocorticoid
receptor (GR) and androgen receptor (AR) to DNA was determined in vivo in Xenopus
oocytes. The total nuclear receptor concentration was quantified as specifically 
retained [(3)H]-hormone in manually isolated oocyte nuclei. DNA was introduced by
nuclear microinjection of single stranded phagemid DNA, chromatin is then formed 
during second strand synthesis. The fraction of DNA sites occupied by the
expressed receptor was determined by dimethylsulphate in vivo footprinting and
used for calculation of the receptor-DNA binding affinity. The forkhead
transcription factor FoxA1 enhanced the DNA binding by GR with an apparent Kd of 
~1 µM and dramatically stimulated DNA binding by AR with an apparent Kd of ~0.13 
µM at a composite androgen responsive DNA element containing one FoxA1 binding
site and one palindromic hormone receptor binding site known to bind one receptor
homodimer. FoxA1 exerted a weak constitutive- and strongly cooperative DNA
binding together with AR but had a less prominent effect with GR, the difference 
reflecting the licensing function of FoxA1 at this androgen responsive DNA
element.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26657626  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. J Dermatol Sci. 2016 Feb;81(2):129-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2015.11.001. Epub 
2015 Nov 10.

Identification of potassium and chloride channels in eccrine sweat glands.

Cui CY(1), Sima J(2), Yin M(2), Michel M(2), Kunisada M(3), Schlessinger D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, 251 Bayview Blvd., Suite 100, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address:
cuic@mail.nih.gov. (2)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Blvd., Suite 100, Baltimore, MD, USA. 
(3)Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Related, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.

PMID: 26627722  [PubMed - in process]


32. Cell. 2015 Nov 5;163(4):1011-25. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.025.

The Molecular Taxonomy of Primary Prostate Cancer.

Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.

Collaborators: Abeshouse A, Ahn J, Akbani R, Ally A, Amin S, Andry CD, Annala M, 
Aprikian A, Armenia J, Arora A, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barbieri CE,
Bauer T, Benz CC, Bergeron A, Beroukhim R, Berrios M, Bivol A, Bodenheimer T,
Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Borges dos Reis R, Boutros PC, Bowen J, Bowlby R, Boyd J, 
Bradley RK, Breggia A, Brimo F, Bristow CA, Brooks D, Broom BM, Bryce AH, Bubley 
G, Burks E, Butterfield YS, Button M, Canes D, Carlotti CG, Carlsen R, Carmel M, 
Carroll PR, Carter SL, Cartun R, Carver BS, Chan JM, Chang MT, Chen Y, Cherniack 
AD, Chevalier S, Chin L, Cho J, Chu A, Chuah E, Chudamani S, Cibulskis K,
Ciriello G, Clarke A, Cooperberg MR, Corcoran NM, Costello AJ, Cowan J, Crain D, 
Curley E, David K, Demchok JA, Demichelis F, Dhalla N, Dhir R, Doueik A, Drake B,
Dvinge H, Dyakova N, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S, Freedland S, Fu Y, Gabriel
SB, Gao J, Gardner J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Gerstein MB,
Getz G, Godwin AK, Gopalan A, Graefen M, Graim K, Gribbin T, Guin R, Gupta M,
Hadjipanayis A, Haider S, Hamel L, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hess J, Hoadley KA,
Holbrook AH, Holt RA, Holway A, Hovens CM, Hoyle AP, Huang M, Hutter CM, Ittmann 
M, Iype L, Jefferys SR, Jones CD, Jones SJ, Juhl H, Kahles A, Kane CJ, Kasaian K,
Kerger M, Khurana E, Kim J, Klein RJ, Kucherlapati R, Lacombe L, Ladanyi M, Lai
PH, Laird PW, Lander ES, Latour M, Lawrence MS, Lau K, LeBien T, Lee D, Lee S,
Lehmann KV, Leraas KM, Leshchiner I, Leung R, Libertino JA, Lichtenberg TM, Lin
P, Linehan WM, Ling S, Lippman SM, Liu J, Liu W, Lochovsky L, Loda M, Logothetis 
C, Lolla L, Longacre T, Lu Y, Luo J, Ma Y, Mahadeshwar HS, Mallery D, Mariamidze 
A, Marra MA, Mayo M, McCall S, McKercher G, Meng S, Mes-Masson AM, Merino MJ,
Meyerson M, Mieczkowski PA, Mills GB, Mills Shaw KR, Minner S, Moinzadeh A, Moore
RA, Morris S, Morrison C, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Myers JB, Naresh R,
Nelson J, Nelson MA, Nelson PS, Newton Y, Noble MS, Noushmehr H, Nykter M,
Pantazi A, Parfenov M, Park PJ, Parker JS, Paulauskis J, Penny R, Perou CM, Piché
A, Pihl T, Pinto PA, Prandi D, Protopopov A, Ramirez NC, Rao A, Rathmell WK,
Rätsch G, Ren X, Reuter VE, Reynolds SM, Rhie SK, Rieger-Christ K, Roach J,
Robertson AG, Robinson B, Rubin MA, Saad F, Sadeghi S, Saksena G, Saller C,
Salner A, Sanchez-Vega F, Sander C, Sandusky G, Sauter G, Sboner A, Scardino PT, 
Scarlata E, Schein JE, Schlomm T, Schmidt LS, Schultz N, Schumacher SE, Seidman
J, Neder L, Seth S, Sharp A, Shelton C, Shelton T, Shen H, Shen R, Sherman M,
Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J, Shmulevich I, Simko J, Simon R, Simons JV, Sipahimalani
P, Skelly T, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Song X, Sorcini A, Sougnez C, Stepa S, Stewart
C, Stewart J, Stuart JM, Sullivan TB, Sun C, Sun H, Tam A, Tan D, Tang J,
Tarnuzzer R, Tarvin K, Taylor BS, Teebagy P, Tenggara I, Têtu B, Tewari A,
Thiessen N, Thompson T, Thorne LB, Tirapelli DP, Tomlins SA, Trevisan FA,
Troncoso P, True LD, Tsourlakis MC, Tyekucheva S, Van Allen E, Van Den Berg DJ,
Veluvolu U, Verhaak R, Vocke CD, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Q, Wang W, Wang Z, Weinhold 
N, Weinstein JN, Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wise L, Witte J, Wu CC, Wu J, Wu 
Y, Xu AW, Yadav SS, Yang L, Yang L, Yau C, Ye H, Yena P, Zeng T, Zenklusen JC,
Zhang H, Zhang J, Zhang J, Zhang W, Zhong Y, Zhu K, Zmuda E.

There is substantial heterogeneity among primary prostate cancers, evident in the
spectrum of molecular abnormalities and its variable clinical course. As part of 
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we present a comprehensive molecular analysis of 
333 primary prostate carcinomas. Our results revealed a molecular taxonomy in
which 74% of these tumors fell into one of seven subtypes defined by specific
gene fusions (ERG, ETV1/4, and FLI1) or mutations (SPOP, FOXA1, and IDH1).
Epigenetic profiles showed substantial heterogeneity, including an IDH1 mutant
subset with a methylator phenotype. Androgen receptor (AR) activity varied widely
and in a subtype-specific manner, with SPOP and FOXA1 mutant tumors having the
highest levels of AR-induced transcripts. 25% of the prostate cancers had a
presumed actionable lesion in the PI3K or MAPK signaling pathways, and DNA repair
genes were inactivated in 19%. Our analysis reveals molecular heterogeneity among
primary prostate cancers, as well as potentially actionable molecular defects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4695400 [Available on 2016-11-05]
PMID: 26544944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur Urol. 2015 Nov 2. pii: S0302-2838(15)01014-3. doi:
10.1016/j.eururo.2015.10.031. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic Progression of High Grade Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia to Prostate
Cancer.

Jung SH(1), Shin S(1), Kim MS(2), Baek IP(1), Lee JY(3), Lee SH(4), Kim TM(5),
Lee SH(6), Chung YJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea; Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, College 
of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of
Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Hospital Pathology, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Medical Informatics,
College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: suhulee@catholic.ac.kr. (7)Department of
Microbiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
Korea; Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, College of Medicine,
The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address:
yejun@catholic.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Although high grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) is
considered a neoplastic lesion that precedes prostate cancer (PCA), the genomic
structures of HGPIN remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: Identification of the genomic landscape of HGPIN and the genomic
differences between HGPIN and PCA that may drive the progression to PCA.
DESIGN, SETTINGS, AND PARTICIPANTS: We analyzed 20 regions of paired HGPIN and
PCA from six patients using whole-exome sequencing and array-comparative genomic 
hybridization.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Somatic mutation and copy number
alteration (CNA) profiles of paired HGPIN and PCA were measured and compared.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: The number of total mutations and CNAs of HGPINs were
significantly fewer than those of PCAs. Mutations in FOXA1 and CNAs (1q and 8q
gains) were detected in both HGPIN and PCA ('common'), suggesting their roles in 
early PCA development. Mutations in SPOP, KDM6A, and KMT2D were 'PCA-specific',
suggesting their roles in HGPIN progression to PCA. The 8p loss was either
'common' or 'PCA-specific'. In-silico estimation of evolutionary ages predicted
that HGPIN genomes were much younger than PCA genomes. Our data show that PCAs
are direct descendants of HGPINs in most cases that require more genomic
alterations to progress to PCA. The nature of heterogeneous HGPIN population that
might attenuate genomic signals should further be studied.
CONCLUSIONS: HGPIN genomes harbor relatively fewer mutations and CNAs than PCA
but require additional hits for the progression.
PATIENT SUMMARY: In this study, we suggest a systemic diagram from high grade
prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (HGPIN) to prostate cancer (PCA). Our results
provide a clue to explain the long latency from HGPIN to PCA and provide useful
information for the genetic diagnosis of HGPIN and PCA.

Copyright © 2015 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 26542946  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Jan;411(1-2):393-402. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2601-1. Epub
2015 Nov 5.

GalNAc-T4 putatively modulates the estrogen regulatory network through FOXA1
glycosylation in human breast cancer cells.

Niang B(1), Jin L(1), Chen X(1), Guo X(1), Zhang H(1), Wu Q(2), Padhiar AA(1),
Xiao M(3), Fang D(4), Zhang J(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Glycobiology, Dalian Medical
University, 9 South Lvshun Road Western Section, Dalian, 116044, China. (2)School
of Life Science and Medicine, Dalian University of Technology, 2 Linggong Road,
Dalian, 116024, China. (3)National Glycoengineering Research Center and State Key
Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, 250100, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 
303 E. Chicago Ave, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Glycobiology, Dalian Medical University, 9 South Lvshun Road Western
Section, Dalian, 116044, China. jnzhang@dlut.edu.cn. (6)School of Life Science
and Medicine, Dalian University of Technology, 2 Linggong Road, Dalian, 116024,
China. jnzhang@dlut.edu.cn.

GALNT4 belongs to a family of N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferases, which catalyze 
the transfer of GalNAc to Serine or Threonine residues in the initial step of
mucin-type O-linked protein glycosylation. This glycosylation type is the most
complex post-translational modification of proteins, playing important roles
during cellular differentiation and in pathological disorders. Most of the breast
cancer subtypes are estrogen receptor positive, and hence, the estrogen pathway
represents a key regulatory network. We investigated the expression of GalNAc-T4 
in a panel of mammary epithelial cell lines and found its expression is
associated with the estrogen status of the cells. FOXA1, a key transcription
factor, functions to promote estrogen responsive gene expression by acting as a
cofactor to estrogen receptor alpha (ERa), but all the aspects of this regulatory
mechanism are not fully explored. This study found that knockdown of GALNT4
expression in human breast cancer cells attenuated the protein expression of ERa,
FOXA1, and Cyclin D1. Further, our immunoprecipitation assays depicted the
possibility of FOXA1 to undergo O-GalNAc modifications with a decrease of GalNAc 
residues in the GALNT4 knockdown cells and also impairment in the FOXA1-ERa
association. Rescuing GALNT4 expression could restore the interaction as well as 
the glycosylation of FOXA1. Together, these findings suggest a key role for
GalNAc-T4 in the estrogen pathway through FOXA1 glycosylation.

PMID: 26541755  [PubMed - in process]


35. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Nov 4;16:366. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0768-9.

Iterative sub-network component analysis enables reconstruction of large scale
genetic networks.

Jayavelu ND(1), Aasgaard LS(2), Bar N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nareshd@ntnu.no.
(2)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. lsaas@statoil.com.
(3)Department of Chemical Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU), Sem Salandsvei 4, Trondheim, Norway. nadi.bar@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: Network component analysis (NCA) became a popular tool to understand 
complex regulatory networks. The method uses high-throughput gene expression data
and a priori topology to reconstruct transcription factor activity profiles.
Current NCA algorithms are constrained by several conditions posed on the network
topology, to guarantee unique reconstruction (termed compliancy). However, the
restrictions these conditions pose are not necessarily true from biological
perspective and they force network size reduction, pruning potentially important 
components.
RESULTS: To address this, we developed a novel, Iterative Sub-Network Component
Analysis (ISNCA) for reconstructing networks at any size. By dividing the initial
network into smaller, compliant subnetworks, the algorithm first predicts the
reconstruction of each subnetwork using standard NCA algorithms. It then
subtracts from the reconstruction the contribution of the shared components from 
the other subnetwork. We tested the ISNCA on real, large datasets using various
NCA algorithms. The size of the networks we tested and the accuracy of the
reconstruction increased significantly. Importantly, FOXA1, ATF2, ATF3 and many
other known key regulators in breast cancer could not be incorporated by any NCA 
algorithm because of the necessary conditions. However, their temporal activities
could be reconstructed by our algorithm, and therefore their involvement in
breast cancer could be analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our framework enables reconstruction of large gene expression data
networks, without reducing their size or pruning potentially important
components, and at the same time rendering the results more biological plausible.
Our ISNCA method is not only suitable for prediction of key regulators in cancer 
studies, but it can be applied to any high-throughput gene expression data.

PMCID: PMC4634733
PMID: 26537518  [PubMed - in process]


36. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Oct 20;8:3029-39. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S91035. eCollection
2015.

Forkhead box protein A1 is a prognostic predictor and promotes tumor growth of
gastric cancer.

Ren H(1), Zhang P(2), Tang Y(3), Wu M(4), Zhang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science
and Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Union Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, 
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
People's Republic of China.

Previous studies have demonstrated the cancer-type specific role of forkhead box 
protein A1 (FOXA1) in human malignancies. However, the clinical significance of
FOXA1 and its biological function in gastric cancer remain unknown. In this
study, the expression of FOXA1 in 80 pairs of gastric cancer tissues and
corresponding non-tumor tissues was analyzed using immunohistochemistry and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. We found that the levels of
FOXA1 protein and mRNA in gastric cancer tissues were significantly higher than
those in matched tumor-adjacent tissues. Furthermore, clinical association
analysis indicated that the positive expression of FOXA1 was associated with
adverse clinicopathological characteristics of gastric cancer patients including 
poor tumor differentiation, large tumor size, and advanced tumor-node-metastasis 
tumor stage. Notably, gastric cancer patients with positive expression of FOXA1
had a poorer 5-year overall survival and recurrence-free survival. In addition,
FOXA1 knockdown remarkably inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in 
both SGC-7901 and MGC-803 cells. In vivo studies indicated that FOXA1 knockdown
prominently suppressed tumor growth of gastric cancer in a nude mouse xenograft
model. Mechanistically, we disclosed that the expression of Yes-associated
protein was decreased accordingly after FOXA1 knockdown in both SGC-7901 and
MGC-803 cells. Taken together, our data suggest that FOXA1 may serve as a
promising prognostic indicator and an attractive therapeutic target of gastric
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4621220
PMID: 26527889  [PubMed]


37. Hum Pathol. 2016 Jan;47(1):26-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.09.015. Epub 2015
Sep 30.

GATA-3 and FOXA1 expression is useful to differentiate breast carcinoma from
other carcinomas.

Davis DG(1), Siddiqui MT(1), Oprea-Ilies G(1), Stevens K(1), Osunkoya AO(1),
Cohen C(1), Li XB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University Hospital,
Atlanta, GA 30322. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory
University Hospital, Atlanta, GA 30322. Electronic address: xli40@emory.edu.

GATA-3, a member of the GATA family of zinc-finger DNA binding proteins, and
FOXA1, a member of the forkhead transcription factor family, are both associated 
with estrogen receptor expression. Both GATA-3 and FOXA1 are useful markers for
breast carcinoma, but their expression in the different breast cancer subtypes
and other neoplasms has not been thoroughly evaluated. We examined the expression
of GATA-3 and FOXA1 in estrogen receptor-positive, Her2/neu-positive, and
triple-negative breast carcinomas as well as in 10 other common carcinomas,
including hepatocellular, colonic, pancreatic, gastric, endometrial
(endometrioid), lung, prostatic, renal cell, urothelial, and ovarian serous
carcinomas. Primary and metastatic melanomas and mesotheliomas were also
evaluated. GATA-3 and FOXA1 staining of estrogen receptor-positive breast
carcinomas was seen in 96.6% and 96.2%, respectively. In triple-negative breast
carcinomas, GATA-3 and FOXA1 staining was seen in 21.6% and 15.9%, respectively. 
Among the other tumors, GATA-3 staining was only seen in urothelial carcinoma
(70.9%) and FOXA1 staining was only seen in prostatic (87.5%), urothelial (5.1%) 
carcinomas, and mesotheliomas (40.0%). In conclusion, GATA-3 and FOXA1 are
excellent breast carcinoma markers; however, their utility is limited in the
triple-negative subtype. The utility of FOXA1 in diagnosing prostatic carcinoma
and mesothelioma warrants further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26527523  [PubMed - in process]


38. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Oct 29;7(12):1529-46. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201505439.

Aberrant epigenome in iPSC-derived dopaminergic neurons from Parkinson's disease 
patients.

Fernández-Santiago R(1), Carballo-Carbajal I(2), Castellano G(3), Torrent R(4),
Richaud Y(5), Sánchez-Danés A(4), Vilarrasa-Blasi R(3), Sánchez-Pla A(6),
Mosquera JL(7), Soriano J(8), López-Barneo J(9), Canals JM(10), Alberch J(10),
Raya Á(11), Vila M(12), Consiglio A(13), Martín-Subero JI(3), Ezquerra M(1),
Tolosa E(14).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurology, Hospital
Clínic of Barcelona Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain
Cell Therapy Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB),
Barcelona, Spain ruben.fernandez.santiago@gmail.com ezquerra@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Laboratory,
Hospital Vall d'Hebron Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR) Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of Pathological
Anatomy, Pharmacology and Microbiology, University of Barcelona (UB) Institut
d'investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Institute for Biomedicine (IBUB) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain. (5)Control of Stem Cell Potency Group, Institute for Bioengineering of
Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain Centre for Networked Biomedical Research on
Bioengineering Biomaterials and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain.
(6)Department of Statistics, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Department of Statistics, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona,
Spain. (7)Department of Statistics, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain. (8)Departament d'Estructura i Constituents de la Matèria (ECM), Facultat
de Física, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain. (9)Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED),
Madrid, Spain Institute of Biomedicine of Seville (IBiS) Hospital Universitario
Virgen del Rocío Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC)
University of Seville, Seville, Spain. (10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) University of 
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain. (11)Control of Stem Cell Potency Group,
Institute for Bioengineering of Catalonia (IBEC), Barcelona, Spain Centre for
Networked Biomedical Research on Bioengineering Biomaterials and Nanomedicine
(CIBER-BBN), Zaragoza, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. (12)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Neurodegenerative
Diseases Research Laboratory, Hospital Vall d'Hebron Vall d'Hebron Research
Institute (VHIR) Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Institute for Biomedicine (IBUB) University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona,
Spain Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia
and National Institute of Neuroscience, Brescia, Italy. (14)Laboratory of
Neurodegenerative Disorders, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínic of
Barcelona Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS)
University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain Centro de Investigación Biomédica 
en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Cell Therapy 
Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain
Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS) University of 
Barcelona (UB), Barcelona, Spain.

The epigenomic landscape of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains unknown. We
performed a genomewide DNA methylation and a transcriptome studies in induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived dopaminergic neurons (DAn) generated by cell
reprogramming of somatic skin cells from patients with monogenic LRRK2-associated
PD (L2PD) or sporadic PD (sPD), and healthy subjects. We observed extensive DNA
methylation changes in PD DAn, and of RNA expression, which were common in L2PD
and sPD. No significant methylation differences were present in parental skin
cells, undifferentiated iPSCs nor iPSC-derived neural cultures
not-enriched-in-DAn. These findings suggest the presence of molecular defects in 
PD somatic cells which manifest only upon differentiation into the DAn cells
targeted in PD. The methylation profile from PD DAn, but not from controls,
resembled that of neural cultures not-enriched-in-DAn indicating a failure to
fully acquire the epigenetic identity own to healthy DAn in PD. The PD-associated
hypermethylation was prominent in gene regulatory regions such as enhancers and
was related to the RNA and/or protein downregulation of a network of
transcription factors relevant to PD (FOXA1, NR3C1, HNF4A, and FOSL2). Using a
patient-specific iPSC-based DAn model, our study provides the first evidence that
epigenetic deregulation is associated with monogenic and sporadic PD.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4693505
PMID: 26516212  [PubMed - in process]


39. Genetics. 2015 Dec;201(4):1341-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180125. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

A Gene Regulatory Program in Human Breast Cancer.

Li R(1), Campos J(2), Iida J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963 The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609 renhua.li10@gmail.com. (2)Windber Research
Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963.

Molecular heterogeneity in human breast cancer has challenged diagnosis,
prognosis, and clinical treatment. It is well known that molecular subtypes of
breast tumors are associated with significant differences in prognosis and
survival. Assuming that the differences are attributed to subtype-specific
pathways, we then suspect that there might be gene regulatory mechanisms that
modulate the behavior of the pathways and their interactions. In this study, we
proposed an integrated methodology, including machine learning and information
theory, to explore the mechanisms. Using existing data from three large cohorts
of human breast cancer populations, we have identified an ensemble of 16 master
regulator genes (or MR16) that can discriminate breast tumor samples into four
major subtypes. Evidence from gene expression across the three cohorts has
consistently indicated that the MR16 can be divided into two groups that
demonstrate subtype-specific gene expression patterns. For example, group 1 MRs, 
including ESR1, FOXA1, and GATA3, are overexpressed in luminal A and luminal B
subtypes, but lowly expressed in HER2-enriched and basal-like subtypes. In
contrast, group 2 MRs, including FOXM1, EZH2, MYBL2, and ZNF695, display an
opposite pattern. Furthermore, evidence from mutual information modeling has
congruently indicated that the two groups of MRs either up- or down-regulate
cancer driver-related genes in opposite directions. Furthermore, integration of
somatic mutations with pathway changes leads to identification of canonical
genomic alternations in a subtype-specific fashion. Taken together, these studies
have implicated a gene regulatory program for breast tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4676531 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510790  [PubMed - in process]


40. BMC Genomics. 2015 Oct 28;16(1):874. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2022-2.

Prior infection with Type A Francisella tularensis antagonizes the pulmonary
transcriptional response to an aerosolized Toll-like receptor 4 agonist.

Walters KA(1), Olsufka R(2), Kuestner RE(3), Wu X(4), Wang K(5), Skerrett SJ(6), 
Ozinsky A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Kathie.Walters@systemsbiology.org. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
rachael.olsufka@uky.edu. (3)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Rolf.Kuestner@systemsbiology.org. (4)Institute for
Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Xiagang.Wu@systemsbiology.org. (5)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave.
N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Kai.Wang@systemsbiology.com. (6)Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
shawn@u.washington.edu. (7)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. aozinsky@systemsbiology.org.

BACKGROUND: Francisella infection attenuates immune cell infiltration and
expression of selected pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to endogenous LPS, 
suggesting the bacteria is actively antagonizing at least some part of the
response to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement. The ability of different
Francisella strains to inhibit the ability of E. coli LPS to induce a pulmonary
inflammatory response, as measured by gene expression profiling, was examined to 
define the scope of modulation and identify of inflammatory genes/pathways that
are specifically antagonized by a virulent F. tularensis infection.
RESULTS: Prior aerosol exposure to F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, but not the
live attenuated strain (LVS) of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica or F. novicida,
significantly antagonized the transcriptional response in the lungs of infected
mice exposed to aerosolized E. coli LPS. The response to E. coli LPS was not
completely inhibited, suggesting that the bacteria is targeting further
downstream of the TLR4 molecule. Analysis of the promotors of LPS-responsive
genes that were perturbed by Type A Francisella infection identified candidate
transcription factors that were potentially modulated by the bacteria, including 
multiple members of the forkhead transcription factor family (FoxA1, Foxa2,
FoxD1, Foxd3, Foxf2, FoxI1, Fox03, Foxq1), IRF1, CEBPA, and Mef2. The annotated
functional roles of the affected genes suggested that virulent Francisella
infection suppressed cellular processes including mRNA processing, antiviral
responses, intracellular trafficking, and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
Surprisingly, despite the broad overall suppression of LPS-induced genes by
virulent Francisella, and contrary to what was anticipated from prior studies,
Type A Francisella did not inhibit the expression of the majority of LPS-induced 
cytokines, nor the expression of many classic annotated inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this analysis demonstrates clear differences in the
ability of different Francisella strains to modulate TLR4 signaling and
identifies genes/pathways that are specifically targeted by virulent Type A
Francisella.

PMCID: PMC4625460
PMID: 26510639  [PubMed - in process]


41. Bioinformatics. 2016 Feb 15;32(4):490-6. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv565. Epub
2015 Oct 17.

GERV: a statistical method for generative evaluation of regulatory variants for
transcription factor binding.

Zeng H(1), Hashimoto T(1), Kang DD(1), Gifford DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA and. (2)Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA and Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Harvard University and Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

MOTIVATION: The majority of disease-associated variants identified in genome-wide
association studies reside in noncoding regions of the genome with regulatory
roles. Thus being able to interpret the functional consequence of a variant is
essential for identifying causal variants in the analysis of genome-wide
association studies.
RESULTS: We present GERV (generative evaluation of regulatory variants), a novel 
computational method for predicting regulatory variants that affect transcription
factor binding. GERV learns a k-mer-based generative model of transcription
factor binding from ChIP-seq and DNase-seq data, and scores variants by computing
the change of predicted ChIP-seq reads between the reference and alternate
allele. The k-mers learned by GERV capture more sequence determinants of
transcription factor binding than a motif-based approach alone, including both a 
transcription factor's canonical motif and associated co-factor motifs. We show
that GERV outperforms existing methods in predicting single-nucleotide
polymorphisms associated with allele-specific binding. GERV correctly predicts a 
validated causal variant among linked single-nucleotide polymorphisms and
prioritizes the variants previously reported to modulate the binding of FOXA1 in 
breast cancer cell lines. Thus, GERV provides a powerful approach for
functionally annotating and prioritizing causal variants for experimental
follow-up analysis.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The implementation of GERV and related data are 
available at http://gerv.csail.mit.edu/.
CONTACT: gifford@mit.edu
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26476779  [PubMed - in process]


42. BMC Genomics. 2015 Oct 14;16:790. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2017-z.

Virtual pathway explorer (viPEr) and pathway enrichment analysis tool (PEANuT):
creating and analyzing focus networks to identify cross-talk between molecules
and pathways.

Garmhausen M(1), Hofmann F(2), Senderov V(3,)(4), Thomas M(5), Kandel BA(6,)(7), 
Habermann BH(8).

Author information: 
(1)CECAD Research Center, Joseph-Stelzmann-Str. 26, 50931, Cologne, Germany.
marius.garmhausen@smail.uni-koeln.de. (2)Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular
Plant Biology, Austrian Acacdemy of Sciences, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr.
Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030, Vienna, Austria. falko.hofmann@gmi.oeaw.ac.at. (3)Research
Group Computational Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am
Klopferspitz 18, 82152, Martinsried, Germany. vsenderov@gmail.com. (4)Present
address: Pensoft Publisher, 1700, Sofia, Bulgaria. vsenderov@gmail.com. (5)Dr.
Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and University of
Tübingen, Auerbachstr. 112, 70376, Stuttgart, Germany.
Maria.Thomas@ikp-stuttgart.de. (6)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of
Clinical Pharmacology and University of Tübingen, Auerbachstr. 112, 70376,
Stuttgart, Germany. benjamin.kandel@hain-lifescience.de. (7)Present address: Hain
Lifescience GmbH, Hardwiesenstr. 1, 72147, Nehren, Germany.
benjamin.kandel@hain-lifescience.de. (8)Research Group Computational Biology, Max
Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am Klopferspitz 18, 82152, Martinsried,
Germany. habermann@biochem.mpg.de.

BACKGROUND: Interpreting large-scale studies from microarrays or next-generation 
sequencing for further experimental testing remains one of the major challenges
in quantitative biology. Combining expression with physical or genetic
interaction data has already been successfully applied to enhance knowledge from 
all types of high-throughput studies. Yet, toolboxes for navigating and
understanding even small gene or protein networks are poorly developed.
RESULTS: We introduce two Cytoscape plug-ins, which support the generation and
interpretation of experiment-based interaction networks. The virtual pathway
explorer viPEr creates so-called focus networks by joining a list of
experimentally determined genes with the interactome of a specific organism.
viPEr calculates all paths between two or more user-selected nodes, or explores
the neighborhood of a single selected node. Numerical values from expression
studies assigned to the nodes serve to score identified paths. The pathway
enrichment analysis tool PEANuT annotates networks with pathway information from 
various sources and calculates enriched pathways between a focus and a background
network. Using time series expression data of atorvastatin treated primary
hepatocytes from six patients, we demonstrate the handling and applicability of
viPEr and PEANuT. Based on our investigations using viPEr and PEANuT, we suggest 
a role of the FoxA1/A2/A3 transcriptional network in the cellular response to
atorvastatin treatment. Moreover, we find an enrichment of metabolic and cancer
pathways in the Fox transcriptional network and demonstrate a patient-specific
reaction to the drug.
CONCLUSIONS: The Cytoscape plug-in viPEr integrates -omics data with interactome 
data. It supports the interpretation and navigation of large-scale datasets by
creating focus networks, facilitating mechanistic predictions from -omics
studies. PEANuT provides an up-front method to identify underlying biological
principles by calculating enriched pathways in focus networks.

PMCID: PMC4606501
PMID: 26467653  [PubMed - in process]


43. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;36(1):50-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00861-15.

Hepatic Long Intergenic Noncoding RNAs: High Promoter Conservation and Dynamic,
Sex-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation by Growth Hormone.

Melia T(1), Hao P(1), Yilmaz F(1), Waxman DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA djw@bu.edu.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) are increasingly recognized as key
chromatin regulators, yet few studies have characterized lincRNAs in a single
tissue under diverse conditions. Here, we analyzed 45 mouse liver RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) data sets collected under diverse conditions to systematically
characterize 4,961 liver lincRNAs, 59% of them novel, with regard to gene
structures, species conservation, chromatin accessibility, transcription factor
binding, and epigenetic states. To investigate the potential for functionality,
we focused on the responses of the liver lincRNAs to growth hormone stimulation, 
which imparts clinically relevant sex differences to hepatic metabolism and liver
disease susceptibility. Sex-biased expression characterized 247 liver lincRNAs,
with many being nuclear RNA enriched and regulated by growth hormone. The
sex-biased lincRNA genes are enriched for nearby and correspondingly sex-biased
accessible chromatin regions, as well as sex-biased binding sites for growth
hormone-regulated transcriptional activators (STAT5, hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 
[HNF6], FOXA1, and FOXA2) and transcriptional repressors (CUX2 and BCL6).
Repression of female-specific lincRNAs in male liver, but not that of
male-specific lincRNAs in female liver, was associated with enrichment of
H3K27me3-associated inactive states and poised (bivalent) enhancer states.
Strikingly, we found that liver-specific lincRNA gene promoters are more highly
species conserved and have a significantly higher frequency of proximal binding
by liver transcription factors than liver-specific protein-coding gene promoters.
Orthologs for many liver lincRNAs were identified in one or more supraprimates,
including two rat lincRNAs showing the same growth hormone-regulated, sex-biased 
expression as their mouse counterparts. This integrative analysis of liver
lincRNA chromatin states, transcription factor occupancy, and growth hormone
regulation provides novel insights into the expression of sex-specific lincRNAs
and their potential for regulation of sex differences in liver physiology and
disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702595 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26459762  [PubMed - in process]


44. FEBS Lett. 2015 Dec 21;589(24 Pt A):3786-94. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.10.002. 
Epub 2015 Oct 13.

Dissecting the role of Engrailed in adult dopaminergic neurons - Insights into
Parkinson disease pathogenesis.

Rekaik H(1), Blaudin de Thé FX(1), Prochiantz A(1), Fuchs J(2), Joshi RL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS 
UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231
Paris Cedex 05, France. (2)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in Biology
(CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France, 11 place 
Marcelin Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. Electronic address:
julia.fuchs@college-de-france.fr. (3)Center for Interdisciplinary Research in
Biology (CIRB), Labex Memolife, CNRS UMR 7241, INSERM U1050, Collège de France,
11 place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France. Electronic address:
rajiv.joshi@college-de-france.fr.

The homeoprotein Engrailed (Engrailed-1/Engrailed-2, collectively En1/2) is not
only a survival factor for mesencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons during
development, but continues to exert neuroprotective and physiological functions
in adult mDA neurons. Loss of one En1 allele in the mouse leads to progressive
demise of mDA neurons in the ventral midbrain starting from 6weeks of age. These 
mice also develop Parkinson disease-like motor and non-motor symptoms. The
characterization of En1 heterozygous mice have revealed striking parallels to
central mechanisms of Parkinson disease pathogenesis, mainly related to
mitochondrial dysfunction and retrograde degeneration. Thanks to the ability of
homeoproteins to transduce cells, En1/2 proteins have also been used to protect
mDA neurons in various experimental models of Parkinson disease. This
neuroprotection is partly linked to the ability of En1/2 to regulate the
translation of certain nuclear-encoded mitochondrial mRNAs for complex I
subunits. Other transcription factors that govern mDA neuron development (e.g.
Foxa1/2, Lmx1a/b, Nurr1, Otx2, Pitx3) also continue to function for the survival 
and maintenance of mDA neurons in the adult and act through partially overlapping
but also diverse mechanisms.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26459030  [PubMed - in process]


45. Nat Genet. 2015 Nov;47(11):1346-51. doi: 10.1038/ng.3419. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

The androgen receptor cistrome is extensively reprogrammed in human prostate
tumorigenesis.

Pomerantz MM(1), Li F(2,)(3), Takeda DY(1,)(4), Lenci R(1), Chonkar A(1), Chabot 
M(1), Cejas P(1,)(2), Vazquez F(4), Cook J(1), Shivdasani RA(1,)(2), Bowden M(5),
Lis R(5), Hahn WC(1,)(4), Kantoff PW(1), Brown M(1,)(2), Loda M(1,)(4,)(5), Long 
HW(1,)(2), Freedman ML(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Master transcription factors interact with DNA to establish cell type identity
and to regulate gene expression in mammalian cells. The genome-wide map of these 
transcription factor binding sites has been termed the cistrome. Here we show
that the androgen receptor (AR) cistrome undergoes extensive reprogramming during
prostate epithelial transformation in man. Using human prostate tissue, we
observed a core set of AR binding sites that are consistently reprogrammed in
tumors. FOXA1 and HOXB13 colocalized at the reprogrammed AR binding sites in
human tumor tissue. Introduction of FOXA1 and HOXB13 into an immortalized
prostate cell line reprogrammed the AR cistrome to resemble that of a prostate
tumor, functionally linking these specific factors to AR cistrome reprogramming. 
These findings offer mechanistic insights into a key set of events that drive
normal prostate epithelium toward transformation and establish the centrality of 
epigenetic reprogramming in human prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4707683 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26457646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell. 2015 Oct 8;163(2):506-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.033.

Comprehensive Molecular Portraits of Invasive Lobular Breast Cancer.

Ciriello G(1), Gatza ML(2), Beck AH(3), Wilkerson MD(4), Rhie SK(5), Pastore
A(6), Zhang H(7), McLellan M(8), Yau C(9), Kandoth C(10), Bowlby R(11), Shen
H(12), Hayat S(6), Fieldhouse R(6), Lester SC(3), Tse GM(13), Factor RE(14),
Collins LC(3), Allison KH(15), Chen YY(16), Jensen K(17), Johnson NB(3),
Oesterreich S(18), Mills GB(19), Cherniack AD(7), Robertson G(11), Benz C(9),
Sander C(6), Laird PW(12), Hoadley KA(20), King TA(21); TCGA Research Network,
Perou CM(22).

Collaborators: Akbani R, Auman JT, Balasundaram M, Balu S, Barr T, Beck A, Benz
C, Benz S, Berrios M, Beroukhim R, Bodenheimer T, Boice L, Bootwalla MS, Bowen J,
Bowlby R, Brooks D, Cherniack AD, Chin L, Cho J, Chudamani S, Ciriello G,
Davidsen T, Demchok JA, Dennison JB, Ding L, Felau I, Ferguson ML, Frazer S,
Gabriel SB, Gao J, Gastier-Foster JM, Gatza ML, Gehlenborg N, Gerken M, Getz G,
Gibson WJ, Hayes DN, Heiman DI, Hoadley KA, Holbrook A, Holt RA, Hoyle AP, Hu H, 
Huang M, Hutter CM, Hwang ES, Jefferys SR, Jones SJ, Ju Z, Kim J, Lai PH, Laird
PW, Lawrence MS, Leraas KM, Lichtenberg TM, Lin P, Ling S, Liu J, Liu W, Lolla L,
Lu Y, Ma Y, Maglinte DT, Mardis E, Marks J, Marra MA, McAllister C, McLellan M,
Meng S, Meyerson M, Mills GB, Moore RA, Mose LE, Mungall AJ, Murray BA, Naresh R,
Noble MS, Oesterreich S, Olopade O, Parker JS, Perou CM, Pihl T, Saksena G,
Schumacher SE, Shaw KR, Ramirez NC, Rathmell WK, Rhie SK, Roach J, Robertson AG, 
Saksena G, Sander C, Schein JE, Schultz N, Shen H, Sheth M, Shi Y, Shih J,
Shelley CS, Shriver C, Simons JV, Sofia HJ, Soloway MG, Sougnez C, Sun C,
Tarnuzzer R, Tiezzi DG, Van Den Berg DJ, Voet D, Wan Y, Wang Z, Weinstein JN,
Weisenberger DJ, Wilkerson MD, Wilson R, Wise L, Wiznerowicz M, Wu J, Wu Y, Yang 
L, Yau C, Zack TI, Zenklusen JC, Zhang H, Zhang J, Zmuda E.

Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is the second most prevalent histologic subtype 
of invasive breast cancer. Here, we comprehensively profiled 817 breast tumors,
including 127 ILC, 490 ductal (IDC), and 88 mixed IDC/ILC. Besides E-cadherin
loss, the best known ILC genetic hallmark, we identified mutations targeting
PTEN, TBX3, and FOXA1 as ILC enriched features. PTEN loss associated with
increased AKT phosphorylation, which was highest in ILC among all breast cancer
subtypes. Spatially clustered FOXA1 mutations correlated with increased FOXA1
expression and activity. Conversely, GATA3 mutations and high expression
characterized luminal A IDC, suggesting differential modulation of ER activity in
ILC and IDC. Proliferation and immune-related signatures determined three ILC
transcriptional subtypes associated with survival differences. Mixed IDC/ILC
cases were molecularly classified as ILC-like and IDC-like revealing no true
hybrid features. This multidimensional molecular atlas sheds new light on the
genetic bases of ILC and provides potential clinical options.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4603750 [Available on 2016-10-08]
PMID: 26451490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


48. Biol Chem. 2016 Jan;397(1):75-83. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2015-0215.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) promotes the epithelial mesenchymal
transition of triple negative breast cancer cells via HDAC8/FOXA1 signals.

Wu S, Luo Z, Yu PJ, Xie H, He YW.

Inhibitor of histone deacetylases (HDACIs) have great therapeutic value for
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) patients. Interestingly, our present study
reveals that suberoyl anilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA), one of the most advanced
pan-HDAC inhibitor, can obviously promote in vitro motility of MDA-MB-231 and
BT-549 cells via induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). SAHA
treatment significantly down-regulates the expression of epithelial markers
E-cadherin (E-Cad) while up-regulates the mesenchymal markers N-cadherin (N-Cad),
vimentin (Vim) and fibronectin (FN). However, SAHA has no effect on the
expression and nuclear translocation of EMT related transcription factors
including Snail, Slug, Twist and ZEB. While SAHA treatment down-regulates the
protein and mRNA expression of FOXA1 and then decreases its nuclear
translocation. Over-expression of FOXA1 markedly attenuates SAHA induced EMT of
TNBC cells. Further, silence of HDAC8, while not HDAC6, alleviates the
down-regulation of FOXA1 and up-regulation of N-Cad and Vim in MDA-MB-231 cells
treated with SAHA. Collectively, our present study reveals that SAHA can promote 
EMT of TNBC cells via HDAC8/FOXA1 signals, which suggests that more attention
should be paid when SAHA is used as anti-cancer agent for cancer treatment.

PMID: 26431101  [PubMed - in process]


49. Sex Dev. 2015;9(4):216-28. doi: 10.1159/000439499. Epub 2015 Sep 26.

FOXA1 and SOX9 Expression in the Developing Urogenital Sinus of the Tammar
Wallaby (Macropus eugenii).

Gamat M(1), Chew KY, Shaw G, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Kangaroo Genomics, Department of Zoology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

The mammalian prostate is a compact structure in humans but multi-lobed in mice. 
In humans and mice, FOXA1 and SOX9 play pivotal roles in prostate morphogenesis, 
but few other species have been examined. We examined FOXA1 and SOX9 in the
marsupial tammar wallaby, Macropus eugenii, which has a segmented prostate more
similar to human than to mouse. In males, prostatic budding in the urogenital
epithelium (UGE) was initiated by day 24 postpartum (pp), but in the female the
UGE remained smooth and had begun forming the marsupial vaginal structures. FOXA1
was upregulated in the male urogenital sinus (UGS) by day 51 pp, whilst in the
female UGS FOXA1 remained basal. FOXA1 was localised in the UGE in both sexes
between day 20 and 80 pp. SOX9 was upregulated in the male UGS at day 21-30 pp
and remained high until day 51-60 pp. SOX9 protein was localised in the distal
tips of prostatic buds which were highly proliferative. The persistent
upregulation of the transcription factors SOX9 and FOXA1 after the initial peak
and fall of androgen levels suggest that in the tammar, as in other mammals,
these factors are required to sustain prostate differentiation, development and
proliferation as androgen levels return to basal levels.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26406875  [PubMed - in process]


50. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 25;5:14499. doi: 10.1038/srep14499.

Molecular portraits revealing the heterogeneity of breast tumor subtypes defined 
using immunohistochemistry markers.

Dai X(1,)(2), Li Y(3), Bai Z(1,)(2), Tang XQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122, China. (2)National 
Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi 214122, China. (3)School of Science, Jiangnan University, Wuxi 214122,
China.

Breast cancer is highly heterogeneous. The subtypes defined using
immunohistochemistry markers and gene expression profilings (GEP) are related but
not equivalent, with inter-connections under investigated. Our previous study
revealed a set of differentially expressed genes (diff-genes), containing 1015
mRNAs and 69 miRNAs, which characterize the immunohistochemistry-defined breast
tumor subtypes at the GEP level. However, they may convey redundant information
due to the large amount of genes included. By reducing the dimension of the
diff-genes, we identified 119 mRNAs and 20 miRNAs best explaining breast tumor
heterogeneity with the most succinct number of genes found using hierarchical
clustering and nearest-to-center principle. The final signature panel contains
119 mRNAs, whose superiority over diff-genes was replicated in two independent
public datasets. The comparison of our signature with two pioneering signatures, 
the Sorlie's signature and PAM50, suggests a novel marker, FOXA1, in breast
cancer classification. Subtype-specific feature genes are reported to
characterize each immunohistochemistry-defined subgroup. Pathway and network
analysis reveal the critical roles of Notch signalings in [ER+|PR+]HER2- and cell
cycle in [ER+|PR+]HER2+ tumors. Our study reveals the primary differences among
the four immunohistochemistry-defined breast tumors at the mRNA and miRNA levels,
and proposes a novel signature for breast tumor subtyping given GEP data.

PMCID: PMC4585919
PMID: 26404658  [PubMed - in process]


51. Nat Commun. 2015 Sep 25;6:8219. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9219.

TET2 repression by androgen hormone regulates global hydroxymethylation status
and prostate cancer progression.

Takayama K(1,)(2), Misawa A(1), Suzuki T(3), Takagi K(3), Hayashizaki Y(4,)(5),
Fujimura T(6), Homma Y(6), Takahashi S(7), Urano T(1,)(2), Inoue S(1,)(2,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anti-Aging Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (2)Department of Geriatric Medicine, 
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, 
Japan. (3)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan. (4)RIKEN Omics Science Center (OSC), 
RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan. (5)RIKEN Preventive
Medicine &Diagnosis Innovation Program, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.
(6)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (7)Department of Urology, Nihon University
School of Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0032, Japan. (8)Division of Gene
Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama
Medical University, Hidaka, Saitama 350-1241, Japan.

Modulation of epigenetic patterns has promising efficacy for treating cancer.
5-Hydroxymethylated cytosine (5-hmC) is an epigenetic mark potentially important 
in cancer. Here we report that 5-hmC is an epigenetic hallmark of prostate cancer
(PCa) progression. A member of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) proteins, which
catalyse the oxidation of methylated cytosine (5-mC) to 5-hmC, TET2, is repressed
by androgens in PCa. Androgen receptor (AR)-mediated induction of the miR-29
family, which targets TET2, are markedly enhanced in hormone refractory PCa
(HRPC) and its high expression predicts poor outcome of PCa patients.
Furthermore, decreased expression of miR-29b results in reduced tumour growth and
increased TET2 expression in an animal model of HRPC. Interestingly, global 5-hmC
modification regulated by miR-29b represses FOXA1 activity. A reduction in 5-hmC 
activates PCa-related key pathways such as mTOR and AR. Thus, DNA modification
directly links the TET2-dependent epigenetic pathway regulated by AR to
5-hmC-mediated tumour progression.

PMID: 26404510  [PubMed - in process]


52. Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3519-28. doi: 10.1242/dev.126581. Epub 2015 Sep 
22.

Revising the embryonic origin of thyroid C cells in mice and humans.

Johansson E(1), Andersson L(1), Örnros J(1), Carlsson T(1), Ingeson-Carlsson
C(1), Liang S(1), Dahlberg J(2), Jansson S(2), Parrillo L(3), Zoppoli P(4),
Barila GO(5), Altschuler DL(5), Padula D(6), Lickert H(6), Fagman H(7), Nilsson
M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg,
Göteborg SE-40530, Sweden. (2)Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Göteborg, SE-41345, Sweden. (3)IRGS, Biogem, Ariano Irpino (AV), 83031,
Italy. (4)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, 1130 St Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical
Biology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(6)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Helmholtz Center Munich,
German Research Center for Environmental Health GmgH, Ingolstaedter Landstraße 1,
Munich 85764, Germany. (7)Department of Clinical Pathology and Genetics,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, SE-41345, Sweden. (8)Sahlgrenska
Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg
SE-40530, Sweden mikael.nilsson@gu.se.

Current understanding infers a neural crest origin of thyroid C cells, the major 
source of calcitonin in mammals and ancestors to neuroendocrine thyroid tumors.
The concept is primarily based on investigations in quail-chick chimeras
involving fate mapping of neural crest cells to the ultimobranchial glands that
regulate Ca(2+) homeostasis in birds, reptiles, amphibians and fishes, but
whether mammalian C cell development involves a homologous ontogenetic trajectory
has not been experimentally verified. With lineage tracing, we now provide direct
evidence that Sox17+ anterior endoderm is the only source of differentiated C
cells and their progenitors in mice. Like many gut endoderm derivatives,
embryonic C cells were found to coexpress pioneer factors forkhead box (Fox) a1
and Foxa2 before neuroendocrine differentiation takes place. In the
ultimobranchial body epithelium emerging from pharyngeal pouch endoderm in early 
organogenesis, differential Foxa1/Foxa2 expression distinguished two spatially
separated pools of C cell precursors with different growth properties. A similar 
expression pattern was recapitulated in medullary thyroid carcinoma cells in
vivo, consistent with a growth-promoting role of Foxa1. In contrast to embryonic 
precursor cells, C cell-derived tumor cells invading the stromal compartment
downregulated Foxa2, foregoing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition designated by
loss of E-cadherin; both Foxa2 and E-cadherin were re-expressed at metastatic
sites. These findings revise mammalian C cell ontogeny, expand the neuroendocrine
repertoire of endoderm and redefine the boundaries of neural crest
diversification. The data further underpin distinct functions of Foxa1 and Foxa2 
in both embryonic and tumor development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631767
PMID: 26395490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2015 Nov 1;585:10-6. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2015.09.006. Epub
2015 Sep 9.

Bisphenol A stimulates the epithelial mesenchymal transition of estrogen negative
breast cancer cells via FOXA1 signals.

Zhang XL(1), Wang HS(2), Liu N(3), Ge LC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Foshan University, Foshan 528000, China. Electronic address:
zhangxlfsu@126.com. (2)Department of Microbial and Biochemical Pharmacy, School
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(3)Medical School, Foshan University, Foshan 528000, China.

Estrogen receptor negative (ER-) breast cancer are associated with increased
risks for metastasis and high rates of recurrence. Our present study revealed
that nanomolar bisphenol A (BPA), a typical endocrine disrupting chemical,
promoted the in vitro migration and induced mesenchymal transition (EMT) of
ER-breast cancer cells. PCR array revealed that BPA can down regulate 12 and up
regulate 2 genes involved in regulation of signal transduction and biological
pathways of breast cancer. The down regulated genes included FOXA1, which is a
key determinant of endocrine response and down regulated by BPA via a time
dependent manner. Silencing of FOXA1 by siRNA triggered the EMT of SkBr3 cells.
While over expression of FOXA1 abolished BPA induced EMT. Further, 10(-8) M BPA
significantly increased the phosphorylation of ERK1/2, p38-MAPK, and Akt in SkBr3
cells, while only PI3K/Akt inhibitor LY294002 attenuated the BPA induced down
regulation of FOXA1 and E-Cadherin (E-Cad). Over expression of Akt also
suppressed FOXA1 expression in SkBr3 cells. It suggested that PI3K/Akt mediated, 
at least partially, BPA induced EMT of ER-breast cancer cells. In summary, our
data provided the first evidence that BPA can promote the EMT of ER-breast cancer
cells through down regulation of FOXA1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26363213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Onco Targets Ther. 2015 Aug 24;8:2227-35. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S87976. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-212 inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation and induces
apoptosis by targeting FOXA1.

Tu H(1), Wei G(2), Cai Q(1), Chen X(1), Sun Z(2), Cheng C(1), Zhang L(1), Feng
Y(1), Zhou H(1), Zhou B(1), Zeng T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Renmin Hospital,
Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, People's Republic of China.

MircroRNA-212 (miR-212) is proposed as a novel tumor-related miRNA and has been
found to be significantly deregulated in human cancers. In this study, the
miR-212 expression was found to be obviously downregulated in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) tissues as compared with adjacent nontumor tissues. Clinical
association analysis indicated that low expression of miR-212 was prominently
correlated with poor prognostic features of HCC, including high AFP level, large 
tumor size, high Edmondson-Steiner grading, and advanced tumor-node-metastasis
tumor stage. Furthermore, the miR-212 expression was an independent prognostic
marker for predicting both 5-year overall survival and disease-free survival of
HCC patients. Our in vitro studies showed that upregulation of miR-212 inhibited 
cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells. On the contrary,
downregulation of miR-212 promoted cell proliferation and suppressed apoptosis in
Huh7 cells. Interestingly, we found that upregulation of miR-212 decreased FOXA1 
expression in HepG2 cells. Significantly, FOXA1 was identified as a direct target
of miR-212 in HCC. FOXA1 was downregulated in HCC tissues as compared with
noncancerous tissues. An inverse correlation between FOXA1 and miR-212 expression
was observed in HCC tissues. Notably, FOXA1 knockdown inhibited cell
proliferation and induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells. In conclusion, miR-212 is a
potent prognostic marker and may suppress HCC tumor growth by inhibiting FOXA1
expression.

PMCID: PMC4556035
PMID: 26347321  [PubMed]


55. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 6;6(30):29782-94. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4927.

FOXA1 regulates androgen receptor variant activity in models of
castrate-resistant prostate cancer.

Jones D(1), Wade M(1), Nakjang S(1), Chaytor L(1), Grey J(1), Robson CN(1),
Gaughan L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon
Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

Retention of androgen receptor (AR) signalling in castrate-resistant prostate
cancer (CRPC) highlights the requirement for the development of more effective AR
targeting therapies. A key mechanism of resistance to anti-androgens is through
expression of constitutively active AR variants (AR-Vs) that are refractory to
next-generation therapies, including Enzalutamide and Abiraterone. By maintaining
an androgenic gene signature, AR-Vs drive tumour survival and progression in
castrate conditions. Critically, however, our understanding of the mechanics of
AR-V-driven transcription is limited, particularly with respect to dependency on 
pioneer factor function. Here we show that depletion of FOXA1 in the CWR22Rv1
CRPC cell line abrogates the oncogenic potential of AR-Vs. Gene expression
profiling reveals that approximately 41% of the AR-V transcriptome requires FOXA1
and that depletion of FOXA1 attenuates AR-V binding at a sub-set of analysed
co-regulated genes. Interestingly, AR-V levels are elevated in cells depleted of 
FOXA1 as a consequence of attenuated negative feedback on the AR gene, but is
insufficient to maintain cell growth as evidenced by marked anti-proliferative
effects in FOXA1 knockdown cells. In all, our data suggests that AR-Vs are
dependent on FOXA1 for sustaining a pro-proliferative gene signature and agents
targeting FOXA1 may represent novel therapeutic options for CRPC patients.

PMCID: PMC4745762
PMID: 26336819  [PubMed - in process]


56. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Sep;153(2):465-74. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3553-6. 
Epub 2015 Aug 23.

FOXA2 mRNA expression is associated with relapse in patients with
Triple-Negative/Basal-like breast carcinoma.

Perez-Balaguer A(1), Ortiz-Martínez F, García-Martínez A, Pomares-Navarro C,
Lerma E, Peiró G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Hospital General Universitari d'Alacant, C/Pintor Baeza 12,
03010, Alacant, Spain, arperez@ibecbarcelona.eu.

The FOXA family of transcription factors regulates chromatin structure and gene
expression especially during embryonic development. In normal breast tissue FOXA1
acts throughout mammary development; whereas in breast carcinoma its expression
promotes luminal phenotype and correlates with good prognosis. However, the role 
of FOXA2 has not been previously studied in breast cancer. Our purpose was to
analyze the expression of FOXA2 in breast cancer cells, to explore its role in
breast cancer stem cells, and to correlate its mRNA expression with
clinicopathological features and outcome in a series of patients diagnosed with
breast carcinoma. We analyzed FOXA2 mRNA expression in a retrospective cohort of 
230 breast cancer patients and in cell lines. We also knocked down FOXA2 mRNA
expression by siRNA to determine the impact on cell proliferation and
mammospheres formation using a cancer stem cells culture assay. In vitro studies 
demonstrated higher FOXA2 mRNA expression in Triple-Negative/Basal-like cells.
Further, when it was knocked down, cells decreased proliferation and its
capability of forming mammospheres. Similarly, FOXA2 mRNA expression was detected
in 10% (23/230) of the tumors, especially in Triple-Negative/Basal-like phenotype
(p < 0.001, Fisher's test). Patients whose tumors expressed FOXA2 had increased
relapses (59 vs. 79%, p = 0.024, log-rank test) that revealed an independent
prognostic value (HR = 3.29, C.I.95% = 1.45-7.45, p = 0.004, Cox regression). Our
results suggest that FOXA2 promotes cell proliferation, maintains cancer stem
cells, favors the development of Triple-Negative/Basal-like tumors, and is
associated with increase relapses.

PMID: 26298189  [PubMed - in process]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 1;112(35):E4929-38. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503911112. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2 maintain dopaminergic neuronal properties
and control feeding behavior in adult mice.

Pristerà A(1), Lin W(1), Kaufmann AK(2), Brimblecombe KR(3), Threlfell S(4),
Dodson PD(5), Magill PJ(5), Fernandes C(6), Cragg SJ(4), Ang SL(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom; (2)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, United Kingdom; (3)Department
of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United
Kingdom; (4)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QX, United Kingdom; Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; (5)Medical Research Council Brain Network
Dynamics Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, 
United Kingdom; Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; (6)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, 
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London,
London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. (7)The Francis Crick Institute Mill Hill
Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom; siew-lan.ang@crick.ac.uk.

Midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons are implicated in cognitive functions,
neuropsychiatric disorders, and pathological conditions; hence understanding
genes regulating their homeostasis has medical relevance. Transcription factors
FOXA1 and FOXA2 (FOXA1/2) are key determinants of mDA neuronal identity during
development, but their roles in adult mDA neurons are unknown. We used a
conditional knockout strategy to specifically ablate FOXA1/2 in mDA neurons of
adult mice. We show that deletion of Foxa1/2 results in down-regulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme of dopamine (DA) biosynthesis,
specifically in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc).
In addition, DA synthesis and striatal DA transmission were reduced after Foxa1/2
deletion. Furthermore, the burst-firing activity characteristic of SNc mDA
neurons was drastically reduced in the absence of FOXA1/2. These molecular and
functional alterations lead to a severe feeding deficit in adult Foxa1/2 mutant
mice, independently of motor control, which could be rescued by L-DOPA treatment.
FOXA1/2 therefore control the maintenance of molecular and physiological
properties of SNc mDA neurons and impact on feeding behavior in adult mice.

PMCID: PMC4568236
PMID: 26283356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 14;10(8):e0135737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135737.
eCollection 2015.

Comparative MiRNA Expressional Profiles and Molecular Networks in Human Small
Bowel Tissues of Necrotizing Enterocolitis and Spontaneous Intestinal
Perforation.

Ng PC(1), Chan KY(1), Leung KT(1), Tam YH(2), Ma TP(1), Lam HS(1), Cheung HM(1), 
Lee KH(2), To KF(3), Li K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong. (2)Department of Surgery, Prince of Wales
Hospital, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.
(3)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) and spontaneous intestinal
perforation (SIP) are acute intestinal conditions which could result in mortality
and severe morbidity in preterm infants. Our objective was to identify
dysregulated micro-RNAs (miRNAs) in small bowel tissues of NEC and SIP, and their
possible roles in disease pathophysiology.
METHODS: We performed differential miRNA arrays on tissues of NEC (n = 4), SIP (n
= 4) and surgical-control (Surg-CTL; n = 4), and validated target miRNAs by qPCR 
(n = 10 each group). The association of target miRNAs with 52 dysregulated mRNAs 
was investigated by bioinformatics on functional and base-pair sequence
algorithms, and correlation in same tissue samples.
RESULTS: We presented the first miRNA profiles of NEC, SIP and Surg-CTL
intestinal tissues in preterm infants. Of 28 validated miRNAs, 21 were
significantly different between NEC or SIP and Surg-CTL. Limited overlapping in
the aberrant expression of miRNAs between NEC and SIP indicated their distinct
molecular mechanisms. A proposed network of dysregulated miRNA/mRNA pairs in NEC 
suggested interaction at bacterial receptor TLR4 (miR-31, miR-451, miR-203,
miR-4793-3p), mediated via key transcription factors NFKB2 (miR-203), AP-1/FOSL1 
(miR-194-3p), FOXA1 (miR-21-3p, miR-431 and miR-1290) and HIF1A (miR-31), and
extended downstream to pathways of angiogenesis, arginine metabolism, cell
adhesion and chemotaxis, extracellular matrix remodeling, hypoxia/oxidative
stress, inflammation and muscle contraction. In contrast, upregulation of miR-451
and miR-223 in SIP suggested modulation of G-protein-mediated muscle contraction.
CONCLUSIONS: The robust response of miRNA dysregulation in NEC and SIP, and
concerted involvement of specific miRNAs in the molecular networks indicated
their crucial roles in mucosa integrity and disease pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4537110
PMID: 26274503  [PubMed - in process]


59. Future Oncol. 2015;11(16):2283-97. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.102.

Coexpression of androgen receptor and FOXA1 in nonmetastatic triple-negative
breast cancer: ancillary study from PACS08 trial.

Guiu S(1), Charon-Barra C(2), Vernerey D(3), Fumoleau P(4), Campone M(5),
Spielmann M(6), Roché H(7), Mesleard C(8), Arnould L(2), Lemonnier J(8),
Lacroix-Triki M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, 208 avenue 
des Apothicaires, 34298 Montpellier Cedex 5, France. (2)Department of Pathology, 
Georges-François Leclerc Cancer Center, 1 rue du Professeur Marion, 21000 Dijon, 
France. (3)Methodological and Quality of Life in Oncology Unit, EA 3181,
University Hospital of Besançon, 2 place Saint-Jacques, 25000 Besançon, France.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Georges-François Leclerc Cancer Center, 1 rue 
du Professeur Marion, 21000 Dijon, France. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, ICO
Centre René Gauducheau, boulevard Jacques Monod, 44805 Saint Herblain, France.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, 114 rue
Edouard-Vaillant, 94800 Villejuif, France. (7)Department of Medical Oncology,
Institut Claudius Régaud, 20/24 Rue du Pont Saint Pierre, 31300 Toulouse, France.
(8)R&D UNICANCER, 101 rue de Tolbiac, 75654 Paris, France. (9)Department of
Pathology, Institut Claudius Régaud, 20/24 rue du Pont Saint Pierre, 31300
Toulouse, France.

AIM: Microarray studies identified a subgroup of molecular apocrine tumors
(estrogen receptor [ER] negative/androgen receptor [AR] positive) that express
luminal genes including FOXA1. FOXA1 may direct AR to sites normally occupied by 
ER in luminal tumors, inducing an estrogen-like gene program that stimulated
proliferation.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Expression of AR and FOXA1 was evaluated by
immunohistochemistry in 592 patients with nonmetastatic triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC).
RESULTS: Coexpression of AR and FOXA1 was found in 15.2% of patients. These
tumors were more frequently lobular, found in older patients and exhibited a
lower nuclear grade and a greater degree of node involvement. They less often
exhibited lymphocytic infiltrate, pushing margins, syncytial architecture,
central fibrosis or necrosis.
CONCLUSION: TNBC with coexpression of AR and FOXA1 seems to behave like luminal
tumors with a morphological profile distinct from other TNBC. These biomarkers
could be useful to identify a subgroup of TNBC and could have future therapeutic 
implications.

PMID: 26260807  [PubMed - in process]


60. BMC Neurosci. 2015 Jul 19;16:43. doi: 10.1186/s12868-015-0186-y.

mRNA and microRNA analysis reveals modulation of biochemical pathways related to 
addiction in the ventral tegmental area of methamphetamine self-administering
rats.

Bosch PJ(1), Benton MC(2,)(3), Macartney-Coxson D(4), Kivell BM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biodiscovery, School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of
Wellington, Kelburn Parade, PO Box 600, Wellington, 6140, New Zealand.
peetyrbosch@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Environmental Science and Research,
Wellington, New Zealand. miles.benton84@gmail.com. (3)Genomics Research Centre,
Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of
Technology, Brisbane, Australia. miles.benton84@gmail.com. (4)Institute of
Environmental Science and Research, Wellington, New Zealand.
donia.macartney@esr.cri.nz. (5)Centre for Biodiscovery, School of Biological
Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, Kelburn Parade, PO Box 600,
Wellington, 6140, New Zealand. Bronwyn.kivell@vuw.ac.nz.

BACKGROUND: Methamphetamine is a highly addictive central nervous system
stimulant with increasing levels of abuse worldwide. Alterations to mRNA and
miRNA expression within the mesolimbic system can affect addiction-like behaviors
and thus play a role in the development of drug addiction. While many studies
have investigated the effects of high-dose methamphetamine, and identified
neurotoxic effects, few have looked at the role that persistent changes in gene
regulation play following methamphetamine self-administration. Therefore, the aim
of this study was to identify RNA changes in the ventral tegmental area following
methamphetamine self-administration. We performed microarray analyses on RNA
extracted from the ventral tegmental area of Sprague-Dawley rats following
methamphetamine self-administration training (2 h/day) and 14 days of abstinence.
RESULTS: We identified 78 miRNA and 150 mRNA transcripts that were differentially
expressed (fdr adjusted p < 0.05, absolute log2 fold change >0.5); these included
genes not previously associated with addiction (miR-125a-5p, miR-145 and Foxa1), 
loci encoding receptors related to drug addiction behaviors and genes with
previously recognized roles in addiction such as miR-124, miR-181a, DAT and Ret.
CONCLUSION: This study provides insight into the effects of methamphetamine on
RNA expression in a key brain region associated with addiction, highlighting the 
possibility that persistent changes in the expression of genes with both known
and previously unknown roles in addiction occur.

PMCID: PMC4506769
PMID: 26188473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Aug;152(3):519-31. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3492-2. 
Epub 2015 Jul 10.

TFAP2C expression in breast cancer: correlation with overall survival beyond 10
years of initial diagnosis.

Perkins SM(1), Bales C, Vladislav T, Althouse S, Miller KD, Sandusky G, Badve S, 
Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN, 46202, USA.

Recurrence and death in a significant number of patients with ERa-positive breast
cancer occurs 10-20 years after diagnosis. Prognostic markers for late events
have been more elusive. TFAP2C (AP2<U+03B3>) regulates the expression of ERa, the ERa
pioneer factors FOXA1 and GATA3, and controls ERa-dependent transcription. The
purpose of this investigation is to determine the long-term prognostic value of
TFAP2C. A tissue microarray (TMA) consisting of breast tumors from 451 patients
with median follow-up time of 10.3 years was created and tested for the
expression of TFAP2C by immunohistochemistry. Wilcoxon Rank-Sum and
Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to determine if TFAP2C H-scores correlate with
other tumor markers. Cox proportional hazards regression models were used to
determine whether TFAP2C H-scores and other tumor markers were related to overall
and disease-free survival in univariate and multivariable models. TFPAC2
overexpression did not impact overall survival during the first 10 years after
diagnosis, but was associated with a shorter survival after 10 years (HR 3.40, 95
% CI 1.58, 7.30; p value = 0.002). This late divergence persisted in ER-positive 
(HR 2.86, 95 % CI 1.29, 6.36; p value = 0.01) and endocrine therapy-positive
subgroups (HR 4.19, 95 % CI 1.72, 10.23; p value = 0.002). For the ER+ and
endocrine therapy subgroup, the HR was 3.82 (95 % CI 1.53, 9.50; p value =
0.004). TFAP2C H-scores were not correlated with other tumor markers or related
to disease-free survival. In this hypothesis-generating study, we show that
higher TFAP2C scores correlate with poor overall survival after 10 years of
diagnosis in ERa-positive and endocrine therapy-treated subgroups.

PMID: 26160249  [PubMed - in process]


62. J Nutr Sci. 2015 May 20;4:e22. doi: 10.1017/jns.2015.11. eCollection 2015.

Lipid-rich diet enhances L-cell density in obese subjects and in mice through
improved L-cell differentiation.

Aranias T(1), Grosfeld A(2), Poitou C(3), Omar AA(1), Le Gall M(4), Miquel S(5), 
Garbin K(1), Ribeiro A(2), Bouillot JL(6), Bado A(7), Brot-Laroche E(2), Clément 
K(3), Leturque A(2), Guilmeau S(8), Serradas P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR_S 1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne universités 
, UPMC Univ Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 , Paris ,
France. (2)Inserm UMR_S 1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne
universités , UPMC Univ Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 ,
Paris , France ; Institut de Cardiométabolisme et Nutrition , ICAN ,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Paris , France. (3)Institut de Cardiométabolisme et 
Nutrition , ICAN , Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Paris , France ; Sorbonne
universités , UPMC Univ Paris 06 , UMR_S ICAN U1166; Inserm; Nutriomic Team ,
F-75013 , Paris , France ; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris ,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Heart and Metabolism Department , Nutrition Unit ,
47-83 Boulevard de l'Hôpital , 75651 Paris Cedex 13 , France. (4)Inserm UMR_S
1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne universités , UPMC Univ
Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 , Paris , France ; Inserm
UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD
Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France. (5)INRA UMR 1319 Micalis , Interactions
des Commensales et Probiotiques avec l'Hôte , F-78350 Jouy-en-Josas , France ;
AgroParisTech , UMR 1319 Micalis , F-78350 Jouy-en-Josas , France. (6)Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris , Surgery Department , Ambroise Paré Hospital ,
Boulogne-Billancourt , France. (7)Inserm UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine
Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France.
(8)Inserm UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités
, UPD Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France ; Institut Cochin , Inserm UMR_S
1016 , CNRS UMR 8104 , Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; Endocrinology ,
Metabolism and Diabetes Department , F-75014; Paris , France.

The enterohormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is required to amplify
glucose-induced insulin secretion that facilitates peripheral glucose
utilisation. Alteration in GLP-1 secretion during obesity has been reported but
is still controversial. Due to the high adaptability of intestinal cells to
environmental changes, we hypothesised that the density of GLP-1-producing cells 
could be modified by nutritional factors to prevent the deterioration of
metabolic condition in obesity. We quantified L-cell density in jejunum samples
collected during Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in forty-nine severely obese subjects
analysed according to their fat consumption. In mice, we deciphered the
mechanisms by which a high-fat diet (HFD) makes an impact on enteroendocrine cell
density and function. L-cell density in the jejunum was higher in obese subjects 
consuming >30 % fat compared with low fat eaters. Mice fed a HFD for 8 weeks
displayed an increase in GLP-1-positive cells in the jejunum and colon
accordingly to GLP-1 secretion. The regulation by the HFD appears specific to
GLP-1-producing cells, as the number of PYY (peptide YY)-positive cells remained 
unchanged. Moreover, genetically obese ob/ob mice did not show alteration of
GLP-1-positive cell density in the jejunum or colon, suggesting that obesity per 
se is not sufficient to trigger the mechanism. The higher L-cell density in
HFD-fed mice involved a rise in L-cell terminal differentiation as witnessed by
the increased expression of transcription factors downstream of neurogenin3
(Ngn3). We suggest that the observed increase in GLP-1-positive cell density
triggered by high fat consumption in humans and mice might favour insulin
secretion and therefore constitute an adaptive response of the intestine to
balance diet-induced insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC4459237
PMID: 26157580  [PubMed]


63. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0132325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0132325.
eCollection 2015.

Differences in Transcriptional Activity of Human Papillomavirus Type 6 Molecular 
Variants in Recurrent Respiratory Papillomatosis.

Measso do Bonfim C(1), Simão Sobrinho J(2), Lacerda Nogueira R(3), Salgado Kupper
D(3), Cardoso Pereira Valera F(3), Lacerda Nogueira M(4), Villa LL(5), Rahal
P(1), Sichero L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Studies, Universidade do Estado de São Paulo, UNESP, São
José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. (2)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of
Translational Oncology, Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São
Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Ophthalmology/Otorhinolaryngology and Head/Neck
Surgery, Discipline Otorhinolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto,
Universidade de São Paulo, USP, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Laboratory of Research in
Virology, Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, FAMERP, São José do Rio
Preto, Brazil. (5)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Center of Translational Oncology,
Instituto do Câncer do Estado de São Paulo, ICESP, São Paulo, Brazil; Department 
of Radiology and Oncology, School of Medicine, Universidade de São Paulo, USP,
São Paulo, Brazil; School of Medicine, Santa Casa de São Paulo and HPV Institute,
São Paulo, Brazil.

A significant proportion of recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is caused 
by human papillomavirus type 6 (HPV-6). The long control region (LCR) contains
cis-elements for regulation of transcription. Our aim was to characterize LCR
HPV-6 variants in RRP cases, compare promoter activity of these isolates and
search for cellular transcription factors (TFs) that could explain the
differences observed. The complete LCR from 13 RRP was analyzed. Transcriptional 
activity of 5 variants was compared using luciferase assays. Differences in
putative TFs binding sites among variants were revealed using the TRANSFAC
database. Chromatin immunoprecipation (CHIP) and luciferase assays were used to
evaluate TF binding and impact upon transcription, respectively. Juvenile-onset
RRP cases harbored exclusively HPV-6vc related variants, whereas among
adult-onset cases HPV-6a variants were more prevalent. The HPV-6vc reference was 
more transcriptionally active than the HPV-6a reference. Active FOXA1, ELF1 and
GATA1 binding sites overlap variable nucleotide positions among isolates and
influenced LCR activity. Furthermore, our results support a crucial role for ELF1
on transcriptional downregulation. We identified TFs implicated in the regulation
of HPV-6 early gene expression. Many of these factors are mutated in cancer or
are putative cancer biomarkers, and must be further studied.

PMCID: PMC4494706
PMID: 26151558  [PubMed - in process]


64. Cytokine. 2015 Dec;76(2):588-90. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.06.012. Epub 2015 Jul
3.

Interplay between inflammatory and estrogen signaling in breast cancer.

Nagari A(1), Franco HL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signaling and Gene Regulation, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for
Reproductive Biology Sciences and Division of Basic Reproductive Biology
Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, United States. (2)Laboratory of
Signaling and Gene Regulation, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive
Biology Sciences and Division of Basic Reproductive Biology Research, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, United States. Electronic address:
hector.franco@utsouthwestern.edu.

Inflammation is known to have a paradoxical effect in cancers, in some cases
promoting pathogenesis while in others inhibiting pathogenesis, depending on the 
cellular context. In an effort to answer a number of fundamental questions about 
two of the major signaling cascades that affect breast tumorigenesis and impact
clinical outcome, we examined the genome-wide consequences of treating
ERa-positive breast cancer cells with both estrogen and TNFa. Below, we highlight
our observations, their biological significance, and how they provide a framework
for understanding the molecular basis for integration of proinflammatory and
estrogen signaling in breast cancer.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26144291  [PubMed - in process]


65. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2015 May;21(5):414-9.

[Correlation of FOXA1 with the malignancy and progression of prostate cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng W, Zhang HB, Wang YM, Hu JL.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship of the expression of FOXA1 in the prostate
cancer (PCa) tissue with the Gleason score and clinical staging of PCa and with
castration-resistant PCa (CRPC).
METHODS: Using the immunohistochemical method, we detected the expressions of
FOXA1 and Ki-67 in the pathological sections of 35 cases of PCa and 21 cases of
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Then we analyzed their correlation with the
Gleason score and TNM staging of PCa and that with CRPC.
RESULTS: The positive expression of FOXA1 was significantly higher in the PCa
than in the BPH tissue (P < 0.001) and was positively correlated with that of
Ki-67 (P < 0.001) as well as with the Gleason score (P = 0.027) and clinical
staging of PCa (P = 0.002), but showed no correlation with CRPC (P = 0.391).
CONCLUSION: The positive expression of FOXA1 is increased in PCa, most
significantly in the advanced stage of the tumor.

PMID: 26117938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Genes Dis. 2015 Jun;2(2):144-151.

Current perspectives on FOXA1 regulation of androgen receptor signaling and
prostate cancer.

Yang YA(1), Yu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA ; Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

FOXA1 (also known as hepatocyte nuclear factor 3a, or HNF-3a) is a protein of the
FKHD family transcription factors. FOXA1 has been termed as a pioneer
transcription factor due to its unique ability of chromatin remodeling in which
the chromatin can be decompacted to allow genomic access by nuclear hormone
receptors, including androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor (ER). In this
review, we discuss our current understanding of FOXA1 regulation of prostatic and
non-prostatic AR-chromatin targeting. We present an updated model wherein
FOXA1:AR equilibrium in the nuclei defines prostatic AR binding profile, which is
perturbed in prostate cancer with FOXA1 and/or AR de-regulation. Finally, we
discuss recent efforts in exploring new horizons of AR-independent functions of
FOXA1 in prostate cancer and interesting directions to pursue in future studies.

PMCID: PMC4477823
PMID: 26114156  [PubMed]


67. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Apr 1;8(4):3979-86. eCollection 2015.

Differential expression of FOXA1, DUSP6, and HA117 in colon segments of
Hirschsprung's disease.

Luo Y(1), Li S(1), Teng Y(1), Wang N(1), Li L(1), Liu H(1), Jin X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders; Key
Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing; Chongqing International Science and
Technology Cooperation Center for Child Development and Disorders, Children's
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400014, P.
R. China ; Department of Neonatal Gastrointestinal Surgery, Children's Hospital
of Chongqing Medical University Yuzhong District, Chongqing 400014, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the expression profiles of FOXA1, DUSP6, and HA117 in
different portions of the colon of patients diagnosed with Hirschsprung's disease
(HSCR).
METHODS: Colon specimens were collected from 34 HSCR patients and grouped into 3 
segments: proximal anastomosis, dilated segment and stenotic segment. Levels of
FOXA1, DUSP6, and HA117 RNA were evaluated by real-time PCR. Levels of FOXA1 and 
DUSP6 protein were analyzed by immunohistochemistry and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The levels of FOXA1 and DUSP6 RNA were significantly lower in the
stenotic segment compared to proximal anastomosis (P < 0.05). The level of HA117 
RNA was significantly higher in the stenotic segment compared to proximal
anastomosis (P < 0.05). In proximal anastomosis, FOXA1 and DUSP6 were both
expressed at the protein level in ganglion cells and nerve fibers between the
circular and longitudinal muscles. In the stenotic segments, positive staining
for FOXA1 and DUSP6 was diminished. The levels of FOXA1 and DUSP6 protein were
significantly lower in the stenotic segment compared to proximal anastomosis (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Suppression of the FOXA1/DUSP6 signaling pathway may contribute to
the development of HSCR. LncRNA HA117 may have an anti-differentiation function, 
and play a pivotal role in the progression of HSCR.

PMCID: PMC4466971
PMID: 26097584  [PubMed - in process]


68. Cell Rep. 2015 Jun 16;11(10):1549-63. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.05.011. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Somatic Cell Fusions Reveal Extensive Heterogeneity in Basal-like Breast Cancer.

Su Y(1), Subedee A(2), Bloushtain-Qimron N(3), Savova V(4), Krzystanek M(5), Li
L(6), Marusyk A(1), Tabassum DP(2), Zak A(7), Flacker MJ(8), Li M(3), Lin JJ(1), 
Sukumar S(8), Suzuki H(9), Long H(6), Szallasi Z(10), Gimelbrant A(4), Maruyama
R(11), Polyak K(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens
Lyngby, Denmark. (6)Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (7)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA. (8)Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA. (9)Department of Molecular Biology, Sapporo
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan. (10)Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark;
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (11)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Molecular Biology,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.
Electronic address: reomaru@sapmed.ac.jp. (12)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Boston, MA 02215, USA; Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; BBS Program, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, 
USA; The Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address:
kornelia_polyak@dfci.harvard.edu.

Basal-like and luminal breast tumors have distinct clinical behavior and
molecular profiles, yet the underlying mechanisms are poorly defined. To
interrogate processes that determine these distinct phenotypes and their
inheritance pattern, we generated somatic cell fusions and performed integrated
genetic and epigenetic (DNA methylation and chromatin) profiling. We found that
the basal-like trait is generally dominant and is largely defined by epigenetic
repression of luminal transcription factors. Definition of super-enhancers
highlighted a core program common in luminal cells but a high degree of
heterogeneity in basal-like breast cancers that correlates with clinical outcome.
We also found that protein extracts of basal-like cells are sufficient to induce 
a luminal-to-basal phenotypic switch, implying a trigger of basal-like
autoregulatory circuits. We determined that KDM6A might be required for
luminal-basal fusions, and we identified EN1, TBX18, and TCF4 as candidate
transcriptional regulators of the luminal-to-basal switch. Our findings highlight
the remarkable epigenetic plasticity of breast cancer cells.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26051943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Diabetologia. 2015 Aug;58(8):1836-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3. Epub 2015
May 29.

The FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 transcription factors are required for islet alpha
cell proliferation and function in mice.

Spaeth JM(1), Hunter CS, Bonatakis L, Guo M, French CA, Slack I, Hara M, Fisher
SE, Ferrer J, Morrisey EE, Stanger BZ, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 723 Light Hall, 2215 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Several forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family members
have important roles in controlling pancreatic cell fates and maintaining beta
cell mass and function, including FOXA1, FOXA2 and FOXM1. In this study we have
examined the importance of FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 of the FOXP subfamily in islet 
cell development and function.
METHODS: Mice harbouring floxed alleles for Foxp1, Foxp2 and Foxp4 were crossed
with pan-endocrine Pax6-Cre transgenic mice to generate single and compound Foxp 
mutant mice. Mice were monitored for changes in glucose tolerance by IPGTT, serum
insulin and glucagon levels by radioimmunoassay, and endocrine cell development
and proliferation by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression and glucose-stimulated
hormone secretion experiments were performed with isolated islets.
RESULTS: Only the triple-compound Foxp1/2/4 conditional knockout (cKO) mutant had
an overt islet phenotype, manifested physiologically by hypoglycaemia and
hypoglucagonaemia. This resulted from the reduction in glucagon-secreting alpha
cell mass and function. The proliferation of alpha cells was profoundly reduced
in Foxp1/2/4 cKO islets through the effects on mediators of replication (i.e.
decreased Ccna2, Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 activators, and increased Cdkn1a inhibitor).
Adult islet Foxp1/2/4 cKO beta cells secrete insulin normally while the remaining
alpha cells have impaired glucagon secretion.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these findings reveal an important role
for the FOXP1, 2, and 4 proteins in governing postnatal alpha cell expansion and 
function.

PMCID: PMC4785827
PMID: 26021489  [PubMed - in process]


70. Prostate. 2015 Sep;75(12):1264-76. doi: 10.1002/pros.23008. Epub 2015 May 25.

Systematic enrichment analysis of potentially functional regions for 103 prostate
cancer risk-associated loci.

Chen H(1,)(2,)(3), Yu H(1), Wang J(4), Zhang Z(2), Gao Z(2), Chen Z(2), Lu Y(1), 
Liu W(5), Jiang D(1,)(5), Zheng SL(2,)(5), Wei GH(6), Issacs WB(7), Feng J(2), Xu
J(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (2)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest
University School of Medicine, Winston Salem, North Carolina. (3)Center for
Genomic Translational Medicine and Prevention, Fudan School of Public Health,
Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (4)Fudan Institute of Urology, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R. China. (5)Program for Personalized
Cancer Care and Department of Surgery, North Shore University Health System,
Evanston, Illinois. (6)Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Biocenter 
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (7)Department of Urology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: More than 100 prostate cancer (PCa) risk-associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified by genome wide association studies
(GWAS). However, the molecular mechanisms are unclear for most of these SNPs.
METHODS: All reported PCa risk-associated SNPs reaching the genome-wide
significance level of P < 1 × 10(-7) (index SNPs), as well as SNPs in linkage
disequilibrium (LD, r(2) = 0.5) with them were cataloged. Genomic regions with
potentially functional impact were also identified, including UCSC annotated
coding regions (exon and snoRNA/miRNA) and regulatory regions, as well as binding
regions for transcription factors (TFs), histone modifications (HMs), DNase I
hypersensitivity (DHSs), and RNA Polymerase IIA (POLR2A) defined by ChIP-Seq in
prostate cell lines and tissues. Enrichment analysis was performed to test
whether PCa risk-associated SNPs are located in these functional regions more
than expected.
RESULTS: A total of 103 PCa risk-associated index SNPs and 7,244 SNPs in LD with 
these index SNPs were cataloged. Genomic regions with potentially functional
impact, grouped in 30 different categories of functionalities, were identified.
Enrichment analysis indicated that genomic regions in the following 15 categories
were enriched for the PCa risk-associated SNPs: exons, CpG regions, 6 TFs (AR,
ERG, FOXA1, HOXB13, CTCF, and NR3C1), 5 HMs (H3K4me1, H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K27AC, 
and H3T11P), DHSs and POLR2A. In contrast, significantly fewer PCa risk SNPs were
mapped to binding regions for H3K27me3, a repressive chromatin marker.
CONCLUSIONS: The PCa risk-associated SNPs discovered to date may affect PCa risk 
through multiple different mechanisms, especially by affecting binding regions of
TFs/HMs.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26015065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Sep;24(9):644-50. doi: 10.1111/exd.12773. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Eccrine sweat gland development and sweat secretion.

Cui CY(1), Schlessinger D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Eccrine sweat glands help to maintain homoeostasis, primarily by stabilizing body
temperature. Derived from embryonic ectoderm, millions of eccrine glands are
distributed across human skin and secrete litres of sweat per day. Their easy
accessibility has facilitated the start of analyses of their development and
function. Mouse genetic models find sweat gland development regulated
sequentially by Wnt, Eda and Shh pathways, although precise subpathways and
additional regulators require further elucidation. Mature glands have two
secretory cell types, clear and dark cells, whose comparative development and
functional interactions remain largely unknown. Clear cells have long been known 
as the major secretory cells, but recent studies suggest that dark cells are also
indispensable for sweat secretion. Dark cell-specific Foxa1 expression was shown 
to regulate a Ca(2+) -dependent Best2 anion channel that is the candidate driver 
for the required ion currents. Overall, it was shown that cholinergic impulses
trigger sweat secretion in mature glands through second messengers - for example 
InsP3 and Ca(2+) - and downstream ion channels/transporters in the framework of a
Na(+) -K(+) -Cl(-) cotransporter model. Notably, the microenvironment surrounding
secretory cells, including acid-base balance, was implicated to be important for 
proper sweat secretion, which requires further clarification. Furthermore,
multiple ion channels have been shown to be expressed in clear and dark cells,
but the degree to which various ion channels function redundantly or
indispensably also remains to be determined.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 26014472  [PubMed - in process]


72. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 May 26;8:25. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0101-5.

Molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma are defined by specific gene
regulatory systems.

Eriksson P(1), Aine M(2), Veerla S(3), Liedberg F(4), Sjödahl G(5), Höglund M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. pontus.eriksson@med.lu.se.
(2)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.aine@med.lu.se. (3)Division
of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. srinivas.veerla@med.lu.se. (4)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Fredrik.liedberg@med.lu.se. (5)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Gottfrid.sjodahl@med.lu.se. (6)Division of
Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.hoglund@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: Molecular stratification of bladder cancer has revealed gene
signatures differentially expressed across tumor subtypes. While these signatures
provide important insights into subtype biology, the transcriptional regulation
that governs these signatures is not well characterized.
METHODS: In this study, we use publically available ChIP-Seq data on regulatory
factor binding in order to link transcription factors to gene signatures defining
molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma.
RESULTS: We identify PPARG and STAT3, as well as ADIRF, a novel regulator of
fatty acid metabolism, as putative mediators of the SCC-like phenotype. We link
the PLK1-FOXM1 axis to the rapidly proliferating Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like subtypes and show that differentiation programs involving PPARG/RXRA,
FOXA1/GATA3 and HOXA/HOXB are differentially expressed in UC molecular subtypes. 
We show that gene signatures and regulatory systems defined in urothelial
carcinoma operate in breast cancer in a subtype specific manner, suggesting
similarities at the gene regulatory level of these two tumor types.
CONCLUSIONS: At the gene regulatory level Urobasal, Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like tumors represents three fundamentally different tumor types. Urobasal
tumors maintain an apparent urothelial differentiation axis composed of
PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3 and anterior HOXA and HOXB genes. Genomically Unstable
and SCC-like tumors differ from Urobasal tumors by a strong increase of
proliferative activity through the PLK1-FOXM1 axis operating in both subtypes.
However, whereas SCC-like tumors evade urothelial differentiation by a block in
differentiation through strong downregulation of PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3, our
data indicates that Genomically Unstable tumors evade differentiation in a more
dynamic manner.

PMCID: PMC4446831
PMID: 26008846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Bioinformatics. 2015 Sep 15;31(18):3057-9. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv321.
Epub 2015 May 20.

ABC: a tool to identify SNVs causing allele-specific transcription factor binding
from ChIP-Seq experiments.

Bailey SD(1), Virtanen C(2), Haibe-Kains B(1), Lupien M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON,
Canada, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada and Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada Princess
Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada,
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada and 
Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada. (2)Princess Margaret 
Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, Department of
Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada and Ontario
Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada. (3)Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada and Ontario Institute for 
Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University 
Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada, Department of Medical Biophysics, University
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada and Ontario Institute for Cancer Research,
Toronto, ON, Canada Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada, Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada and Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

MOTIVATION: Detection of allelic imbalances in ChIP-Seq reads is a powerful
approach to identify functional non-coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs),
either polymorphisms or mutations, which modulate the affinity of transcription
factors for chromatin. We present ABC, a computational tool that identifies
allele-specific binding of transcription factors from aligned ChIP-Seq reads at
heterozygous SNVs. ABC controls for potential false positives resulting from
biases introduced by the use of short sequencing reads in ChIP-Seq and can
efficiently process a large number of heterozygous SNVs.
RESULTS: ABC successfully identifies previously characterized functional SNVs,
such as the rs4784227 breast cancer risk associated SNP that modulates the
affinity of FOXA1 for the chromatin.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The code is open-source under an Artistic-2.0
license and versioned on GitHub (https://github.com/mlupien/ABC/). ABC is written
in PERL and can be run on any platform with both PERL (=5.18.1) and R (=3.1.1)
installed. The script requires the PERL Statistics::R module.
CONTACT: mlupien@uhnres.utoronto.ca
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4668780 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 25995231  [PubMed - in process]


74. Genome Biol. 2015 May 21;16:105. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0668-3.

Inferring regulatory element landscapes and transcription factor networks from
cancer methylomes.

Yao L(1), Shen H(2), Laird PW(3), Farnham PJ(4), Berman BP(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. lijingya@usc.edu. (2)Center for Epigenetics, Van Andel Research Institute,
Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Hui.Shen@vai.org. (3)Center for Epigenetics, Van
Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Peter.Laird@vai.org.
(4)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. peggy.farnham@med.usc.edu. (5)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT
6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.
(6)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Research Center, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, AHSP Bldg., Suite A8111, Los
Angeles, CA, 90048, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.

Recent studies indicate that DNA methylation can be used to identify
transcriptional enhancers, but no systematic approach has been developed for
genome-wide identification and analysis of enhancers based on DNA methylation. We
describe ELMER (Enhancer Linking by Methylation/Expression Relationships), an
R-based tool that uses DNA methylation to identify enhancers and correlates
enhancer state with expression of nearby genes to identify transcriptional
targets. Transcription factor motif analysis of enhancers is coupled with
expression analysis of transcription factors to infer upstream regulators. Using 
ELMER, we investigated more than 2,000 tumor samples from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. We identified networks regulated by known cancer drivers such as GATA3 and
FOXA1 (breast cancer), SOX17 and FOXA2 (endometrial cancer), and NFE2L2, SOX2,
and TP63 (squamous cell lung cancer). We also identified novel networks with
prognostic associations, including RUNX1 in kidney cancer. We propose ELMER as a 
powerful new paradigm for understanding the cis-regulatory interface between
cancer-associated transcription factors and their functional target genes.

PMCID: PMC4460959
PMID: 25994056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13216-28.

MicroRNA-212 suppresses tumor growth of human hepatocellular carcinoma by
targeting FOXA1.

Dou C(1), Wang Y(1), Li C(1), Liu Z(1), Jia Y(1), Li Q(1), Yang W(1), Yao Y(1),
Liu Q(1), Tu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.

MicroRNA-212 (miR-212) has been reported to play oncogenic or tumor suppressive
role in different human malignancies. Here, we demonstrated that the mean level
of miR-212 in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues was significantly lower than
that in matched tumor-adjacent tissues. Similarly, the expression of miR-212 was 
obviously reduced in HCC cell lines as compared with a nontransformed hepatic
cell line. Ectopic expression of miR-212 inhibited cell viability and
proliferation, and induced apoptosis in HepG2 cells. In contrast, down-regulation
of miR-212 increased cell viability and proliferation, and suppressed apoptosis
in Bel-7402 cells. In vivo studies showed that miR-212 inhibited tumor growth of 
HCC via suppressing proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Furthermore, we
confirmed that Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) was a direct target of miR-212,
and it abrogated the function of miR-212 in HCC. Finally, we disclosed that the
aberrant expression of miR-212 and FOXA1 was evidently correlated with poor
prognostic features of HCC. MiR-212, FOXA1 and their combination were valuable
prognostic markers for predicting survival of HCC patients. In conclusion,
miR-212 may serve as a prognostic indicator for HCC patients and exerts tumor
suppressive role, at least in part, by inhibiting FOXA1.

PMCID: PMC4537009
PMID: 25965836  [PubMed - in process]


76. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2015 Jul;48(7):610-5. doi: 10.1590/1414-431X20154026. Epub
2015 Apr 28.

DNA methylation patterns of candidate genes regulated by thymine DNA glycosylase 
in patients with TP53 germline mutations.

Fortes FP(1), Kuasne H(2), Marchi FA(2), Miranda PM(2), Rogatto SR(2), Achatz
MI(1).

Author information: 
(1)CIPE, Laboratrio de Oncogentica Molecular, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, São
Paulo, SP, Brasil. (2)CIPE, Laboratrio NeoGene, A.C. Camargo Cancer Center, São
Paulo, SP, Brasil.

Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant, hereditary cancer
predisposition disorder. In Brazil, the p.R337H TP53 founder mutation causes the 
variant form of LFS, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome. The occurrence of cancer and age 
of disease onset are known to vary, even in patients carrying the same mutation, 
and several mechanisms such as genetic and epigenetic alterations may be involved
in this variability. However, the extent of involvement of such events has not
been clarified. It is well established that p53 regulates several pathways,
including the thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG) pathway, which regulates the DNA
methylation of several genes. This study aimed to identify the DNA methylation
pattern of genes potentially related to the TDG pathway (CDKN2A, FOXA1, HOXD8,
OCT4, SOX2, and SOX17) in 30 patients with germline TP53 mutations, 10 patients
with wild-type TP53, and 10 healthy individuals. We also evaluated TDG expression
in patients with adrenocortical tumors (ADR) with and without the p.R337H TP53
mutation. Gene methylation patterns of peripheral blood DNA samples assessed by
pyrosequencing revealed no significant differences between the three groups.
However, increased TDG expression was observed by quantitative reverse
transcription PCR in p.R337H carriers with ADR. Considering the rarity of this
phenotype and the relevance of these findings, further studies using a larger
sample set are necessary to confirm our results.

PMCID: PMC4512099
PMID: 25945745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Jul;47(7):290-7. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00024.2015. 
Epub 2015 Apr 28.

FOXA2 regulates a network of genes involved in critical functions of human
intestinal epithelial cells.

Gosalia N(1), Yang R(1), Kerschner JL(1), Harris A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
Illinois; Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and. (2)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, Illinois; Department of Pediatrics,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

The forkhead box A (FOXA) family of pioneer transcription factors is critical for
the development of many endoderm-derived tissues. Their importance in regulating 
biological processes in the lung and liver is extensively characterized, though
much less is known about their role in intestine. Here we investigate the
contribution of FOXA2 to coordinating intestinal epithelial cell function using
postconfluent Caco2 cells, differentiated into an enterocyte-like model. FOXA2
binding sites genome-wide were determined by ChIP-seq and direct targets of the
factor were validated by ChIP-qPCR and siRNA-mediated depletion of FOXA1/2
followed by RT-qPCR. Peaks of FOXA2 occupancy were frequent at loci contributing 
to gene ontology pathways of regulation of cell migration, cell motion, and
plasma membrane function. Depletion of both FOXA1 and FOXA2 led to a significant 
reduction in the expression of multiple transmembrane proteins including ion
channels and transporters, which form a network that is essential for maintaining
normal ion and solute transport. One of the targets was the adenosine A2B
receptor, and reduced receptor mRNA levels were associated with a functional
decrease in intracellular cyclic AMP. We also observed that 30% of FOXA2 binding 
sites contained a GATA motif and that FOXA1/A2 depletion reduced GATA-4, but not 
GATA-6 protein levels. These data show that FOXA2 plays a pivotal role in
regulating intestinal epithelial cell function. Moreover, that the FOXA and GATA 
families of transcription factors may work cooperatively to regulate gene
expression genome-wide in the intestinal epithelium.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4491527 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25921584  [PubMed - in process]


78. Turk J Haematol. 2015 Sep;32(3):206-12.

Bortezomib and Arsenic Trioxide Activity on a Myelodysplastic Cell Line (P39): A 
Gene Expression Study.

Savli H, Galimberti S, Sünnetçi D, Canesastraro M, Palumbo G, Nagy B, Di Raimondo
F, Petrini M.

INTRODUCTION: We aimed to understand the molecular pathways affected by
bortezomib and arsenic trioxide treatment on myelomonocytoid cell line P39.
METHODS: Oligonucleotide microarray platforms were used for gene expression and
pathway analysis. Confirmation studies were performed using quantitative real
time PCR.
RESULTS: Bortezomib treatment has shown upregulated DIABLO and NF-<U+03BA>BIB (a NF-<U+03BA>B
inhibitor) and downregulated NF-<U+03BA>B1, NF-<U+03BA>B2, and BIRC1 gene expressions.
Combination treatment of the two compounds showed gene expression deregulations
in concordance by the results of single bortezomib treatment. Especially, P53 was
a pathway more significantly modified and a gene network centralized around the
beta estradiol gene. Beta estradiol, BRCA2, and FOXA1 genes were remarkable
deregulations in our findings.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Results support the suggestions about possible use of 
proteasome inhibitors in the treatment of high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS). NF-<U+03BA>B was observed as an important modulator in leukemic transformation of
MDS.

PMCID: PMC4563195
PMID: 25913414  [PubMed - in process]


79. Am J Pathol. 2015 May;185(5):1385-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.01.014.

Loss of FOXA1 Drives Sexually Dimorphic Changes in Urothelial Differentiation and
Is an Independent Predictor of Poor Prognosis in Bladder Cancer.

Reddy OL(1), Cates JM(2), Gellert LL(2), Crist HS(3), Yang Z(3), Yamashita H(3), 
Taylor JA 3rd(4), Smith JA Jr(5), Chang SS(5), Cookson MS(6), You C(5), Barocas
DA(5), Grabowska MM(5), Ye F(7), Wu XR(8), Yi Y(9), Matusik RJ(5), Kaestner
KH(10), Clark PE(5), DeGraff DJ(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, California. (2)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. (3)Department of
Pathology, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey,
Pennsylvania. (4)Division of Urology, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, Connecticut. (5)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. (6)Department of Urology, University of
Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. (7)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee. (8)Departments of Urology and Pathology, New
York University School of Medicine and Veterans Affairs Medical Center in
Manhattan, New York, New York. (9)Institute for Integrative Genomics and
Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(10)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (11)Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University College 
of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania; Cancer Institute, Milton S. Hershey Medical
Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania; Division of Urology, Department of Surgery,
Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania.
Electronic address: ddegraff@hmc.psu.edu.

We previously found loss of forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) expression to be associated
with aggressive urothelial carcinoma of the bladder, as well as increased tumor
proliferation and invasion. These initial findings were substantiated by The
Cancer Genome Atlas, which identified FOXA1 mutations in a subset of bladder
cancers. However, the prognostic significance of FOXA1 inactivation and the
effect of FOXA1 loss on urothelial differentiation remain unknown. Application of
a univariate analysis (log-rank) and a multivariate Cox proportional hazards
regression model revealed that loss of FOXA1 expression is an independent
predictor of decreased overall survival. An ubiquitin Cre-driven system ablating 
Foxa1 expression in urothelium of adult mice resulted in sex-specific histologic 
alterations, with male mice developing urothelial hyperplasia and female mice
developing keratinizing squamous metaplasia. Microarray analysis confirmed these 
findings and revealed a significant increase in cytokeratin 14 expression in the 
urothelium of the female Foxa1 knockout mouse and an increase in the expression
of a number of genes normally associated with keratinocyte differentiation. IHC
confirmed increased cytokeratin 14 expression in female bladders and additionally
revealed enrichment of cytokeratin 14-positive basal cells in the hyperplastic
urothelial mucosa in male Foxa1 knockout mice. Analysis of human tumor specimens 
confirmed a significant relationship between loss of FOXA1 and increased
cytokeratin 14 expression.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4419202 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25907831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Apr 22;12:78. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0292-x.

Role of IL-16 in CD4+ T cell-mediated regulation of relapsing multiple sclerosis.

Skundric DS(1), Cruikshank WW(2), Drulovic J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Wayne State University, 540 East
Canfield Av., Detroit, MI, USA. Skundric@wayne.edu. (2)Pulmonary Center Boston
University, 715 Albany Street, Boston, MA, USA. bcruiksh@bu.edu. (3)Clinic of
Neurology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Dr Subotica 6, Belgrade, Serbia. jelena60@EUnet.rs.

In an important article published in Nature Medicine, Liu and colleagues
described a novel CD4(+) FoxA1(+) regulatory T (Treg) cell population as distinct
regulators of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS) and experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). CD4(+) FoxA1(+) Treg cells appear as key
regulators of responsiveness to therapy with interferon beta (IFN-ß) in RRMS
patients. Data indicate that CD4(+)FoxA1(+) FOXP3(-) Treg cells develop within
the central nervous system (CNS), and a potential of cerebellar granule neurons
(CGN) in generation of CD4(+)FoxA1(+)PD-L1(hi)FOXP3(-) Treg cells from
encephalitogenic CD4(+) T cells. A CD4 co-receptor specific ligand, IL-16,
governs trafficking and biological properties of CD4(+) T cells irrespective of
their activation state. Functions of IL-16, relevant to Treg cells, include
expansion of CD4(+)CD25(+) T cells in long-term cultures with IL-2, de novo
induction of FOXP-3 and migration of FOXP-3(+) T cells. IL-16 is highly conserved
across species including human and mouse. CGN and neurons in hippocampus contain 
neuronal-IL-16 (NIL-16), splice variant of immune IL-16, and express CD4
molecule. In a CD4-dependent manner, IL-16 supports cultured CGN survival.
Concomitant studies of RRMS lesions and corresponding MOG35-55-induced relapsing 
EAE in (B6 × JL)F1 (H-2(b/s)) mice discovered similar roles of IL-16 in
regulation of relapsing disease. In RRMS and EAE relapse, peak levels of IL-16
and active caspase-3 correlated with CD4(+) T cell infiltration and levels of
T-bet, Stat-1(Tyr(701)), and phosphorylated neurofilaments of axonal cytoskeleton
[NF (M + H) P], suggesting a role of locally produced IL-16 in regulation of
CD4(+) Th1 inflammation and axonal damage, respectively. IL-16 was abundantly
present in CD4(+) T cells, followed by CD20(+) B, CD8(+) T, CD83(+) dendritic
cells, and Mac-1(+) microglia. Apart from lesions, bioactive IL-16 was located in
normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) and normal-appearing grey matter (NAGM) in
RRMS brain and spinal cord. A cytokine IL-16 emerges as an important regulator of
relapsing MS and EAE. Better understanding of immune cell-neuron interactions
mediated by IL-16 will foster development of more specific CD4(+) T cell
subset-targeted therapies to prevent or ameliorate progression of
neuroinflammation and axonal and neuronal damage. Translational studies
necessitate corresponding EAE models.

PMCID: PMC4426180
PMID: 25896927  [PubMed - in process]


81. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 20;11(4):e1005174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005174.
eCollection 2015.

The chromatin Remodeler CHD8 is required for activation of progesterone
receptor-dependent enhancers.

Ceballos-Chávez M(1), Subtil-Rodríguez A(1), Giannopoulou EG(2), Soronellas D(3),
Vázquez-Chávez E(1), Vicent GP(3), Elemento O(4), Beato M(3), Reyes JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Department, Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina 
Regenerativa (CABIMER), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Seville, Spain. (2)Biological Sciences Department, New York City College of
Technology, City University of New York, Brooklyn, New York, New York, United
States of America; Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program and the David Z.
Rosensweig Genomics Research Center, Hospital for Special Surgery, New York, New 
York, United States of America. (3)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Barcelona, Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain. (4)HRH Prince
Alwaleed Bin Talal Bin Abdulaziz Alsaud Institute for Computational Biomedicine, 
Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, New York, New York, United
States of America.

While the importance of gene enhancers in transcriptional regulation is well
established, the mechanisms and the protein factors that determine enhancers
activity have only recently begun to be unravelled. Recent studies have shown
that progesterone receptor (PR) binds regions that display typical features of
gene enhancers. Here, we show by ChIP-seq experiments that the chromatin
remodeler CHD8 mostly binds promoters under proliferation conditions. However,
upon progestin stimulation, CHD8 re-localizes to PR enhancers also enriched in
p300 and H3K4me1. Consistently, CHD8 depletion severely impairs
progestin-dependent gene regulation. CHD8 binding is PR-dependent but independent
of the pioneering factor FOXA1. The SWI/SNF chromatin-remodelling complex is
required for PR-dependent gene activation. Interestingly, we show that CHD8
interacts with the SWI/SNF complex and that depletion of BRG1 and BRM, the
ATPases of SWI/SNF complex, impairs CHD8 recruitment. We also show that CHD8 is
not required for H3K27 acetylation, but contributes to increase accessibility of 
the enhancer to DNaseI. Furthermore, CHD8 was required for RNAPII recruiting to
the enhancers and for transcription of enhancer-derived RNAs (eRNAs). Taken
together our data demonstrate that CHD8 is involved in late stages of PR
enhancers activation.

PMCID: PMC4403880
PMID: 25894978  [PubMed - in process]


82. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 15;408(2):292-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.03.013. Epub 2015
Apr 4.

ATP4a is required for development and function of the Xenopus mucociliary
epidermis - a potential model to study proton pump inhibitor-associated
pneumonia.

Walentek P(1), Beyer T(2), Hagenlocher C(2), Müller C(2), Feistel K(2),
Schweickert A(2), Harland RM(3), Blum M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, University of Hohenheim, Garbenstrasse 30, 70593
Stuttgart, Germany; Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Center for
Integrative Genomics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720,
USA. Electronic address: walentek@berkeley.edu. (2)Institute of Zoology,
University of Hohenheim, Garbenstrasse 30, 70593 Stuttgart, Germany.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Center for Integrative Genomics,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), which target gastric H(+)/K(+)ATPase (ATP4), are
among the most commonly prescribed drugs. PPIs are used to treat ulcers and as a 
preventative measure against gastroesophageal reflux disease in hospitalized
patients. PPI treatment correlates with an increased risk for airway infections, 
i.e. community- and hospital-acquired pneumonia. The cause for this correlation, 
however, remains elusive. The Xenopus embryonic epidermis is increasingly being
used as a model to study airway-like mucociliary epithelia. Here we use this
model to address how ATP4 inhibition may affect epithelial function in human
airways. We demonstrate that atp4a knockdown interfered with the generation of
cilia-driven extracellular fluid flow. ATP4a and canonical Wnt signaling were
required in the epidermis for expression of foxj1, a transcriptional regulator of
motile ciliogenesis. The ATP4/Wnt module activated foxj1 downstream of ciliated
cell fate specification. In multiciliated cells (MCCs) of the epidermis, ATP4a
was also necessary for normal myb expression, apical actin formation, basal body 
docking and alignment of basal bodies. Furthermore, ATP4-dependent Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling in the epidermis was a prerequisite for foxa1-mediated specification of
small secretory cells (SSCs). SSCs release serotonin and other substances into
the medium, and thereby regulate ciliary beating in MCCs and protect the
epithelium against infection. Pharmacological inhibition of ATP4 in the mature
mucociliary epithelium also caused a loss of MCCs and led to impaired mucociliary
clearance. These data strongly suggest that PPI-associated pneumonia in human
patients might, at least in part, be linked to dysfunction of mucociliary
epithelia of the airways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592800 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 25848696  [PubMed - in process]


83. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):386-99. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.013.

Epigenetic priming of enhancers predicts developmental competence of hESC-derived
endodermal lineage intermediates.

Wang A(1), Yue F(2), Li Y(3), Xie R(1), Harper T(1), Patel NA(1), Muth K(1),
Palmer J(1), Qiu Y(3), Wang J(1), Lam DK(1), Raum JC(4), Stoffers DA(4), Ren
B(5), Sander M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0983, USA; Sanford Consortium for
Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, The Pennsylvania State University,
Hershey, PA 17033, USA. (3)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA
92093-0653, USA. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. (5)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0651, USA; Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0761, USA; Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA. Electronic
address: biren@ucsd.edu. (6)Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0983, USA;
Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0651, USA; Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0761, USA; Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA. Electronic
address: masander@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):343-4.

Embryonic development relies on the capacity of progenitor cells to appropriately
respond to inductive cues, a cellular property known as developmental competence.
Here, we report that epigenetic priming of enhancers signifies developmental
competence during endodermal lineage diversification. Chromatin mapping during
pancreatic and hepatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells revealed the
en masse acquisition of a poised chromatin state at enhancers specific to
endoderm-derived cell lineages in gut tube intermediates. Experimentally, the
acquisition of this poised enhancer state predicts the ability of endodermal
intermediates to respond to inductive signals. Furthermore, these enhancers are
first recognized by the pioneer transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2 when
competence is acquired, while subsequent recruitment of lineage-inductive
transcription factors, such as PDX1, leads to enhancer and target gene
activation. Together, our results identify the acquisition of a poised chromatin 
state at enhancers as a mechanism by which progenitor cells acquire developmental
competence.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4478079 [Available on 2016-04-02]
PMID: 25842977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS Lett. 2015 Apr 28;589(10):1112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.03.022. Epub
2015 Mar 30.

Negative regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by forkhead box protein A in
human hepatoma cells.

Okumura N(1), Ikeda M(2), Satoh S(3), Dansako H(3), Sugiyama M(4), Mizokami M(4),
Kato N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama
700-8558, Japan; Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for
Chronic Viral Disease, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. (2)Department of Tumor
Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan;
Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for Chronic Viral Disease,
Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1
Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Electronic address:
maikeda@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (4)The Research Center for
Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-7-1
Konodai, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-8516, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication is controlled by liver-enriched
transcriptional factors, including forkhead box protein A (FOXA) members. Here,
we found that FOXA members are directly and indirectly involved in HBV
replication in human hepatic cells. HBV replication was elevated in HuH-7 treated
with individual FOXA members-specific siRNA. Reciprocally, the downregulation of 
HBV replication was observed in FOXA-induced HuH-7. However, the mechanism of
downregulation is different among FOXA members at the level of HBV RNA
transcription, such as precore/pg RNA and 2.1 kb RNA. In addition, FOXA1 and
FOXA2 suppressed nuclear hormone receptors, such as HNF4a, that are related to
HBV replication.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25836733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes. 2015 Aug;64(8):2744-56. doi: 10.2337/db14-0993. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Glucose Tolerance Is Improved in Mice Invalidated for the Nuclear Receptor
HNF-4<U+03B3>: A Critical Role for Enteroendocrine Cell Lineage.

Baraille F(1), Ayari S(1), Carrière V(1), Osinski C(1), Garbin K(2), Blondeau
B(1), Guillemain G(1), Serradas P(1), Rousset M(1), Lacasa M(2), Cardot P(3),
Ribeiro A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de 
Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France Institute of
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de 
Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France. (3)Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR_S 
1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France UMR_S 1158,
Neurophysiologie Respiratoire Expérimentale et Clinique, Paris, France
agnes.ribeiro-pillet@crc.jussieu.fr philippe.cardot@upmc.fr. (4)Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR_S 
1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France Institute of
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France
agnes.ribeiro-pillet@crc.jussieu.fr philippe.cardot@upmc.fr.

Intestine contributes to energy homeostasis through the absorption, metabolism,
and transfer of nutrients to the organism. We demonstrated previously that
hepatocyte nuclear receptor-4a (HNF-4a) controls intestinal epithelium
homeostasis and intestinal absorption of dietary lipids. HNF-4<U+03B3>, the other HNF-4 
form highly expressed in intestine, is much less studied. In HNF-4<U+03B3> knockout
mice, we detect an exaggerated insulin peak and improvement in glucose tolerance 
during oral but not intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests, highlighting the
involvement of intestine. Moreover, the enteroendocrine L-type cell lineage is
modified, as assessed by the increased expression of transcription factors Isl1, 
Foxa1/2, and Hnf4a, leading to an increase of both GLP-1-positive cell number and
basal and stimulated GLP-1 plasma levels potentiating the glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Using the GLP-1 antagonist exendin (9-39), we demonstrate a
direct effect of GLP-1 on improved glucose tolerance. GLP-1 exerts a trophic
effect on pancreatic ß-cells, and we report an increase of the ß-cell fraction
correlated with an augmented number of proliferative islet cells and with
resistance to streptozotocin-induced diabetes. In conclusion, the loss of HNF-4<U+03B3> 
improves glucose homeostasis through a modulation of the enteroendocrine cell
lineage.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25829452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Prostate. 2015 Jun 15;75(9):976-87. doi: 10.1002/pros.22982. Epub 2015 Mar 23.

FOXA1 modulates EAF2 regulation of AR transcriptional activity, cell
proliferation, and migration in prostate cancer cells.

Guo W(1), Keener AL, Jing Y, Cai L, Ai J, Zhang J, Fisher AL, Fu G, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Center, Shanghai First People's Hospital / Faculty of Basic
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Department of Urology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

Erratum in
    Prostate. 2015 Sep;75(12):1339. Fisher, A L [added].

BACKGROUND: ELL-associated factor 2 (EAF2) is an androgen-regulated tumor
suppressor in the prostate. However, the mechanisms underlying tumor suppressive 
function of EAF2 are still largely unknown. Identification of factors capable of 
modulating EAF2 function will help elucidate the mechanisms underlying EAF2 tumor
suppressive function.
METHODS: Using eaf-1(the ortholog of EAF2) mutant C. elegans model, RNAi screen
was used to identify factors on the basis of their knockdown to synergistically
enhance the reduced fertility phenotype of the eaf-1 mutant C. elegans. In human 
cells, the interaction of EAF2 with FOXA1 and the effect of EAF2 on the FOXA1
protein levels were determined by co-immunoprecipitation and protein stability
assay. The effect of EAF2 and/or FOXA1 knockdown on the expression of AR-target
genes was determined by real-time RT-PCR and luciferase reporter assays. The
effect of EAF2 and/or FOXA1 knockdown on LNCaP human prostate cancer cell
proliferation and migration was tested using BrdU assay and transwell migration
assay.
RESULTS: RNAi screen identified pha-4, the C. elegans ortholog of mammalian
FOXA1, on the basis of its knockdown to synergistically enhance the reduced
fertility phenotype of the eaf-1 mutant C. elegans causing sterility. EAF2
co-immunoprecipitated with FOXA1. EAF2 knockdown enhanced endogenous FOXA1
protein level, whereas transfected GFP-EAF2 down-regulated the FOXA1 protein.
Also, EAF2 knockdown enhanced the expression of AR-target genes, cell
proliferation, and migration in LNCaP cells. However, FOXA1 knockdown inhibited
the effect of EAF2 knockdown on AR-target gene expression, cell proliferation,
and migration in LNCaP cells, suggesting that FOXA1 can modulate EAF2 regulation 
of AR transcriptional activation, cell proliferation, and migration.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that regulation of the AR signaling pathway, 
cell proliferation, and migration through FOXA1 represents an important mechanism
of EAF2 suppression of prostate carcinogenesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4424106 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25808853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Development. 2015 Apr 1;142(7):1315-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.115808.

Genome-wide characterisation of Foxa1 binding sites reveals several mechanisms
for regulating neuronal differentiation in midbrain dopamine cells.

Metzakopian E(1), Bouhali K(1), Alvarez-Saavedra M(2), Whitsett JA(3), Picketts
DJ(4), Ang SL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, 
UK. (2)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (3)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (4)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 Departments of
Biochemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1H 8M5. (5)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London 
NW7 1AA, UK sang@nimr.mrc.ac.uk.

Midbrain dopamine neuronal progenitors develop into heterogeneous subgroups of
neurons, such as substantia nigra pars compacta, ventral tegmental area and
retrorubal field, that regulate motor control, motivated and addictive
behaviours. The development of midbrain dopamine neurons has been extensively
studied, and these studies indicate that complex cross-regulatory interactions
between extrinsic and intrinsic molecules regulate a precise temporal and spatial
programme of neurogenesis in midbrain dopamine progenitors. To elucidate direct
molecular interactions between multiple regulatory factors during neuronal
differentiation in mice, we characterised genome-wide binding sites of the
forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxa1, which functions redundantly
with Foxa2 to regulate the differentiation of mDA neurons. Interestingly, our
studies identified a rostral brain floor plate Neurog2 enhancer that requires
direct input from Otx2, Foxa1, Foxa2 and an E-box transcription factor for its
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the chromatin remodelling factor Smarca1
was shown to function downstream of Foxa1 and Foxa2 to regulate differentiation
from immature to mature midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Our genome-wide
Foxa1-bound cis-regulatory sequences from ChIP-Seq and Foxa1/2 candidate target
genes from RNA-Seq analyses of embryonic midbrain dopamine cells also provide an 
excellent resource for probing mechanistic insights into gene regulatory networks
involved in the differentiation of midbrain dopamine neurons.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4378246
PMID: 25804738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2015 May 8;290(19):12355-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.625012. Epub 2015
Mar 17.

Orc1 Binding to Mitotic Chromosomes Precedes Spatial Patterning during G1 Phase
and Assembly of the Origin Recognition Complex in Human Cells.

Kara N(1), Hossain M(2), Prasanth SG(3), Stillman B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724,
the Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York 11779, and. (2)From the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, New York 11724. (3)From the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold
Spring Harbor, New York 11724, the Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana-Champaign, Illinois 61801.
(4)From the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 11724,
stillman@cshl.edu.

Replication of eukaryotic chromosomes occurs once every cell division cycle in
normal cells and is a tightly controlled process that ensures complete genome
duplication. The origin recognition complex (ORC) plays a key role during the
initiation of DNA replication. In human cells, the level of Orc1, the largest
subunit of ORC, is regulated during the cell division cycle, and thus ORC is a
dynamic complex. Upon S phase entry, Orc1 is ubiquitinated and targeted for
destruction, with subsequent dissociation of ORC from chromosomes. Time lapse and
live cell images of human cells expressing fluorescently tagged Orc1 show that
Orc1 re-localizes to condensing chromatin during early mitosis and then displays 
different nuclear localization patterns at different times during G1 phase,
remaining associated with late replicating regions of the genome in late G1
phase. The initial binding of Orc1 to mitotic chromosomes requires C-terminal
amino acid sequences that are similar to mitotic chromosome-binding sequences in 
the transcriptional pioneer protein FOXA1. Depletion of Orc1 causes concomitant
loss of the mini-chromosome maintenance (Mcm2-7) helicase proteins on chromatin. 
The data suggest that Orc1 acts as a nucleating center for ORC assembly and then 
pre-replication complex assembly by binding to mitotic chromosomes, followed by
gradual removal from chromatin during the G1 phase.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4424365 [Available on 2016-05-08]
PMID: 25784553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Apr;150(2):335-46. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3335-1. 
Epub 2015 Mar 12.

Clinical and biological significance of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression
in breast cancer.

Abduljabbar R(1), Negm OH, Lai CF, Jerjees DA, Al-Kaabi M, Hamed MR, Tighe PJ,
Buluwela L, Mukherjee A, Green AR, Ali S, Rakha EA, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer and Stem Cell, Department of Histopathology, The University
of Nottingham, City Hospital Campus, Nottingham, UK, mrxra10@nottingham.ac.uk.

The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily 
of transcription factors, which exerts anti-proliferative and anti-apoptotic
activities. The GR is expressed in a large proportion of breast cancer (BC)
although levels generally decrease during cancer progression. This study aimed to
determine the clinical and biological significance of GR expression using a large
series of early-stage BC with long-term follow-up and BC cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry was used to assess the expression of GR in 999 cases of
primary invasive BC prepared as tissue microarrays. Reverse phase protein
microarray was used to assess the expression of GR in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 cell
lines. Nuclear expression of GR was observed in 61.6 % of breast tumours and was 
associated with features of good prognosis including smaller tumour size and
lower grade with less pleomorphism and low mitotic count. GR expression was
positively correlated with expression of oestrogen (ER) and progesterone
receptors. In ER-positive tumours, GR was associated with other features of
favourable outcome including FOXA1, GATA3 and BEX1 expression, while low GR
expression was associated with high Ki67, p53 and CD71 expression. GR expression 
is associated with features of good outcome but does not provide prognostic
information independent of size, stage and grade. Understanding the receptor and 
its effects on BC behaviour is essential for avoiding any unwanted effects from
the use of glucocorticoids in routine oncology practice.

PMID: 25762479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2015 Mar;80(3):310-22. doi: 10.1134/S0006297915030062.

Epigenetic mechanisms of peptidergic regulation of gene expression during aging
of human cells.

Ashapkin VV(1), Linkova NS, Khavinson VKh, Vanyushin BF.

Author information: 
(1)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, 119992, Russia. ashapkin@genebee.msu.ru.

Expression levels of genes encoding specific transcription factors and other
functionally important proteins vary upon aging of pancreatic and bronchial
epithelium cell cultures. The peptides KEDW and AEDL tissue-specifically affect
gene expression in pancreatic and bronchial cell cultures, respectively. It is
established in this work that the DNA methylation patterns of the PDX1, PAX6,
NGN3, NKX2-1, and SCGB1A1 gene promoter regions change upon aging in pancreatic
and bronchial cell cultures in correlation with variations in their expression
levels. Thus, stable changes in gene expression upon aging of cell cultures could
be caused by changes in their promoter methylation patterns. The methylation
patterns of the PAX4 gene in pancreatic cells as well as those of the FOXA1,
SCGB3A2, and SFTPA1 genes in bronchial cells do not change upon aging and are
unaffected by peptides, whereas their expression levels change in both cases. The
promoter region of the FOXA2 gene in pancreatic cells contains a small number of 
methylated CpG sites, their methylation levels being affected by cell culture
aging and KEDW, though without any correlation with gene expression levels. The
promoter region of the FOXA2 gene is completely unmethylated in bronchial cells
irrespective of cell culture age and AEDL action. Changes in promoter methylation
might be the cause of age- and peptide-induced variations in expression levels of
the PDX1, PAX6, and NGN3 genes in pancreatic cells and NKX2-1 and SCGB1A1 genes
in bronchial cells. Expression levels of the PAX4 and FOXA2 genes in pancreatic
cells and FOXA1, FOXA2, SCGB3A2, and SFTPA1 genes in bronchial cells seem to be
controlled by some other mechanisms.

PMID: 25761685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Jan 1;8(1):96-106. eCollection 2015.

FOXA1 positively regulates gene expression by changing gene methylation status in
human breast cancer MCF-7 cells.

Zheng L(1), Qian B(1), Tian D(1), Tang T(1), Wan S(1), Wang L(1), Zhu L(2), Geng 
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University
Anhui, Hefei 230601, China. (2)Cental Laboratory, The First Hospital of Anhui
Medical University Anhui, Hefei 230022, China.

OBJECTIVE: DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification with tumor
suppressor gene silencing in cancer. The mechanisms underlying DNA methylation
patterns are still poorly understood. This study aims to evaluate the potential
value of FOXA1 for controlling gene CpG island methylation in breast cancer.
METHODS: FOXA1 was down-regulated by transfection with siRNA and up-regulated by 
transfection with plasmid in MCF-7 cell lines. The DNA methylation and mRNA
levels were examined by qMSP and qRT-PCR. The cell proliferation and apoptosis
was detected by MTT and Flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Suppression of FOXA1 enhanced the methylation status of DAPK, MGMT,
RASSF1A, p53, and depressed mRNA levels of these tumor suppressor genes, whereas 
over-expression of FOXA1 showed the opposite effects. DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B
mRNA were up-regulated by siRNA knock-down of FOXA1. At the same time, FOXA1
suppression promoted cell growth and inhibited apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 may be associated with methylation of the tumor suppressor
genes promoter through changing DNMTs expression. FOXA1 could be a potential
demethylation target for prevention and treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4348911
PMID: 25755696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell. 2015 Apr 2;58(1):21-34. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.02.001. Epub 2015
Mar 5.

TNFa signaling exposes latent estrogen receptor binding sites to alter the breast
cancer cell transcriptome.

Franco HL(1), Nagari A(1), Kraus WL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signaling and Gene Regulation, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for
Reproductive Biology Sciences and Division of Basic Reproductive Biology
Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Laboratory of Signaling
and Gene Regulation, Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Reproductive Biology
Sciences and Division of Basic Reproductive Biology Research, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: lee.kraus@utsouthwestern.edu.

The interplay between mitogenic and proinflammatory signaling pathways plays key 
roles in determining the phenotypes and clinical outcomes of breast cancers.
Using GRO-seq in MCF-7 cells, we defined the immediate transcriptional effects of
crosstalk between estradiol (E2) and TNFa, identifying a large set of target
genes whose expression is rapidly altered with combined E2 + TNFa treatment, but 
not with either agent alone. The pleiotropic effects on gene transcription in
response to E2 + TNFa are orchestrated by extensive remodeling of the ERa
enhancer landscape in an NF-<U+03BA>B- and FoxA1-dependent manner. In addition,
expression of the de novo and synergistically regulated genes is strongly
associated with clinical outcomes in breast cancers. Together, our genomic and
molecular analyses indicate that TNFa signaling, acting in pathways culminating
in the redistribution of NF-<U+03BA>B and FoxA1 binding sites across the genome, creates
latent ERa binding sites that underlie altered patterns of gene expression and
clinically relevant cellular responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4385449 [Available on 2016-04-02]
PMID: 25752574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genome Res. 2015 Jun;25(6):825-35. doi: 10.1101/gr.185157.114. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

ChIP-exo signal associated with DNA-binding motifs provides insight into the
genomic binding of the glucocorticoid receptor and cooperating transcription
factors.

Starick SR(1), Ibn-Salem J(2), Jurk M(1), Hernandez C(3), Love MI(1), Chung
HR(1), Vingron M(1), Thomas-Chollier M(3), Meijsing SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany; (2)Department of Computational
Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin,
Germany; Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1024, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8197, F-75005 Paris, France. (3)Institut
de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale, U1024, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité
Mixte de Recherche 8197, F-75005 Paris, France.

The classical DNA recognition sequence of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
appears to be present at only a fraction of bound genomic regions. To identify
sequences responsible for recruitment of this transcription factor (TF) to
individual loci, we turned to the high-resolution ChIP-exo approach. We exploited
this signal by determining footprint profiles of TF binding at single-base-pair
resolution using ExoProfiler, a computational pipeline based on DNA binding
motifs. When applied to our GR and the few available public ChIP-exo data sets,
we find that ChIP-exo footprints are protein- and recognition sequence-specific
signatures of genomic TF association. Furthermore, we show that ChIP-exo captures
information about TFs other than the one directly targeted by the antibody in the
ChIP procedure. Consequently, the shape of the ChIP-exo footprint can be used to 
discriminate between direct and indirect (tethering to other DNA-bound proteins) 
DNA association of GR. Together, our findings indicate that the absence of
classical recognition sequences can be explained by direct GR binding to a
broader spectrum of sequences than previously known, either as a homodimer or as 
a heterodimer binding together with a member of the ETS or TEAD families of TFs, 
or alternatively by indirect recruitment via FOX or STAT proteins. ChIP-exo
footprints also bring structural insights and locate DNA:protein cross-link
points that are compatible with crystal structures of the studied TFs. Overall,
our generically applicable footprint-based approach uncovers new structural and
functional insights into the diverse ways of genomic cooperation and association 
of TFs.

© 2015 Starick et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4448679
PMID: 25720775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):506-19. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-14-1042. Epub 2015
Feb 25.

Suppression of early hematogenous dissemination of human breast cancer cells to
bone marrow by retinoic Acid-induced 2.

Werner S(1), Brors B(2), Eick J(1), Marques E(3), Pogenberg V(4), Parret A(4),
Kemming D(5), Wood AW(6), Edgren H(7), Neubauer H(8), Streichert T(9), Riethdorf 
S(1), Bedi U(1), Baccelli I(10), Jücker M(11), Eils R(12), Fehm T(8), Trumpp
A(10), Johnsen SA(1), Klefström J(3), Wilmanns M(4), Müller V(13), Pantel K(1),
Wikman H(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. (2)Division of Applied Bioinformatics (G200), German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. National Center for Tumor Diseases
(NCT), Heidelberg, Germany. German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research
(DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Translational Cancer Biology Research Program and
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)European 
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg, Germany. (5)Department of Tumor Biology,
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. European
Laboratory Association, Ibbenbüren, Germany. (6)Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., 
Danvers, Massachusetts. (7)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany. Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (9)Department of Clinical 
Chemistry, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany. (10)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (11)Institute of Biochemistry and Signal
Transduction, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(12)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics (B080), German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology,
and Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(13)Department of Gynecology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany. (14)Department of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. h.wikman@uke.de.

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2015 May;5(5):466-8.

Regulatory pathways that drive early hematogenous dissemination of tumor cells
are insufficiently defined. Here, we used the presence of disseminated tumor
cells (DTC) in the bone marrow to define patients with early disseminated breast 
cancer and identified low retinoic acid-induced 2 (RAI2) expression to be
significantly associated with DTC status. Low RAI2 expression was also shown to
be an independent poor prognostic factor in 10 different cancer datasets.
Depletion of RAI2 protein in luminal breast cancer cell lines resulted in
dedifferentiation marked by downregulation of ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3, together
with increased invasiveness and activation of AKT signaling. Functional analysis 
of the previously uncharacterized RAI2 protein revealed molecular interaction
with CtBP transcriptional regulators and an overlapping function in controlling
the expression of a number of key target genes involved in breast cancer. These
results suggest that RAI2 is a new metastasis-associated protein that sustains
differentiation of luminal breast epithelial cells.SIGNIFICANCE: We identified
downregulation of RAI2 as a novel metastasis-associated genetic alteration
especially associated with early occurring bone metastasis in ERa-positive breast
tumors. We specified the role of the RAI2 protein to function as a
transcriptional regulator that controls the expression of several key regulators 
of breast epithelial integrity and cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25716347  [PubMed - in process]


95. Ann Surg Oncol. 2015;22(6):2034-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-4313-2. Epub 2015 Feb 
24.

FOXA1 Expression Significantly Predict Response to Chemotherapy in Estrogen
Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer Patients.

Xu C(1), Wei Q, Guo J, Zhou JC, Mei J, Jiang ZN, Shen JG, Wang LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Affiliated Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Most estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer responds poorly to
chemotherapy and no single cost-effective biomarker capable of selecting
chemosensitive ones has been found yet. We investigated FOXA1 for its role in
predicting chemosensitivity of this subgroup in neoadjuvant chemotherapy
settings.
METHODS: We reviewed pathologic slides of 123 patients who were diagnosed with
ER-positive breast cancer on core needle biopsy and underwent neoadjuvant
chemotherapy at our institution between 2002 and 2012. FOXA1 expression and
pathologic response were evaluated. We then statistically analyzed FOXA1
expression and its relationship with chemosensitivity.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression before NAC was correlated with poor chemoresponse in
ER-positive as well as luminal A and luminal B breast cancer patients (p = 0.002,
0.001, and 0.049 respectively). Significant association between change of FOXA1
staining position after NAC and chemosensitivity also was observed (p = 0.024).
Multivariate analysis identified FOXA1 expression before NAC as an independent
predictor of chemosensitivity in ER-positive and luminal A breast cancer patients
[p = 0.002; relative risk (RR) 0.163; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 0.053-0.500, 
and p = 0.002; RR 0.055; 95 % CI 0.008-0.353, respectively]. Additionally, change
of FOXA1 staining position after NAC was shown to be an independent predictor of 
chemoresponse in luminal B subtype breast cancer patients (p = 0.012; RR 0.153;
95 % CI 0.035-0.665).
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 expression can independently predict chemosensitivity of
ER-positive breast cancer patients.

PMID: 25707489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Gastroenterology. 2015 May;148(5):1012-1023.e14. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.01.045. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Interactions Between Nuclear Receptor SHP and FOXA1 Maintain Oscillatory
Homocysteine Homeostasis in Mice.

Tsuchiya H(1), da Costa KA(2), Lee S(3), Renga B(4), Jaeschke H(5), Yang Z(6),
Orena SJ(2), Goedken MJ(7), Zhang Y(5), Kong B(8), Lebofsky M(5), Rudraiah S(3), 
Smalling R(1), Guo G(8), Fiorucci S(4), Zeisel SH(2), Wang L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City,
Utah. (2)Nutrition Research Institute, Department of Nutrition, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (3)Department of Physiology and
Neurobiology and The Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, Connecticut. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche e Biomediche,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology 
& Therapeutics, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas.
(6)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology and The Institute for Systems
Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut; Veterans Affairs
Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut. (7)Translational
Sciences, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey. (8)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology of School of Pharmacy, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey. (9)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology and The
Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut;
Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, Connecticut;
Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale University, 
New Haven, Connecticut. Electronic address: li.wang@uconn.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hyperhomocysteinemia is often associated with liver and
metabolic diseases. We studied nuclear receptors that mediate oscillatory control
of homocysteine homeostasis in mice.
METHODS: We studied mice with disruptions in Nr0b2 (called small heterodimer
partner [SHP]-null mice), betaine-homocysteine S-methyltransferase (Bhmt), or
both genes (BHMT-null/SHP-null mice), along with mice with wild-type copies of
these genes (controls). Hyperhomocysteinemia was induced by feeding mice alcohol 
(National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism binge model) or chow diets
along with water containing 0.18% DL-homocysteine. Some mice were placed on diets
containing cholic acid (1%) or cholestyramine (2%) or high-fat diets (60%). Serum
and livers were collected during a 24-hour light-dark cycle and analyzed by
RNA-seq, metabolomic, and quantitative polymerase chain reaction, immunoblot, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
RESULTS: SHP-null mice had altered timing in expression of genes that regulate
homocysteine metabolism compared with control mice. Oscillatory production of
S-adenosylmethionine, betaine, choline, phosphocholine, glyceophosphocholine,
cystathionine, cysteine, hydrogen sulfide, glutathione disulfide, and
glutathione, differed between SHP-null mice and control mice. SHP inhibited
transcriptional activation of Bhmt and cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase by FOXA1. Expression
of Bhmt and cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase was decreased when mice were fed cholic acid
but increased when they were placed on diets containing cholestyramine or
high-fat content. Diets containing ethanol or homocysteine induced
hyperhomocysteinemia and glucose intolerance in control, but not SHP-null, mice. 
In BHMT-null and BHMT-null/SHP-null mice fed a control liquid, lipid vacuoles
were observed in livers. Ethanol feeding induced accumulation of macrovesicular
lipid vacuoles to the greatest extent in BHMT-null and BHMT-null/SHP-null mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Disruption of Shp in mice alters timing of expression of genes that 
regulate homocysteine metabolism and the liver responses to ethanol and
homocysteine. SHP inhibits the transcriptional activation of Bhmt and
cystathionine <U+03B3>-lyase by FOXA1.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4409521 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25701738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 May;13(5):828-38. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-15-0016-T. Epub
2015 Feb 20.

The lncRNA DRAIC/PCAT29 Locus Constitutes a Tumor-Suppressive Nexus.

Sakurai K(1), Reon BJ(1), Anaya J(1), Dutta A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia
School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia. (2)Department of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville,
Virginia. ad8q@virginia.edu.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNA) are emerging as major regulators of cellular
phenotypes and implicated as oncogenes or tumor suppressors. Here, we report a
novel tumor-suppressive locus on human chromosome 15q23 that contains two
multiexonic lncRNA genes of 100 kb each: DRAIC (LOC145837) and the recently
reported PCAT29. The DRAIC lncRNA was identified from RNA-seq data and is
downregulated as prostate cancer cells progress from an androgen-dependent (AD)
to a castration-resistant (CR) state. Prostate cancers persisting in patients
after androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) select for decreased DRAIC expression,
and higher levels of DRAIC in prostate cancer are associated with longer
disease-free survival (DFS). Androgen induced androgen receptor (AR) binding to
the DRAIC locus and repressed DRAIC expression. In contrast, FOXA1 and NKX3-1 are
recruited to the DRAIC locus to induce DRAIC, and FOXA1 specifically counters the
repression of DRAIC by AR. The decrease of FOXA1 and NKX3-1, and aberrant
activation of AR, thus accounts for the decrease of DRAIC during prostate cancer 
progression to the CR state. Consistent with DRAIC being a good prognostic
marker, DRAIC prevents the transformation of cuboidal epithelial cells to
fibroblast-like morphology and prevents cellular migration and invasion. A second
tumor-suppressive lncRNA PCAT29, located 20 kb downstream of DRAIC, is regulated 
identically by AR and FOXA1 and also suppresses cellular migration and
metastasis. Finally, based on TCGA analysis, DRAIC expression predicts good
prognosis in a wide range of malignancies, including bladder cancer, low-grade
gliomas, lung adenocarcinoma, stomach adenocarcinoma, renal clear cell carcinoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, skin melanoma, and stomach adenocarcinoma.IMPLICATIONS:
This study reveals a novel tumor-suppressive locus encoding two hormone-regulated
lncRNAs, DRAIC and PCAT29, that are prognostic for a wide variety of cancer
types.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4456356 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25700553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 15;418 Pt 3:334-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.01.043. 
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Interplay of estrogen receptors and FOXA factors in the liver cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Li Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL 32224, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road,
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. Electronic address: li.zhaoyu@mayo.edu.

Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in human with male dominance. Sexual
dimorphism of liver cancer is conserved from rodents to humans, which was firstly
found in mice in late 1930s and female mice were resistant to liver cancer. Sex
hormones were found to affect the incidence of liver cancer in rodents. Estrogen 
receptor alpha (ERa)-mediated estrogen signaling or androgen receptor-mediated
androgen signaling prevents or promotes the growth of rodent liver tumors,
respectively. Forkhead box protein A (Foxa) factors, Foxa1 and Foxa2, also known 
as pioneer transcription factors in liver specification, are essential for both
estrogen and androgen signaling by acting as central regulators of sexual
dimorphism in liver cancer. This review mainly focuses on the interplay between
ERa and FOXA factors in liver cancer, and summarizes recent breakthrough studies 
in elucidating the mechanisms of sexual dimorphism in liver cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4524798 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 25661537  [PubMed - in process]


99. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 May 15;24(10):2966-84. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv035. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

Fine-mapping identifies two additional breast cancer susceptibility loci at
9q31.2.

Orr N, Dudbridge F, Dryden N, Maguire S, Novo D, Perrakis E, Johnson N,
Ghoussaini M, Hopper JL, Southey MC, Apicella C, Stone J, Schmidt MK, Broeks A,
Van't Veer LJ, Hogervorst FB, Fasching PA, Haeberle L, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW,
Gibson L, Aitken Z, Warren H, Sawyer E, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N,
Burwinkel B, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Guénel P, Truong T, Cordina-Duverger
E, Sanchez M, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Benitez J,
Zamora MP, Arias Perez JI, Menéndez P, Anton-Culver H, Neuhausen SL, Brenner H,
Dieffenbach AK, Arndt V, Stegmaier C, Hamann U, Brauch H, Justenhoven C, Brüning 
T, Ko YD, Nevanlinna H, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Khan S, Bogdanova N, Dörk T,
Lindblom A, Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM,
Chenevix-Trench G, Beesley J, Lambrechts D, Moisse M, Floris G, Beuselinck B,
Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Seibold P, Flesch-Janys D, Radice P, Peterlongo P,
Peissel B, Pensotti V, Couch FJ, Olson JE, Slettedahl S, Vachon C, Giles GG,
Milne RL, McLean C, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Simard 
J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Kristensen V, Alnæs GG, Nord S,
Borresen-Dale AL, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, Long J, Winqvist R,
Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Grip M, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G,
Tchatchou S, Devilee P, Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve CM, Van Asperen CJ, Garcia-Closas 
M, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Czene K, Darabi H, Eriksson M, Klevebring
D, Hooning MJ, Hollestelle A, van Deurzen CH, Kriege M, Hall P, Li J, Liu J,
Humphreys K, Cox A, Cross SS, Reed MW, Pharoah PD, Dunning AM, Shah M, Perkins
BJ, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Ashworth A, Swerdlow
A, Jones M, Schoemaker MJ, Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Olswold C, Slager S, Toland
AE, Yannoukakos D, Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P,
Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Ishiguro J, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den Berg D, Stram DO, 
Teo SH, Yip CH, Kang P, Ikram MK, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai H, Kang D, Choi JY,
Park SK, Noh DY, Hartman M, Miao H, Lim WY, Lee SC, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V,
Brennan P, Mckay J, Wu PE, Hou MF, Yu JC, Shen CY, Blot W, Cai Q, Signorello LB, 
Luccarini C, Bayes C, Ahmed S, Maranian M, Healey CS, González-Neira A, Pita G,
Alonso MR, Álvarez N, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, Hunter DJ,
Lindstrom S, Dennis J, Michailidou K, Bolla MK, Easton DF, dos Santos Silva I,
Fletcher O, Peto J; GENICA Network; kConFab Investigators; Australian Ovarian
Cancer Study Group.

We recently identified a novel susceptibility variant, rs865686, for
estrogen-receptor positive breast cancer at 9q31.2. Here, we report a
fine-mapping analysis of the 9q31.2 susceptibility locus using 43 160 cases and
42 600 controls of European ancestry ascertained from 52 studies and a further
5795 cases and 6624 controls of Asian ancestry from nine studies. Single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs676256 was most strongly associated with risk in 
Europeans (odds ratios [OR] = 0.90 [0.88-0.92]; P-value = 1.58 × 10(-25)). This
SNP is one of a cluster of highly correlated variants, including rs865686, that
spans ~14.5 kb. We identified two additional independent association signals
demarcated by SNPs rs10816625 (OR = 1.12 [1.08-1.17]; P-value = 7.89 × 10(-09))
and rs13294895 (OR = 1.09 [1.06-1.12]; P-value = 2.97 × 10(-11)). SNP rs10816625,
but not rs13294895, was also associated with risk of breast cancer in Asian
individuals (OR = 1.12 [1.06-1.18]; P-value = 2.77 × 10(-05)). Functional genomic
annotation using data derived from breast cancer cell-line models indicates that 
these SNPs localise to putative enhancer elements that bind known drivers of
hormone-dependent breast cancer, including ER-a, FOXA1 and GATA-3. In vitro
analyses indicate that rs10816625 and rs13294895 have allele-specific effects on 
enhancer activity and suggest chromatin interactions with the KLF4 gene locus.
These results demonstrate the power of dense genotyping in large studies to
identify independent susceptibility variants. Analysis of associations using
subjects with different ancestry, combined with bioinformatic and genomic
characterisation, can provide strong evidence for the likely causative alleles
and their functional basis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4406292
PMID: 25652398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2015 Mar 13;290(11):7114-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.635250. Epub 2015
Jan 7.

Deficiency of the chromatin regulator BRPF1 causes abnormal brain development.

You L(1), Zou J(2), Zhao H(3), Bertos NR(3), Park M(4), Wang E(2), Yang XJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research Center, Department of
Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3. (2)the National Research Council
Canada, Montreal, Quebec H4P 2R2, and. (3)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman
Cancer Research Center. (4)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Center, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3, the Department
of Biochemistry, McGill University and McGill University Health Center, Montreal,
Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada. (5)From the Rosalind & Morris Goodman Cancer Research
Center, Department of Medicine, McGill University, Quebec H3A 1A3, the Department
of Biochemistry, McGill University and McGill University Health Center, Montreal,
Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada xiang-jiao.yang@mcgill.ca.

Epigenetic mechanisms are important in different neurological disorders, and one 
such mechanism is histone acetylation. The multivalent chromatin regulator BRPF1 
(bromodomain- and plant homeodomain-linked (PHD) zinc finger-containing protein
1) recognizes different epigenetic marks and activates three histone
acetyltransferases, so it is both a reader and a co-writer of the epigenetic
language. The three histone acetyltransferases are MOZ, MORF, and HBO1, which are
also known as lysine acetyltransferase 6A (KAT6A), KAT6B, and KAT7, respectively.
The MORF gene is mutated in four neurodevelopmental disorders sharing the
characteristic of intellectual disability and frequently displaying callosal
agenesis. Here, we report that forebrain-specific inactivation of the mouse Brpf1
gene caused early postnatal lethality, neocortical abnormalities, and partial
callosal agenesis. With respect to the control, the mutant forebrain contained
fewer Tbr2-positive intermediate neuronal progenitors and displayed aberrant
neurogenesis. Molecularly, Brpf1 loss led to decreased transcription of multiple 
genes, such as Robo3 and Otx1, important for neocortical development.
Surprisingly, elevated expression of different Hox genes and various other
transcription factors, such as Lhx4, Foxa1, Tbx5, and Twist1, was also observed. 
These results thus identify an important role of Brpf1 in regulating forebrain
development and suggest that it acts as both an activator and a silencer of gene 
expression in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4358132
PMID: 25568313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):848-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1375. Epub 2014 Dec
30.

SUMO ligase PIAS1 functions as a target gene selective androgen receptor
coregulator on prostate cancer cell chromatin.

Toropainen S(1), Malinen M(1), Kaikkonen S(1), Rytinki M(1), Jääskeläinen T(2),
Sahu B(3), Jänne OA(4), Palvimo JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio,
Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211
Kuopio, Finland Institute of Dentistry, University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211
Kuopio, Finland. (3)Institute of Biomedicine, Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland Research Programs Unit,
Genome-Scale Biology, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, FI-00014
Helsinki, Finland. (4)Institute of Biomedicine, Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki, 
University of Helsinki, FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland. (5)Institute of Biomedicine, 
University of Eastern Finland, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland jorma.palvimo@uef.fi.

Androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor that plays a
central role in the development and growth of prostate carcinoma. PIAS1 is an AR-
and SUMO-interacting protein and a putative transcriptional coregulator
overexpressed in prostate cancer. To study the importance of PIAS1 for the
androgen-regulated transcriptome of VCaP prostate cancer cells, we silenced its
expression by RNAi. Transcriptome analyses revealed that a subset of the
AR-regulated genes is significantly influenced, either activated or repressed, by
PIAS1 depletion. Interestingly, PIAS1 depletion also exposed a new set of genes
to androgen regulation, suggesting that PIAS1 can mask distinct genomic loci from
AR access. In keeping with gene expression data, silencing of PIAS1 attenuated
VCaP cell proliferation. ChIP-seq analyses showed that PIAS1 interacts with AR at
chromatin sites harboring also SUMO2/3 and surrounded by H3K4me2; androgen
exposure increased the number of PIAS1-occupying sites, resulting in nearly
complete overlap with AR chromatin binding events. PIAS1 interacted also with the
pioneer factor FOXA1. Of note, PIAS1 depletion affected AR chromatin occupancy at
binding sites enriched for HOXD13 and GATA motifs. Taken together, PIAS1 is a
genuine chromatin-bound AR coregulator that functions in a target gene selective 
fashion to regulate prostate cancer cell growth.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333416
PMID: 25552417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 26;9(12):e115909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115909.
eCollection 2014.

Investigating microenvironmental regulation of human chordoma cell behaviour.

Patel P(1), Brooks C(2), Seneviratne A(3), Hess DA(3), Séguin CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine &
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada; Robarts
Research Institute, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

The tumour microenvironment is complex and composed of many different
constituents, including matricellular proteins such as connective tissue growth
factor (CCN2), and is characterized by gradients in oxygen levels. In various
cancers, hypoxia and CCN2 promote stem and progenitor cell properties, and
regulate the proliferation, migration and phenotype of cancer cells. Our study
was aimed at investigating the effects of hypoxia and CCN2 on chordoma cells,
using the human U-CH1 cell line. We demonstrate that under basal conditions,
U-CH1 cells express multiple CCN family members including CCN1, CCN2, CCN3 and
CCN5. Culture of U-CH1 cells in either hypoxia or in the presence of recombinant 
CCN2 peptide promoted progenitor cell-like characteristics specific to the
notochordal tissue of origin. Specifically, hypoxia induced the most robust
increase in progenitor-like characteristics in U-CH1 cells, including increased
expression of the notochord-associated markers T, CD24, FOXA1, ACAN and CA12,
increased cell growth and tumour-sphere formation, and a decrease in the
percentage of vacuolated cells present in the heterogeneous population.
Interestingly, the effects of recombinant CCN2 peptide on U-CH1 cells were more
pronounced under normoxia than hypoxia, promoting increased expression of CCN1,
CCN2, CCN3 and CCN5, the notochord-associated markers SOX5, SOX6, T, CD24, and
FOXA1 as well as increased tumour-sphere formation. Overall, this study
highlights the importance of multiple factors within the tumour microenvironment 
and how hypoxia and CCN2 may regulate human chordoma cell behaviour.

PMCID: PMC4277432
PMID: 25541962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 24;34(39):5012-24. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.421. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

FOXA1 repression is associated with loss of BRCA1 and increased promoter
methylation and chromatin silencing in breast cancer.

Gong C(1,)(2), Fujino K(1,)(3), Monteiro LJ(1), Gomes AR(1), Drost R(4),
Davidson-Smith H(5), Takeda S(3), Khoo US(2), Jonkers J(4), Sproul D(5), Lam
EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK. (2)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Juntendo University, Bunkyoku,
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Division of Molecular Pathology and Cancer Genomics Centre
Netherlands, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)MRC
Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

FOXA1 expression correlates with the breast cancer luminal subtype and patient
survival. RNA and protein analysis of a panel of breast cancer cell lines
revealed that BRCA1 deficiency is associated with the downregulation of FOXA1
expression. Knockdown of BRCA1 resulted in the downregulation of FOXA1 expression
and enhancement of FOXA1 promoter methylation in MCF-7 breast cancer cells,
whereas the reconstitution of BRCA1 in Brca1-deficent mouse mammary epithelial
cells (MMECs) promoted Foxa1 expression and methylation. These data suggest that 
BRCA1 suppresses FOXA1 hypermethylation and silencing. Consistently, the
treatment of MMECs with the DNA methylation inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycitydine
induced Foxa1 mRNA expression. Furthermore, treatment with GSK126, an inhibitor
of EZH2 methyltransferase activity, induced FOXA1 expression in BRCA1-deficient
but not in BRCA1-reconstituted MMECs. Likewise, the depletion of EZH2 by small
interfering RNA enhanced FOXA1 mRNA expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) analysis demonstrated that BRCA1, EZH2, DNA methyltransferases
(DNMT)1/3a/3b and H3K27me3 are recruited to the endogenous FOXA1 promoter,
further supporting the hypothesis that these proteins interact to modulate FOXA1 
methylation and repression. Further co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP analysis
showed that both BRCA1 and DNMT3b form complexes with EZH2 but not with each
other, consistent with the notion that BRCA1 binds to EZH2 and negatively
regulates its methyltransferase activity. We also found that EZH2 promotes and
BRCA1 impairs the deposit of the gene silencing histone mark H3K27me3 on the
FOXA1 promoter. These associations were validated in a familial breast cancer
patient cohort. Integrated analysis of the global gene methylation and expression
profiles of a set of 33 familial breast tumours revealed that FOXA1 promoter
methylation is inversely correlated with the transcriptional expression of FOXA1 
and that BRCA1 mutation breast cancer is significantly associated with FOXA1
methylation and downregulation of FOXA1 expression, providing physiological
evidence to our findings that FOXA1 expression is regulated by methylation and
chromatin silencing and that BRCA1 maintains FOXA1 expression through suppressing
FOXA1 gene methylation in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4430311
PMID: 25531315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochimie. 2015 Feb;109:42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

The expression and correlation between the transcription factor FOXP1 and
estrogen receptors in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Hu Z(1), Zhu L(2), Tan M(2), Cai M(2), Deng L(2), Yu G(2), Liu D(2), Liu J(2),
Lin B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang,
Liaoning Province 110004, PR China; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province
450052, PR China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital 
Affiliated to China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110004, PR China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University, No. 36
Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110004, PR China.
Electronic address: linbei88@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen plays an important role in the progression of ovarian cancer
in humans. FOXP1 belongs to the forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor
family, and previous research indicated that FOXP1 functioned as a tumor
suppressor gene. FOXP1 may be similar to FOXA1 and is closely related to steroid 
hormone receptors, but the relationship between FOXP1 and ER currently remains
unclear.
METHODS: Ovarian tumors (60 malignant cases, 26 borderline cases, and 13 benign
cases) and 14 normal ovarian tissues were collected retrospectively.
Immunohistochemistry, western blotting and real-time PCR were used to
characterize the expression patterns of FOXP1, ERa, and ERß both at the mRNA and 
protein levels. We also used co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescent
colocalization to investigate whether a correlation exists between FOXP1 and
ERa/ERß in ovarian cancer tissues.
RESULTS: The mRNA level for FOXP1 and ERß in ovarian carcinoma tissues decreased,
while the expression level of ERa mRNA increased compared with normal ovarian
tissues. With an increase in the degree of ovarian carcinoma malignancy, the ERa 
expression level also increased. The expression pattern of ERß in ovarian
neoplasms was similar to that of the FOXP1 protein; presenting nuclear staining
decreased, while cytoplasmic expression increased. Colocalization of FOXP1, ERa, 
and ERß was present in the cytoplasm, with ERß specific co-localization with
FOXP1 in the perinuclear area. While immunoprecipitates created with FOXP1 mouse 
anti-human monoclonal antibody showed a positive reaction to an anti-ER antibody,
immunoprecipitates containing anti-ER antibody and react to anti-FOXP1 antibody.
CONCLUSION: Interactions between FOXP1 and ER may play a pivotal role in the
progression of ovarian cancer, and the activation or induction of FOXP1 and ERß
expression in cancer cells may inhibit tumor proliferation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 23;111(51):18261-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421415111. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

GATA2 facilitates steroid receptor coactivator recruitment to the androgen
receptor complex.

He B(1), Lanz RB(2), Fiskus W(1), Geng C(3), Yi P(2), Hartig SM(2), Rajapakshe
K(2), Shou J(3), Wei L(4), Shah SS(3), Foley C(1), Chew SA(3), Eedunuri VK(5),
Bedoya DJ(3), Feng Q(2), Minami T(6), Mitsiades CS(7), Frolov A(8), Weigel NL(2),
Hilsenbeck SG(8), Rosen DG(9), Palzkill T(4), Ittmann MM(9), Song Y(4), Coarfa
C(10), O'Malley BW(10), Mitsiades N(11).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Molecular and Cellular Biology. (2)Molecular and
Cellular Biology. (3)Departments of Medicine. (4)Pharmacology, and. (5)Adrienne
Helis Malvin Medical Research Foundation, New Orleans, LA, 70130; (6)Laboratory
for Systems Biology and Medicine, The Research Center for Advanced Science and
Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 153-8904; and. (7)Department of
Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215. (8)Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center-Biostatistics, and. (9)Pathology and Immunology, Michael E. 
DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030; (10)Molecular and Cellular Biology, coarfa@bcm.edu berto@bcm.edu
mitsiade@bcm.edu. (11)Departments of Medicine, Molecular and Cellular Biology,
coarfa@bcm.edu berto@bcm.edu mitsiade@bcm.edu.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a key driver of prostate cancer (PC), even in the
state of castration-resistant PC (CRPC) and frequently even after treatment with 
second-line hormonal therapies such as abiraterone and enzalutamide. The
persistence of AR activity via both ligand-dependent and ligand-independent
mechanisms (including constitutively active AR splice variants) highlights the
unmet need for alternative approaches to block AR signaling in CRPC. We
investigated the transcription factor GATA-binding protein 2 (GATA2) as a
regulator of AR signaling and an actionable therapeutic target in PC. We
demonstrate that GATA2 directly promotes expression of both full-length and
splice-variant AR, resulting in a strong positive correlation between GATA2 and
AR expression in both PC cell lines and patient specimens. Conversely, GATA2
expression is repressed by androgen and AR, suggesting a negative feedback
regulatory loop that, upon androgen deprivation, derepresses GATA2 to contribute 
to AR overexpression in CRPC. Simultaneously, GATA2 is necessary for optimal
transcriptional activity of both full-length and splice-variant AR. GATA2
colocalizes with AR and Forkhead box protein A1 on chromatin to enhance
recruitment of steroid receptor coactivators and formation of the transcriptional
holocomplex. In agreement with these important functions, high GATA2 expression
and transcriptional activity predicted worse clinical outcome in PC patients. A
GATA2 small molecule inhibitor suppressed the expression and transcriptional
function of both full-length and splice-variant AR and exerted potent anticancer 
activity against PC cell lines. We propose pharmacological inhibition of GATA2 as
a first-in-field approach to target AR expression and function and improve
outcomes in CRPC.

PMCID: PMC4280633
PMID: 25489091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 11;9(5):1618-27. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.008. Epub 2014 
Dec 4.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 has dual functions as a major regulator of androgen
receptor transcriptional activity.

Cai C(1), He HH(2), Gao S(3), Chen S(3), Yu Z(3), Gao Y(3), Chen S(3), Chen
MW(4), Zhang J(4), Ahmed M(5), Wang Y(6), Metzger E(7), Schüle R(7), Liu XS(8),
Brown M(9), Balk SP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology-Oncology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
ccai1@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Ontario Cancer
Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Center/University Health Network, Toronto, ON
M5G1L7, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON M5G2M9, Canada. Electronic address: hansenhe@uhnresearch.ca.
(3)Hematology-Oncology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Center/University Health
Network, Toronto, ON M5G1L7, Canada. (6)2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of
Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin 300070, China. (7)Urologische Klinik und Zentrale Klinische Forschung,
Klinikum der Universität Freiburg, Breisacherstrasse 66, and BIOSS Centre of
Biological Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University and Deutsche Konsortium 
für Translationale Krebsforschung (DKTK), Standort Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg,
Germany. (8)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
MA 02215, USA. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Lysine-Specific Demethylase 1 (LSD1, KDM1A) functions as a transcriptional
corepressor through demethylation of histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4) but has a
coactivator function on some genes through mechanisms that are unclear. We show
that LSD1, interacting with CoREST, associates with and coactivates androgen
receptor (AR) on a large fraction of androgen-stimulated genes. A subset of these
AR/LSD1-associated enhancer sites have histone 3 threonine 6 phosphorylation
(H3T6ph), and these sites are further enriched for androgen-stimulated genes.
Significantly, despite its coactivator activity, LSD1 still mediates H3K4me2
demethylation at these androgen-stimulated enhancers. FOXA1 is also associated
with LSD1 at AR-regulated enhancer sites, and a FOXA1 interaction with LSD1
enhances binding of both proteins at these sites. These findings show that LSD1
functions broadly as a regulator of AR function, that it maintains a
transcriptional repression function at AR-regulated enhancers through H3K4
demethylation, and that it has a distinct AR-linked coactivator function mediated
by demethylation of other substrates.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4268354
PMID: 25482560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015 Apr;26(2):133-41. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.10.012. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Divergent effects of type-I interferons on regulatory T cells.

Piconese S(1), Pacella I(2), Timperi E(2), Barnaba V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e Specialità Mediche, Sapienza Università di 
Roma, Policlinico Umberto I, Viale del Policlinico 155, I-00161 Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: silvia.piconese@uniroma1.it. (2)Dipartimento di Medicina
Interna e Specialità Mediche, Sapienza Università di Roma, Policlinico Umberto I,
Viale del Policlinico 155, I-00161 Rome, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Medicina
Interna e Specialità Mediche, Sapienza Università di Roma, Policlinico Umberto I,
Viale del Policlinico 155, I-00161 Rome, Italy; Istituto Pasteur - Fondazione
Cenci Bolognetti, Viale Regina Elena 291, I-00161 Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: vincenzo.barnaba@uniroma1.it.

Regulatory T cells (Treg) exert a dominant role in the protection of unwanted
immune responses and in the resolution of inflammation. To ensure the proper
mounting of protective immune responses, Treg should be finely modulated by
microenvironmental signals, mostly conveyed by cytokines. Type-I interferons are 
pleiotropic cytokines, best known for their anti-viral activities but also
playing relevant immunostimulatory as well as immunomodulatory functions. The
impact of type-I interferons on Treg homeostasis and functions is quite
controversial, as some studies indicate that interferons sustain Treg stability
and suppression, while other reports describe a null or even negative role for
interferons in Treg activities. Interferons may also establish alternative routes
of suppression, through the induction of other suppressive populations, such as
Tr1 and the recently discovered FoxA1+ Treg. Discrepant results about Treg
behavior in vivo emerge also from data collected in patients with multiple
sclerosis, chronic hepatitis C or cancer undergoing interferon therapy.
Concurrent events, such as Treg-extrinsic interferon activities, desensitization 
to chronic interferon exposure, and changes in microenvironmental signals during 
the evolution of diseases, may contribute to depict such a complex scenario, in
which short-term and long-term effects of interferon exposure may give rise to
apparently opposite conclusions.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25466634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2014 Dec 15;396(2):201-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.002. Epub 2014 
Oct 18.

Hepatic Notch2 deficiency leads to bile duct agenesis perinatally and secondary
bile duct formation after weaning.

Falix FA(1), Weeda VB(2), Labruyere WT(3), Poncy A(4), de Waart DR(3), Hakvoort
TB(3), Lemaigre F(4), Gaemers IC(3), Aronson DC(5), Lamers WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical
Center of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: f.a.falix@amc.nl. (2)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma
Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Université Catholique de Louvain and the Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Notch signaling plays an acknowledged role in bile-duct development, but its
involvement in cholangiocyte-fate determination remains incompletely understood. 
We investigated the effects of early Notch2 deletion in
Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(tg/-) ("Notch2-cKO") and Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(-/-)
("control") mice. Fetal and neonatal Notch2-cKO livers were devoid of
cytokeratin19 (CK19)-, Dolichos-biflorus agglutinin (DBA)-, and SOX9-positive
ductal structures, demonstrating absence of prenatal cholangiocyte
differentiation. Despite extensive cholestatic hepatocyte necrosis and growth
retardation, mortality was only ~15%. Unexpectedly, a slow process of secondary
cholangiocyte differentiation and bile-duct formation was initiated around
weaning that histologically resembled the ductular reaction. Newly formed ducts
varied from rare and non-connected, to multiple, disorganized tubular structures 
that connected to the extrahepatic bile ducts. Jaundice had disappeared in ~30%
of Notch2-cKO mice by 6 months. The absence of NOTCH2 protein in postnatally
differentiating cholangiocyte nuclei of Notch2-cKO mice showed that these cells
had not originated from non-recombined precursor cells. Notch2 and Hnf6 mRNA
levels were permanently decreased in Notch2-cKO livers. Perinatally, Foxa1,
Foxa2, Hhex, Hnf1ß, Cebpa and Sox9 mRNA levels were all significantly lower in
Notch2-cKO than control mice, but all except Foxa2 returned to normal or
increased levels after weaning, coincident with the observed secondary bile-duct 
formation. Interestingly, Hhex and Sox9 mRNA levels remained elevated in icteric 
6 months old Notch2-cKOs, but decreased to control levels in non-icteric
Notch2-cKOs, implying a key role in secondary bile-duct formation.CONCLUSION:
Cholangiocyte differentiation becomes progressively less dependent on NOTCH2
signaling with age, suggesting that ductal-plate formation is dependent on
NOTCH2, but subsequent cholangiocyte differentiation is not.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 20;34(34):4509-18. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.382. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

LRH-1 controls proliferation in breast tumor cells by regulating CDKN1A gene
expression.

Bianco S(1), Jangal M(1), Garneau D(1), Gévry N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.

Liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1, NR5A2) is an orphan nuclear receptor that has an
essential role in cancer progression, notably in breast cancer. Although its role
in promoting cancer cell proliferation and migration is well documented, the
molecular basis is not completely established. Here, we report that LRH-1
inhibition affects two- and three-dimensional cell proliferation of different
types of breast cancer cells, including estrogen receptor a (ERa)-positive and
triple-negative cells. This phenotype is accompanied by the upregulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A (aka p21(CIP1/WAF1)) in a
p53-independent manner. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis shows that LRH-1
cooperates with FOXA1 and binds directly to CDKN1A promoter and a distal
regulatory region found at -62<U+2009>kb from its transcriptional start sites, allowing 
repression of CDKN1A transcription. LRH-1 or FOXA1 depletion induces CDKN1A
upregulation by removing histone deacetylase 2 from the promoter and distal
regulatory elements and permitting histone acetylation in these regions. Analysis
of breast cancer samples reveals that a high LRH-1 level is inversely correlated 
with CDKN1A expression in breast cancer patients and is associated with poor
prognosis. This study reveals a novel mechanism of control of cell proliferation 
by LRH-1 regulating CDKN1A transcription in breast cancer cells, independent of
ERa and p53 status. Targeting LRH-1 may provide an attractive prospect for
treatment of tumors that are resistant to hormonal and targeted therapy.

PMID: 25435372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 20;112(2):345-51. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.595. Epub 2014 Nov 
25.

Low FOXA1 expression predicts good response to neo-adjuvant chemotherapy
resulting in good outcomes for luminal HER2-negative breast cancer cases.

Horimoto Y(1), Arakawa A(2), Harada-Shoji N(3), Sonoue H(2), Yoshida Y(4), Himuro
T(4), Igari F(4), Tokuda E(4), Mamat O(2), Tanabe M(4), Hino O(5), Saito M(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Breast Oncology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan [2] Department of Pathology and
Oncology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan. (2)Department of Human Pathology, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Division of Cancer,
Department of Surgery and Cancer, 1st Floor, ICTEM Building, Hammersmith
Hospital, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK. (4)Department of Breast
Oncology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan. (5)Department of Pathology and Oncology, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

BACKGROUND: FOXA1 expression is a good prognostic marker for endocrine therapy in
hormone-positive breast cancer. We retrospectively examined breast cancer
patients with luminal human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-negative
tumours, as defined by immunohistochemistry, who received neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC) and investigated the relationship between treatment effects
and FOXA1 expression.
METHODS: Biopsy specimens from 103 luminal HER2-negative tumours were
immunohistochemically examined. FOXA1 effects on chemo-sensitivity were also
investigated employing in vitro experiments.
RESULTS: FOXA1 and Ki67 expressions independently predicted a pathological
complete response (pCR). Knockdown of FOXA1 by siRNA boosted the chemo-effect in 
oestrogen receptor-positive cells. The Cox hazards model revealed a pCR to be the
strongest factor predicting a good patient outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present study showed low FOXA1 expression to be associated with 
a good response to NAC in luminal HER2-negative breast cancer. Improved outcomes 
of these patients suggest that NAC should be recommended to patients with low
FOXA1 tumours.

PMCID: PMC4453454
PMID: 25422910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Elife. 2014 Nov 21;3:e03881. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03881.

RUNX1, a transcription factor mutated in breast cancer, controls the fate of
ER-positive mammary luminal cells.

van Bragt MP(1), Hu X(1), Xie Y(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, United States.

RUNX1 encodes a RUNX family transcription factor (TF) and was recently identified
as a novel mutated gene in human luminal breast cancers. We found that Runx1 is
expressed in all subpopulations of murine mammary epithelial cells (MECs) except 
the secretory alveolar luminal cells. Conditional knockout of Runx1 in MECs by
MMTV-Cre led to a decrease in luminal MECs, largely due to a profound reduction
in the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive mature luminal subpopulation, a phenotype 
that could be rescued by the loss of either Trp53 or Rb1. Mechanistically RUNX1
represses Elf5, a master regulatory TF gene for alveolar cells, and regulates
mature luminal TF/co-factor genes (e.g., Foxa1 and Cited1) involved in the ER
program. Collectively, our data identified a key regulator of the ER<U+207A> luminal
lineage whose disruption may contribute to the development of ER<U+207A> luminal breast 
cancer when under the background of either TP53 or RB1 loss.

PMCID: PMC4381933
PMID: 25415051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Mar;51(3):211-7. doi:
10.1007/s11626-014-9836-0. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

Block the function of nonmuscle myosin II by blebbistatin induces zebrafish
embryo cardia bifida.

Wang X(1), Chong M, Wang X, Wang H, Zhang J, Xu H, Zhang J, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Qixiu Road
19, 226001, Nantong, China, steven.wong.bio@gmail.com.

Nonmuscle myosin II (NM II) is the name given to the multi-subunit protein
product of three genes encoding different nonmuscle myosin heavy chains including
NM II-A, NM II-B, and NM II-C. Blebbistatin is a small molecule that has been
shown to be a relatively specific inhibitor of NM II. Blocking the function of NM
II by blebbistatin induces zebrafish embryo cardia bifida at a dose-dependent
manner. In situ hybridization analysis with ventricular marker ventricular myosin
heavy chain (vmhc) and atrial marker atrial myosin heavy chain (amhc) showed each
of the heart contained both distinct atria and ventricle. However, the cardia
bifida embryos had highly variable distance between two separate ventricles. We
also provided evidence that time window from 12 to 20 h post fertilization (hpf) 
is necessary and sufficient for cardia bifida formation caused by blebbistatin
treatment. Expression of spinster homolog 2 (spns2) was decreased in
blebbistatin-treated embryos, suggesting the cardia bifida phenotype caused by NM
II inhibition was relevant to precardiac mesoderm migration defects. Through in
situ hybridization analysis, we showed that foxa1 was expressed in endoderm of
blebbistatin-treated embryos at 24-hpf stage, suggesting the endoderm formation
is normal in cardia bifida embryos caused by blebbistatin treatment. In addition,
we demonstrated that blebbistatin treatment resulted in morphology alteration of 
zebrafish cardiomyocytes in vivo and neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes in vitro.

PMID: 25403653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):e7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1079. Epub 2014 Nov 5.

Epidaurus: aggregation and integration analysis of prostate cancer epigenome.

Wang L(1), Huang H(2), Dougherty G(1), Zhao Y(2), Hossain A(1), Kocher JP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic, MN 
55905, USA. (3)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA kocher.jeanpierre@mayo.edu.

Integrative analyses of epigenetic data promise a deeper understanding of the
epigenome. Epidaurus is a bioinformatics tool used to effectively reveal
inter-dataset relevance and differences through data aggregation, integration and
visualization. In this study, we demonstrated the utility of Epidaurus in
validating hypotheses and generating novel biological insights. In particular, we
described the use of Epidaurus to (i) integrate epigenetic data from prostate
cancer cell lines to validate the activation function of EZH2 in
castration-resistant prostate cancer and to (ii) study the mechanism of androgen 
receptor (AR) binding deregulation induced by the knockdown of FOXA1. We found
that EZH2's noncanonical activation function was reaffirmed by its association
with active histone markers and the lack of association with repressive markers. 
More importantly, we revealed that the binding of AR was selectively reprogramed 
to promoter regions, leading to the up-regulation of hundreds of
cancer-associated genes including EGFR. The prebuilt epigenetic dataset from
commonly used cell lines (LNCaP, VCaP, LNCaP-Abl, MCF7, GM12878, K562, HeLa-S3,
A549, HePG2) makes Epidaurus a useful online resource for epigenetic research. As
standalone software, Epidaurus is specifically designed to process user
customized datasets with both efficiency and convenience.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333365
PMID: 25378314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;28(12):2012-24. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1171.

Integrative analysis of FOXP1 function reveals a tumor-suppressive effect in
prostate cancer.

Takayama K(1), Suzuki T, Tsutsumi S, Fujimura T, Takahashi S, Homma Y, Urano T,
Aburatani H, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anti-Aging Medicine (K.T., T.U., S.I.) and Geriatric Medicine
(K.T., T.U., S.I.) and Department of Urology (T.F., Y.H.), Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan; Department
of Pathology (T.S.), Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
Miyagi, 980-8575, Japan; Genome Science Division (Sh.T., H.A.), Research Center
for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo
153-8904, Japan; Department of Urology (Sa.T.), Nihon University School of
Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0032, Japan; and Division of Gene Regulation and
Signal Transduction (S.I.), Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1241, Japan.

The transcriptional network of the androgen receptor (AR), a key molecule of
prostate cancer, is frequently modulated by interactions with other
transcriptional factors such as forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1). However, global 
regulatory mechanisms of AR signaling mediated by such factors have not been well
investigated. Here we conducted a chromatin immunoprecipitation sequence
analysis, which revealed that another FOX family, FOXP1, is specifically
regulated by both AR and FOXA1. We also found that FOXP1 acts as a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer through inhibiting cell proliferation and
migration. We generated an extensive global map of FOXP1 binding sites and found 
that FOXP1 is directly involved in AR-mediated transcription. We demonstrated
that FOXP1 has a repressive effect on AR-induced transcriptional activity or
histone modification in enhancer regions. Moreover, by a global analysis of
androgen-mediated transcriptional networks, we observed enrichment of FOXP1
binding genes in the gene cluster negatively regulated by FOXP1. Evaluation of
FOXP1 expression in clinical samples indicated that the decreased expression of
FOXP1 is another prognostic factor of prostate cancer. Taken together, our
results suggest a novel mechanism in which AR-induced FOXP1 functions as a direct
modulator of the AR and FOXA1 centric global transcriptional network.

PMID: 25329375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Proteome Res. 2014 Dec 5;13(12):5734-42. doi: 10.1021/pr500714a. Epub 2014 Oct 
29.

Phosphoproteomics reveals resveratrol-dependent inhibition of Akt/mTORC1/S6K1
signaling.

Alayev A(1), Doubleday PF, Berger SM, Ballif BA, Holz MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Stern College for Women of Yeshiva University , New
York, New York 10016, United States.

Resveratrol, a plant-derived polyphenol, regulates many cellular processes,
including cell proliferation, aging and autophagy. However, the molecular
mechanisms of resveratrol action in cells are not completely understood.
Intriguingly, resveratrol treatment of cells growing in nutrient-rich conditions 
induces autophagy, while acute resveratrol treatment of cells in a serum-deprived
state inhibits autophagy. In this study, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis
after applying resveratrol to serum-starved cells with the goal of identifying
the acute signaling events initiated by resveratrol in a serum-deprived state. We
determined that resveratrol in serum-starved conditions reduces the
phosphorylation of several proteins belonging to the mTORC1 signaling pathway,
most significantly, PRAS40 at T246 and S183. Under these same conditions, we also
found that resveratrol altered the phosphorylation of several proteins involved
in various biological processes, most notably transcriptional modulators,
represented by p53, FOXA1, and AATF. Together these data provide a more
comprehensive view of both the spectrum of phosphoproteins upon which resveratrol
acts as well as the potential mechanisms by which it inhibits autophagy in
serum-deprived cells.

PMCID: PMC4258159
PMID: 25311616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Cell. 2014 Oct 9;159(2):358-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.027.

Enhancer activation requires trans-recruitment of a mega transcription factor
complex.

Liu Z(1), Merkurjev D(2), Yang F(3), Li W(3), Oh S(4), Friedman MJ(3), Song X(5),
Zhang F(3), Ma Q(2), Ohgi KA(3), Krones A(3), Rosenfeld MG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. Electronic address:
z9liu@ucsd.edu. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine,
School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA;
Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and System Biology, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA; Graduate Program in Biological Sciences, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; CAS Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease and
School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei
230027, China. (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, School
of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
Electronic address: mrosenfeld@ucsd.edu.

Enhancers provide critical information directing cell-type-specific
transcriptional programs, regulated by binding of signal-dependent transcription 
factors and their associated cofactors. Here, we report that the most strongly
activated estrogen (E2)-responsive enhancers are characterized by
trans-recruitment and in situ assembly of a large 1-2 MDa complex of diverse
DNA-binding transcription factors by ERa at ERE-containing enhancers. We refer to
enhancers recruiting these factors as mega transcription factor-bound in trans
(MegaTrans) enhancers. The MegaTrans complex is a signature of the most potent
functional enhancers and is required for activation of enhancer RNA transcription
and recruitment of coactivators, including p300 and Med1. The MegaTrans complex
functions, in part, by recruiting specific enzymatic machinery, exemplified by
DNA-dependent protein kinase. Thus, MegaTrans-containing enhancers represent a
cohort of functional enhancers that mediate a broad and important transcriptional
program and provide a molecular explanation for transcription factor clustering
and hotspots noted in the genome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4465761
PMID: 25303530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(4):1318-38. doi: 10.1159/000366340. Epub 2014 Oct
2.

Functional characteristics of reversibly immortalized hepatic progenitor cells
derived from mouse embryonic liver.

Bi Y(1), He Y, Huang J, Su Y, Zhu GH, Wang Y, Qiao M, Zhang BQ, Zhang H, Wang Z, 
Liu W, Cui J, Kang Q, Zhang Z, Deng Y, Li R, Zhang Q, Yang K, Luu HH, Haydon RC, 
He TC, Tang N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology and Therapy Laboratory, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory
of Child Development and Disorders, the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver is a vital organ and retains its regeneration capability
throughout adulthood, which requires contributions from different cell
populations, including liver precursors and intrahepatic stem cells. To overcome 
the mortality of hepatic progenitors (iHPs) in vitro, we aim to establish
reversibly immortalized hepatic progenitor cells from mouse embryonic liver.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using retroviral system to stably express SV40 T antigen
flanked with Cre/LoxP sites, we establish a repertoire of iHP clones with varied 
differentiation potential. The iHP cells maintain long-term proliferative
activity and express varied levels of progenitor markers (Pou5f1/Oct4 and Dlk)
and hepatocyte markers (AFP, Alb and ApoB). Five representative iHP clones
express hepatic/pancreatic transcription factors HNF3a/Foxa1, HNF3ß/Foxa2, and
HNF4a/MODY1. Dexamethasone is shown to promote the expression of hepatocyte
markers AFP and TAT, along with ICG-uptake and glycogen storage functions in the 
iHP clones. Cre-mediated removal of SV40 T antigen reverses the proliferative
activity of iHP cells. When iHP cells are subcutaneously implanted in athymic
nude mice, no tumor formation is observed for up to 8 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that the established iHP cells are stable,
reversible, and non-tumorigenic hepatic progenitor-like cells, which should be
valuable for studying liver organogenesis, metabolic regulations, and hepatic
lineage-specific differentiation.

PMID: 25301359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):4065-70. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.033. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

The expression of p21 is upregulated by forkhead box A1/2 in p53-null H1299
cells.

An JH(1), Jang SM(1), Kim JW(2), Kim CH(1), Song PI(3), Choi KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, College of
Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea;
Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, NEI, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of
Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic
address: PETER.SONG@ucdenver.edu. (4)Department of Life Science, College of
Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: khchoi@cau.ac.kr.

The expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p21 is increased in response to
various stimuli and stress signals through p53-dependent and independent
pathways. We demonstrate in this study that forkhead box A1/2 (FOXA1/2) is a
crucial transcription factor in the activation of p21 transcription via direct
binding to the p21 promoter in p53-null H1299 lung carcinoma cells. In addition, 
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)-mediated upregulation of p21
expression was repressed by knockdown of FOXA1/2 in H1299 cells. Consequently,
these results suggest that FOXA1/2 is required for p53-independent p21
expression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25281925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 10;453(1):172-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.092. Epub 2014 Sep 27.

FOXA1 antagonizes EZH2-mediated CDKN2A repression in carcinogenesis.

Zhang Y(1), Tong T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center on Aging, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: zhang_yu@bjmu.edu.cn. (2)Research Center on Aging,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, Beijing 100191, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
ttj@bjmu.edu.cn.

CDKN2A (p16(INK4a)) is a crucial tumor suppressor involved in many cancers. Our
recent investigations revealed that FOXA1 as a forkhead transcription factor
mediates CDKN2A activation in cellular senescence. However, the contribution of
this axis in carcinogenesis remains unclear. Here, using a comprehensive
collection of cancer microarray data, we found FOXA1 is down-regulated in many
cancers compared to their normal counterparts and the positive correlation
between FOXA1 and CDKN2A could be observed in prostate and breast cancers with
lower EZH2 (epigenetic repressor for CDKN2A) expression. Experimentally,
epistasis analysis in prostate and breast cancer cells indicated that higher
expression of FOXA1 opposes EZH2-mediated CDKN2A repression, as further depletion
of FOXA1 reverts the de-silencing of CDKN2A caused by EZH2 inhibition.
Concomitantly, EZH2-depletion suppresses cancer cell cycle progression and this
regulation is optimized in the presence of FOXA1 and CDKN2A. A further oncogenic 
transformation assay suggested that overexpression of EZH2 is insufficient to
block RAS-induced CDKN2A activation and loss of FOXA1 is mandatory to potentiate 
EZH2-mediated CDKN2A silencing and to bypass the senescence barrier. Importantly,
using an in vitro histone methyltransferase (HMTase) system, we found FOXA1
directly inhibits EZH2's histone methyltransferase activity through its
C-terminal histone binding motif. These data support that positive regulation of 
CDKN2A by FOXA1 counteracts its tumorigenic repression of by EZH2 in cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25264199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2961-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.09.011. Epub
2014 Sep 28.

Tumor suppressor long non-coding RNA, MT1DP is negatively regulated by YAP and
Runx2 to inhibit FoxA1 in liver cancer cells.

Yu W(1), Qiao Y(2), Tang X(1), Ma L(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Weng W(1), Pan
Q(3), Yu Y(4), Sun F(5), Wang J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai 200072, China. (2)School of Public Health,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(3)Department of Central Laboratory, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital of Tongji
University, Shanghai 200072, China. (4)Shanghai Municipal Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine affiliated to Shanghai TCM University, Shanghai 200071, China.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital
of Tongji University, Shanghai 200072, China. Electronic address:
sunfenyong@126.com. (6)Department of Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Tenth
People's Hospital of Tongji University, Shanghai 200072, China. Electronic
address: karajan2@163.com.

Recent studies are indicative for strong carcinogenetic roles of Runt related
transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Yes associated protein (YAP) in several cancer
types. However, whether and how the interaction between Runx2 and YAP plays a
role in liver tumorigenesis still remain illusive. Here, we identified a close
relationship between Runx2 and YAP in liver cancer cells. Runx2 had a positive
role on YAP expression and vice versa. We also found that Rux2 and YAP were
capable of inhibiting long non-coding RNA (lncRNA), Metallothionein 1D,
Pseudogene (MT1DP) expression through direct promoter binding. Overexpression of 
MT1DP resulted in reduced cell proliferation and colony formation in soft agar,
but increased apoptosis in liver cancer cells, whereas knockdown of this lncRNA
had the opposite effect, indicating that MT1DP acts as a tumor suppressor.
Furthermore, MT1DP was revealed as a negative regulator of Alfa-fetoprotein
(AFP), a classic liver cancer tumor marker, through inhibiting protein synthesis 
of Forkhead box A1 (FoxA1), an important transcription factor in liver
development and cancer progression. Furthermore, we found that FoxA1 plays a
positive role on YAP and Runx2 expression. Specially, opening the compacted
chromatin by FoxA1 around CREB binding site within the YAP promoter facilitates
CREB-mediated YAP transcription. Finally, MT1DP-inhibited in vivo liver cancer
cell growth could be rescued by a combination of overexpression of FoxA1, Runx2
and YAP. Taken together, the close relationship between Rnux2 and YAP plays a
pro-carcinogenetic role in liver cancer cells through inhibiting tumor suppressor
lncRNA, MT1DP in a FoxA1 dependent manner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25261601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Sep 9;8:275. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00275. eCollection
2014.

Transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for adult dopamine neurons
maintenance.

Domanskyi A(1), Alter H(1), Vogt MA(2), Gass P(2), Vinnikov IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany. (2)RG Animal Models in Psychiatry, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Central Institute of Mental Health, Heidelberg University Mannheim,
Germany.

The proteins Foxa1 and Foxa2 belong to the forkhead family of transcription
factors and are involved in the development of several tissues, including liver, 
pancreas, lung, prostate, and the neural system. Both Foxa1 and Foxa2 are also
crucial for the specification and differentiation of dopamine (DA) neurons during
embryonic development, while about 30% of mice with an embryonic deletion of a
single allele of the Foxa2 gene exhibit an age-related asymmetric loss of DA
neurons and develop locomotor symptoms resembling Parkinson's disease (PD).
Notably, both Foxa1 and Foxa2 factors continue to be expressed in the adult
dopamine system. To directly assess their functions selectively in adult DA
neurons, we induced genetic deletions of Foxa1/2 transcription factors in mice
using a tamoxifen inducible tissue-specific CreERT2 recombinase expressed under
control of the dopamine transporter (DAT) promoter (DATCreERT2). The conditional 
DA neurons-specific ablation of both genes, but not of Foxa2 alone, in early
adulthood, caused a decline of striatal dopamine and its metabolites, along with 
locomotor deficits. At early pre-symptomatic stages, we observed a decline in
aldehyde dehydrogenase family 1, subfamily A1 (Aldh1a1) protein expression in DA 
neurons. Further analyses revealed a decline of aromatic amino acid decarboxylase
(AADC) and a complete loss of DAT expression in these neurons. These molecular
changes ultimately led to a reduction of DA neuron numbers in the substantia
nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of aged cFoxa1/2 (-/-) mice, resembling the
progressive course of PD in humans. Altogether, in this study, we address the
molecular, cellular, and functional role of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 factors in the
maintenance of the adult dopamine system which may help to find better approaches
for PD treatment.

PMCID: PMC4158790
PMID: 25249938  [PubMed]


122. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 23;4:4999. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5999.

Evidence that breast cancer risk at the 2q35 locus is mediated through IGFBP5
regulation.

Ghoussaini M, Edwards SL, Michailidou K, Nord S, Cowper-Sal Lari R, Desai K, Kar 
S, Hillman KM, Kaufmann S, Glubb DM, Beesley J, Dennis J, Bolla MK, Wang Q, Dicks
E, Guo Q, Schmidt MK, Shah M, Luben R, Brown J, Czene K, Darabi H, Eriksson M,
Klevebring D, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG, Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Lambrechts D,
Thienpont B, Neven P, Wildiers H, Broeks A, Van't Veer LJ, Th Rutgers EJ, Couch
FJ, Olson JE, Hallberg E, Vachon C, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Seibold P,
Flesch-Janys D, Peto J, Dos-Santos-Silva I, Gibson L, Nevanlinna H, Muranen TA,
Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Hall P, Li J, Liu J, Humphreys K, Kang D, Choi JY, Park
SK, Noh DY, Matsuo K, Ito H, Iwata H, Yatabe Y, Guénel P, Truong T, Menegaux F,
Sanchez M, Burwinkel B, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den 
Berg D, Stram DO, Benitez J, Zamora MP, Perez JI, Menéndez P, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao
YT, Cai Q, Cox A, Cross SS, Reed MW, Andrulis IL, Knight JA, Glendon G, Tchatchou
S, Sawyer EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, Haiman CA, Henderson BE,
Schumacher F, Le Marchand L, Lindblom A, Margolin S, Teo SH, Yip CH, Lee DS, Wong
TY, Hooning MJ, Martens JW, Collée JM, van Deurzen CH, Hopper JL, Southey MC,
Tsimiklis H, Kapuscinski MK, Shen CY, Wu PE, Yu JC, Chen ST, Alnæs GG,
Borresen-Dale AL, Giles GG, Milne RL, McLean C, Muir K, Lophatananon A,
Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P, Hartman M, Miao H, Buhari SA, Teo YY,
Fasching PA, Haeberle L, Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Brenner H, Dieffenbach AK, Arndt 
V, Stegmaier C, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Schoemaker MJ, García-Closas M,
Figueroa J, Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Simard J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M,
Winqvist R, Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Brauch H, Brüning T, Koto YD, Radice P,
Peterlongo P, Bonanni B, Volorio S, Dörk T, Bogdanova NV, Helbig S, Mannermaa A, 
Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM, Devilee P, Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve C, Van
Asperen CJ, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska-Bieniek K, Durda K, Slager S,
Toland AE, Ambrosone CB, Yannoukakos D, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V, Brennan P,
McKay J, Hamann U, Torres D, Zheng W, Long J, Anton-Culver H, Neuhausen SL,
Luccarini C, Baynes C, Ahmed S, Maranian M, Healey CS, González-Neira A, Pita G, 
Alonso MR, Alvarez N, Herrero D, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F, de Santiago I,
Carroll J, Caldas C, Brown MA, Lupien M, Kristensen VN, Pharoah PD,
Chenevix-Trench G, French JD, Easton DF, Dunning AM; Australian Ovarian Cancer
Management Group; Australian Ovarian Cancer Management Group.

Collaborators: Chenevix-Trench G, Webb P, Bowtell D, De Fazio A.

GWAS have identified a breast cancer susceptibility locus on 2q35. Here we report
the fine mapping of this locus using data from 101,943 subjects from 50
case-control studies. We genotype 276 SNPs using the 'iCOGS' genotyping array and
impute genotypes for a further 1,284 using 1000 Genomes Project data. All but
two, strongly correlated SNPs (rs4442975 G/T and rs6721996 G/A) are excluded as
candidate causal variants at odds against >100:1. The best functional candidate, 
rs4442975, is associated with oestrogen receptor positive (ER+) disease with an
odds ratio (OR) in Europeans of 0.85 (95% confidence interval=0.84-0.87; P=1.7 × 
10(-43)) per t-allele. This SNP flanks a transcriptional enhancer that physically
interacts with the promoter of IGFBP5 (encoding insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein 5) and displays allele-specific gene expression, FOXA1
binding and chromatin looping. Evidence suggests that the g-allele confers
increased breast cancer susceptibility through relative downregulation of IGFBP5,
a gene with known roles in breast cell biology.

PMCID: PMC4321900
PMID: 25248036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Oct;147(3):653-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3132-2.
Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling reveals parity-associated hypermethylation 
of FOXA1.

Ghosh S(1), Gu F, Wang CM, Lin CL, Liu J, Wang H, Ravdin P, Hu Y, Huang TH, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cancer Therapy and Research Center,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78229,
USA.

Early pregnancy in women by the age of 20 is known to have a profound effect on
reduction of lifelong breast cancer risk as compared to their nulliparous
counterparts. Additional pregnancies further enhance the protection against
breast cancer development. Nationwide trend of delayed pregnancy may contribute
to the recently reported increase in the incidence of advanced breast cancer
among young women in this country. The underlying mechanism for the
parity-associated reduction of breast cancer risk is not clearly understood. The 
purpose of the current study is to use whole-genome DNA methylation profiling to 
explore a potential association between parity and epigenetic changes in breast
tissue from women with early parity and nulliparity. Breast tissue was collected 
from age-matched cancer-free women with early parity (age < 20; n = 15) or
nulliparity (n = 13). The methyl-CpG binding domain-based capture-sequencing
technology was used for whole-genome DNA methylation profiling. Potential
parity-associated hypermethylated genes were further verified by locus-specific
pyrosequencing, using an expanded cohort of parous (n = 19) and nulliparous (n = 
16) women that included the initial samples used in the global analysis. Our
study identified six genes that are hypermethylated in the parous group (P <
0.05). Pyrosequencing confirmed parity-associated hypermethylation at multiple
CpG islands of the FOXA1 gene, which encodes a pioneer factor that facilitates
chromatin binding of estrogen receptor a. Our work identifies several potential
methylation biomarkers for parity-associated breast cancer risk assessment. In
addition, the results are consistent with the notion that parity-associated
epigenetic silencing of FOXA1 contributes to long-term attenuation of the
estrogenic impact on breast cancer development.

PMCID: PMC4181377
PMID: 25234841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Oct;42(18):11339-48. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku791. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

The transcriptional co-repressor TLE3 suppresses basal signaling on a subset of
estrogen receptor a target genes.

Jangal M(1), Couture JP(1), Bianco S(1), Magnani L(2), Mohammed H(3), Gévry N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada. (2)Department of
Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medecine, 
Imperial College Hammersmith, London W12 0NN, UK. (3)Cancer Research UK Cambridge
Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.
(4)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 2500 
boulevard de l'Université, Sherbrooke, Québec J1K 2R1, Canada
nicolas.gevry@usherbrooke.ca.

Chromatin constitutes a repressive barrier to the process of ligand-dependent
transcriptional activity of nuclear receptors. Nucleosomes prevent the binding of
estrogen receptor a (ERa) in absence of ligand and thus represent an important
level of transcriptional regulation. Here, we show that in breast cancer MCF-7
cells, TLE3, a co-repressor of the Groucho/Grg/TLE family, interacts with FoxA1
and is detected at regulatory elements of ERa target genes in absence of
estrogen. As a result, the chromatin is maintained in a basal state of
acetylation, thus preventing ligand-independent activation of transcription. In
absence of TLE3, the basal expression of ERa target genes induced by E2 is
increased. At the TFF1 gene, the recruitment of TLE3 to the chromatin is
FoxA1-dependent and prevents ERa and RNA polymerase II recruitment to TFF1 gene
regulatory elements. Moreover, the interaction of TLE3 with HDAC2 results in the 
maintenance of acetylation at a basal level. We also provide evidence that TLE3
is recruited at several other regulatory elements of ERa target genes and is
probably an important co-regulator of the E2 signaling pathway. In sum, our
results describe a mechanism by which TLE3 affects ligand dependency in
ERa-regulated gene expression via its binding restricting function and its role
in gene regulation by histone acetylation.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4191390
PMID: 25223786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 11;10(9):e1004633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004633.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of a regulatory variant that binds FOXA1 and FOXA2 at the
CDC123/CAMK1D type 2 diabetes GWAS locus.

Fogarty MP(1), Cannon ME(1), Vadlamudi S(1), Gaulton KJ(2), Mohlke KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Many of the type 2 diabetes loci identified through genome-wide association
studies localize to non-protein-coding intronic and intergenic regions and likely
contain variants that regulate gene transcription. The CDC123/CAMK1D type 2
diabetes association signal on chromosome 10 spans an intergenic region between
CDC123 and CAMK1D and also overlaps the CDC123 3'UTR. To gain insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the association signal, we used open chromatin,
histone modifications and transcription factor ChIP-seq data sets from type 2
diabetes-relevant cell types to identify SNPs overlapping predicted regulatory
regions. Two regions containing type 2 diabetes-associated variants were tested
for enhancer activity using luciferase reporter assays. One SNP, rs11257655,
displayed allelic differences in transcriptional enhancer activity in 832/13 and 
MIN6 insulinoma cells as well as in human HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
The rs11257655 risk allele T showed greater transcriptional activity than the
non-risk allele C in all cell types tested. Using electromobility shift and
supershift assays we demonstrated that the rs11257655 risk allele showed
allele-specific binding to FOXA1 and FOXA2. We validated FOXA1 and FOXA2
enrichment at the rs11257655 risk allele using allele-specific ChIP in human
islets. These results suggest that rs11257655 affects transcriptional activity
through altered binding of a protein complex that includes FOXA1 and FOXA2,
providing a potential molecular mechanism at this GWAS locus.

PMCID: PMC4161327
PMID: 25211022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Biol Sci. 2014 Aug 30;10(9):973-82. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.9088. eCollection
2014.

Aberrantly up-regulated miR-20a in pre-eclampsic placenta compromised the
proliferative and invasive behaviors of trophoblast cells by targeting forkhead
box protein A1.

Wang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang H(1), Wang J(2), Zhang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Pan Z(1), Luo
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)2. Department of Pharmacology (Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Medicine
Research, Ministry of Education; State-Province Key Laboratories of
Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China), Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
Heilongjiang 150081, P. R. China. (2)1. Department of Gerontology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150081, P.
R. China;

Preeclampsia is a serious complication in pregnancy. Dysregulation of trophoblast
cell proliferation and invasion is a major pathological alteration observed in
preeclampsia. Recently, microRNAs were shown to participate in the pathogenesis
of preeclampsia. In this study we explored the effect of miR-20a on the
proliferation and invasion of trophoblast cells and the underlying mechanism. We 
verified the distribution of miR-20a in human placenta by in situ hybridization. 
Real time PCR data showed that the level of miR-20a increased by 2.6 folds in
human preeclampsia than normal tissues. We then cultured trophoblast-like JEG-3
cells and evaluated the effect of miR-20a on JEG-3 cell proliferation, migration 
and invasion. Overexpression of miR-20a significantly inhibited the
proliferation, migration and invasion of cultured JEG-3 cells, which were
abolished by co-transfection of AMO-20a. Transfection of miR-20a also inhibited
JEG-3 cell xenograft tumor growth in nude mice. Luciferase assay technique was
used to identify the direct regulation of miR-20a on Forkhead Box Protein
A1(FOXA1). Transfection of miR-20a markedly reduced the luciferase activity of
the chimeric plasmid containing the 3'UTR of FOXA1, indicating FOXA1 is the
target of miR-20a. Furthermore, transfection of miR-20a inhibited both protein
and mRNA expression of FOXA1 in JEG-3 cells. In summary, the upregulated miR-20a 
in human preeclampsia tissue can inhibit the proliferative and invasive
activities of trophoblast cells by repressing the expression of FOXA1.

PMCID: PMC4159688
PMID: 25210495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Pharmgenomics Pers Med. 2014 Aug 5;7:193-201. doi: 10.2147/PGPM.S38117.
eCollection 2014.

Dysregulation of the homeobox transcription factor gene HOXB13: role in prostate 
cancer.

Decker B(1), Ostrander EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA ; Centre for
Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, School
of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (2)Cancer Genetics 
and Comparative Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Prostate cancer (PC) is the most common noncutaneous cancer in men, and
epidemiological studies suggest that about 40% of PC risk is heritable. Linkage
analyses in hereditary PC families have identified multiple putative loci.
However, until recently, identification of specific risk alleles has proven
elusive. Cooney et al used linkage mapping and segregation analysis to identify a
putative risk locus on chromosome 17q21-22. In search of causative variant(s) in 
genes from the candidate region, a novel, potentially deleterious G84E
substitution in homeobox transcription factor gene HOXB13 was observed in
multiple hereditary PC families. In follow-up testing, the G84E allele was
enriched in cases, especially those with an early diagnosis or positive family
history of disease. This finding was replicated by others, confirming HOXB13 as a
PC risk gene. The HOXB13 protein plays diverse biological roles in embryonic
development and terminally differentiated tissue. In tumor cell lines, HOXB13
participates in a number of biological functions, including coactivation and
localization of the androgen receptor and FOXA1. However, no consensus role has
emerged and many questions remain. All HOXB13 variants with a proposed role in PC
risk are predicted to damage the protein and lie in domains that are highly
conserved across species. The G84E variant has the strongest epidemiological
support and lies in a highly conserved MEIS protein-binding domain, which binds
cofactors required for activation. On the basis of epidemiological and biological
data, the G84E variant likely modulates the interaction between the HOXB13
protein and the androgen receptor, as well as affecting FOXA1-mediated
transcriptional programming. However, further studies of the mutated protein are 
required to clarify the mechanisms by which this translates into PC risk.

PMCID: PMC4157396
PMID: 25206306  [PubMed]


128. Cell. 2014 Sep 25;159(1):176-87. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.08.016. Epub 2014 Sep
4.

Organoid cultures derived from patients with advanced prostate cancer.

Gao D(1), Vela I(2), Sboner A(3), Iaquinta PJ(1), Karthaus WR(4), Gopalan A(5),
Dowling C(2), Wanjala JN(1), Undvall EA(6), Arora VK(7), Wongvipat J(1), Kossai
M(8), Ramazanoglu S(9), Barboza LP(1), Di W(1), Cao Z(1), Zhang QF(1), Sirota
I(1), Ran L(1), MacDonald TY(8), Beltran H(10), Mosquera JM(11), Touijer KA(12), 
Scardino PT(12), Laudone VP(12), Curtis KR(13), Rathkopf DE(14), Morris MJ(14),
Danila DC(14), Slovin SF(14), Solomon SB(15), Eastham JA(12), Chi P(16), Carver
B(2), Rubin MA(11), Scher HI(14), Clevers H(4), Sawyers CL(17), Chen Y(18).

Author information: 
(1)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Urology Service,
Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. (3)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Institute for Precision Medicine of Weill
Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Hubrecht 
Institute, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and University Medical 
Center Utrecht, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Laboratory
Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(7)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (9)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (10)Institute for Precision Medicine of Weill Cornell
Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA;
Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian
Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA. (11)Institute for Precision Medicine of Weill 
Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA. (12)Urology 
Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA. (13)Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (14)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA;
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA. (15)Department of Radiology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 
New York, NY 10065, USA. (16)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Medicine,
Weill Cornell Medical College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY
10065, USA; Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. (17)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. Electronic address: sawyersc@mskcc.org.
(18)Human Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College and New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA; Department
of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
Electronic address: cheny1@mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Nat Methods. 2014 Nov;11(11):1096.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Nov;11(11):604.

The lack of in vitro prostate cancer models that recapitulate the diversity of
human prostate cancer has hampered progress in understanding disease pathogenesis
and therapy response. Using a 3D organoid system, we report success in long-term 
culture of prostate cancer from biopsy specimens and circulating tumor cells. The
first seven fully characterized organoid lines recapitulate the molecular
diversity of prostate cancer subtypes, including TMPRSS2-ERG fusion, SPOP
mutation, SPINK1 overexpression, and CHD1 loss. Whole-exome sequencing shows a
low mutational burden, consistent with genomics studies, but with mutations in
FOXA1 and PIK3R1, as well as in DNA repair and chromatin modifier pathways that
have been reported in advanced disease. Loss of p53 and RB tumor suppressor
pathway function are the most common feature shared across the organoid lines.
The methodology described here should enable the generation of a large repertoire
of patient-derived prostate cancer lines amenable to genetic and pharmacologic
studies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4237931
PMID: 25201530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 8;9(9):e107246. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107246. eCollection
2014.

Integrative genomic analysis identifies that SERPINA6-rs1998056 regulated by
FOXA/ERa is associated with female hepatocellular carcinoma.

Shen N(1), Gong J(2), Wang Y(3), Tian J(4), Qian J(5), Zou L(2), Chen W(2), Zhu
B(2), Lu X(5), Zhong R(2), Guo A(6), Wang L(4), Miao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), MOE (Ministry of
Education) Key Laboratory of Environment & Health, Ministry of Environmental
Protection Key Laboratory of Environment and Health (Wuhan), and Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China; Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health
(Incubation), MOE (Ministry of Education) Key Laboratory of Environment & Health,
Ministry of Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environment and Health
(Wuhan), and Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. (3)Wuhan Centers for Disease Prevention and Control, Wuhan, China. 
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China. (6)Hubei Bioinformatics and Molecular Imaging
Key Laboratory, Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

The human forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) transcription factors have been 
found to control estrogen and androgen signaling through co-regulating target
genes with sex hormone receptors. Here we used an integrative strategy to examine
the hypothesis that genetic variants at FOXA1/2 binding elements may be
associated with sexual dimorphism of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk. Firstly
we extracted chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) data of FOXA1,
FOXA2 and estrogen receptor 1(ERa) from ENCODE database to obtain dual target
regions of FOXA/ERa, and further intersected these regions with genes' promoters.
Then we used MATCH program to predict FOXA binding elements, in which genetic
variants were retrieved by dbSNP database (NCBI, build 134). A total of 15
candidate variants were identified in this stage. Secondly we performed a
case-control study with 1,081 HCC patients and 2,008 matched controls and found a
significant association of SERPINA6-rs1998056 with female HCC risk under common
genetic models (e.g. GG versus CC: OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.26-3.27, P = 0.004).
Moreover, results from our real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) using 72 normal liver tissues adjacent to the tumors showed that SERPINA6 
expression was significantly different among different genotypes of this variant 
(GG versus CC: P = 0.032; Group test: P = 0.060). In summary, our study suggested
that SERPINA6-rs1998056 regulated by FOXA/ERa might be associated with female HCC
risk.

PMCID: PMC4157870
PMID: 25198130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):2167-75. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2619. Epub 2014 Aug
22.

Sorafenib and nilotinib resensitize tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cells to
tamoxifen treatment via estrogen receptor a.

Pedersen AM(1), Thrane S(1), Lykkesfeldt AE(1), Yde CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Group, Cell Death and Metabolism, Danish Cancer Society Research
Center, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.

Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer is a major clinical problem and new treatment
strategies are highly warranted. In this study, the multitargeting kinase
inhibitors sorafenib and nilotinib were investigated as potential new treatment
options for tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. The two compounds inhibited cell
growth, reduced expression of total estrogen receptor a (ER),
Ser118-phosphorylated ER, FOXA1 and AIB1 and resensitized tamoxifen-resistant
cells to tamoxifen. The ER downmodulator fulvestrant exerted strong growth
inhibition of tamoxifen-resistant cells and addition of sorafenib and nilotinib
could not further suppress growth, showing that sorafenib and nilotinib exerted
growth inhibition via ER. In support of this, estradiol prevented sorafenib and
nilotinib mediated growth inhibition. These results demonstrate that sorafenib
and nilotinib act via ER and ER-associated proteins, indicating that these kinase
inhibitors in combination with tamoxifen may be potential new treatments for
tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer.

PMID: 25175082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cancer Sci. 2014 Nov;105(11):1377-83. doi: 10.1111/cas.12521. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Molecular mechanisms regulating the hormone sensitivity of breast cancer.

Tokunaga E(1), Hisamatsu Y, Tanaka K, Yamashita N, Saeki H, Oki E, Kitao H,
Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Department of Comprehensive Clinical Oncology,
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease. Approximately 70% of breast cancers are
estrogen receptor (ER) positive. Endocrine therapy has dramatically improved the 
prognosis of ER-positive breast cancer; however, many tumors exhibit de novo or
acquired resistance to endocrine therapy. A thorough understanding of the
molecular mechanisms regulating hormone sensitivity or resistance is important to
improve the efficacy of and overcome the resistance to endocrine therapy. The
growth factor receptor signaling pathways, particularly the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway can mediate
resistance to all forms of endocrine therapy. In contrast, FOXA1 transcription
factor is a key determinant of ER function and endocrine response. Intriguingly, 
a link between hormone resistance induced by the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and the
function of FOXA1 has been suggested. In this review, we focus on the
PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway and functions of FOXA1 in terms of the molecular mechanisms
regulating the hormone sensitivity of breast cancer.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4462367
PMID: 25155268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 1;74(19):5469-79. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-3429. Epub
2014 Aug 21.

Complex formation and function of estrogen receptor a in transcription requires
RIP140.

Rosell M(1), Nevedomskaya E(2), Stelloo S(3), Nautiyal J(1), Poliandri A(1),
Steel JH(1), Wessels LF(4), Carroll JS(5), Parker MG(1), Zwart W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. (2)Division of Molecular
Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Division
of Molecular Carcinogenesis, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (3)Division of Molecular Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis,
the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (5)Cancer Research 
UK, Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(6)Division of Molecular Pathology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. w.zwart@nki.nl.

RIP140 is a transcriptional coregulator involved in energy homeostasis,
ovulation, and mammary gland development. Although conclusive evidence is
lacking, reports have implicated a role for RIP140 in breast cancer. Here, we
explored the mechanistic role of RIP140 in breast cancer and its involvement in
estrogen receptor a (ERa) transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Using
ChIP-seq analysis, we demonstrate that RIP140 shares more than 80% of its binding
sites with ERa, colocalizing with its interaction partners FOXA1, GATA3, p300,
CBP, and p160 family members at H3K4me1-demarcated enhancer regions. RIP140 is
required for ERa-complex formation, ERa-mediated gene expression, and
ERa-dependent breast cancer cell proliferation. Genes affected following RIP140
silencing could be used to stratify tamoxifen-treated breast cancer cohorts,
based on clinical outcome. Importantly, this gene signature was only effective in
endocrine-treated conditions. Cumulatively, our data suggest that RIP140 plays an
important role in ERa-mediated transcriptional regulation in breast cancer and
response to tamoxifen treatment.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25145671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;28(10):1719-28. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1035. Epub 2014 Aug
15.

Nuclear mobility and activity of FOXA1 with androgen receptor are regulated by
SUMOylation.

Sutinen P(1), Rahkama V, Rytinki M, Palvimo JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine (P.S.,V.R., M.R., J.J.P.), University of Eastern
Finland, 70210 Kuopio; and Department of Pathology (J.J.P.), Kuopio University of
Hospital, 70029 Kuopio, Finland.

Forkhead box (FOX) protein A1 has been dubbed a pioneer transcription factor
because it binds target sites in DNA, thereby displacing nucleosomes to loosen
chromatin and facilitating steroid receptor DNA binding nearby. FOXA1 is an
important regulator of prostate development, collaborating with androgen receptor
(AR). Post-translational modifications regulating FOXA1 are thus far poorly
understood. SUMOylation, post-translational modification of proteins by small
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins, has emerged as an important regulatory
mechanism in transcriptional regulation. In this work, we show by SUMOylation
assays in COS-1 cells that the FOXA1 is modified at least in two of its three
lysines embedded in SUMOylation consensus, K6 and K389, in proximity to its
transactivation domains and K267 proximal to its DNA-binding domain. We also
provide evidence for SUMO-2/3 modification of endogenous FOXA1 in LNCaP prostate 
cancer cells. Based on fluorescence recovery after photobleaching assays with
mCherry-fused FOXA1 and EGFP-fused AR in HEK293 cells, the presence of FOXA1
retards the nuclear mobility of agonist-bound AR. Interestingly, mutation of the 
FOXA1 SUMOylation sites slows down the mobility of the pioneer factor, further
retarding the nuclear mobility of the AR. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and gene 
expression assays suggest that the mutation enhances FOXA1's chromatin occupancy 
as well as its activity on AR-regulated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) locus in 
LNCaP cells. Moreover, the mutation altered the ability of FOXA1 to influence
proliferation of LNCaP cells. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that
the SUMOylation can regulate the transcriptional activity of FOXA1 with the AR.

PMID: 25127374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Genome Res. 2014 Nov;24(11):1854-68. doi: 10.1101/gr.175034.114. Epub 2014 Aug
13.

Unbiased analysis of potential targets of breast cancer susceptibility loci by
Capture Hi-C.

Dryden NH(1), Broome LR(1), Dudbridge F(2), Johnson N(1), Orr N(1), Schoenfelder 
S(3), Nagano T(3), Andrews S(4), Wingett S(4), Kozarewa I(1), Assiotis I(1),
Fenwick K(1), Maguire SL(1), Campbell J(1), Natrajan R(1), Lambros M(1), Perrakis
E(1), Ashworth A(1), Fraser P(3), Fletcher O(5).

Author information: 
(1)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research,
London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom; (2)Department of Non-communicable Disease
Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT,
United Kingdom; (3)Nuclear Dynamics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge 
CB22 3AT, United Kingdom; (4)Babraham Bioinformatics, The Babraham Institute,
Cambridge CB22 3AT, United Kingdom. (5)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research
Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London SW3 6JB, United Kingdom;
Olivia.Fletcher@icr.ac.uk.

Genome-wide association studies have identified more than 70 common variants that
are associated with breast cancer risk. Most of these variants map to
non-protein-coding regions and several map to gene deserts, regions of several
hundred kilobases lacking protein-coding genes. We hypothesized that gene deserts
harbor long-range regulatory elements that can physically interact with target
genes to influence their expression. To test this, we developed Capture Hi-C
(CHi-C), which, by incorporating a sequence capture step into a Hi-C protocol,
allows high-resolution analysis of targeted regions of the genome. We used CHi-C 
to investigate long-range interactions at three breast cancer gene deserts
mapping to 2q35, 8q24.21, and 9q31.2. We identified interaction peaks between
putative regulatory elements ("bait fragments") within the captured regions and
"targets" that included both protein-coding genes and long noncoding (lnc) RNAs
over distances of 6.6 kb to 2.6 Mb. Target protein-coding genes were IGFBP5,
KLF4, NSMCE2, and MYC; and target lncRNAs included DIRC3, PVT1, and CCDC26. For
one gene desert, we were able to define two SNPs (rs12613955 and rs4442975) that 
were highly correlated with the published risk variant and that mapped within the
bait end of an interaction peak. In vivo ChIP-qPCR data show that one of these,
rs4442975, affects the binding of FOXA1 and implicate this SNP as a putative
functional variant.

© 2014 Dryden et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4216926
PMID: 25122612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 11;9(8):e104234. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104234.
eCollection 2014.

Mapping of a chromosome 12 region associated with airway hyperresponsiveness in a
recombinant congenic mouse strain and selection of potential candidate genes by
expression and sequence variation analyses.

Kanagaratham C(1), Marino R(2), Camateros P(2), Ren J(3), Houle D(4), Sladek
R(5), Vidal SM(6), Radzioch D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (4)Research Institute of the McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (5)Department of Human
Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Faculty of Medicine,
Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
(6)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada;
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada. (7)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada; Faculty of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

In a previous study we determined that BcA86 mice, a strain belonging to a panel 
of AcB/BcA recombinant congenic strains, have an airway responsiveness phenotype 
resembling mice from the airway hyperresponsive A/J strain. The majority of the
BcA86 genome is however from the hyporesponsive C57BL/6J strain. The aim of this 
study was to identify candidate regions and genes associated with airway
hyperresponsiveness (AHR) by quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis using the
BcA86 strain. Airway responsiveness of 205 F2 mice generated from backcrossing
BcA86 strain to C57BL/6J strain was measured and used for QTL analysis to
identify genomic regions in linkage with AHR. Consomic mice for the QTL
containing chromosomes were phenotyped to study the contribution of each
chromosome to lung responsiveness. Candidate genes within the QTL were selected
based on expression differences in mRNA from whole lungs, and the presence of
coding non-synonymous mutations that were predicted to have a functional effect
by amino acid substitution prediction tools. One QTL for AHR was identified on
Chromosome 12 with its 95% confidence interval ranging from 54.6 to 82.6 Mbp and 
a maximum LOD score of 5.11 (p = 3.68 × 10(-3)). We confirmed that the genotype
of mouse Chromosome 12 is an important determinant of lung responsiveness using a
Chromosome 12 substitution strain. Mice with an A/J Chromosome 12 on a C57BL/6J
background have an AHR phenotype similar to hyperresponsive strains A/J and
BcA86. Within the QTL, genes with deleterious coding variants, such as Foxa1, and
genes with expression differences, such as Mettl21d and Snapc1, were selected as 
possible candidates for the AHR phenotype. Overall, through QTL analysis of a
recombinant congenic strain, microarray analysis and coding variant analysis we
identified Chromosome 12 and three potential candidate genes to be in linkage
with airway responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC4128649
PMID: 25111050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Dec;12(12):1829-39. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0195. Epub
2014 Aug 6.

Delineation of a FOXA1/ERa/AGR2 regulatory loop that is dysregulated in endocrine
therapy-resistant breast cancer.

Wright TM(1), Wardell SE(1), Jasper JS(1), Stice JP(1), Safi R(1), Nelson ER(1), 
McDonnell DP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, North Carolina. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer
Biology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
donald.mcdonnell@duke.edu.

Tamoxifen, a selective estrogen receptor (ER) modulator (SERM), remains a
frontline clinical therapy for patients with ERa-positive breast cancer. However,
the relatively rapid development of resistance to this drug in the metastatic
setting remains an impediment to a durable response. Although drug resistance
likely arises by many different mechanisms, the consensus is that most of the
implicated pathways facilitate the outgrowth of a subpopulation of cancer cells
that can either recognize tamoxifen as an agonist or bypass the regulatory
control of ERa. Notable in this regard is the observation here and in other
studies that expression of anterior gradient homology 2 (AGR2), a known
proto-oncogene and disulfide isomerase, was induced by both estrogen
(17ß-estradiol, E2) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4OHT) in breast cancer cells. The
importance of AGR2 expression is highlighted here by the observation that (i) its
knockdown inhibited the growth of both tamoxifen-sensitive and -resistant breast 
cancer cells and (ii) its increased expression enhanced the growth of
ERa-positive tumors in vivo and increased the migratory capacity of breast cancer
cells in vitro. Interestingly, as with most ERa target genes, the expression of
AGR2 in all breast cancer cells examined requires the transcription factor FOXA1.
However, in tamoxifen-resistant cells, the expression of AGR2 occurs in a
constitutive manner, requiring FOXA1, but loses its dependence on ER. Taken
together, these data define the importance of AGR2 in breast cancer cell growth
and highlight a mechanism where changes in FOXA1 activity obviate the need for ER
in the regulation of this gene.IMPLICATIONS: These findings reveal the
transcriptional interplay between FOXA1 and ERa in controlling AGR2 during the
transition from therapy-sensitive to -resistant breast cancer and implicate AGR2 
as a relevant therapeutic target.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4272635
PMID: 25100862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Sep;42(15):9612-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku648. Epub 2014
Jul 31.

Architectural proteins CTCF and cohesin have distinct roles in modulating the
higher order structure and expression of the CFTR locus.

Gosalia N(1), Neems D(2), Kerschner JL(1), Kosak ST(2), Harris A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, 60611, USA. (2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.
(3)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, 60611, USA
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, 60611, USA ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Higher order chromatin structures across the genome are maintained in part by the
architectural proteins CCCTC binding factor (CTCF) and the cohesin complex, which
co-localize at many sites across the genome. Here, we examine the role of these
proteins in mediating chromatin structure at the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CFTR encompasses nearly 200 kb flanked by
CTCF-binding enhancer-blocking insulator elements and is regulated by
cell-type-specific intronic enhancers, which loop to the promoter in the active
locus. SiRNA-mediated depletion of CTCF or the cohesin component, RAD21, showed
that these two factors have distinct roles in regulating the higher order
organization of CFTR. CTCF mediates the interactions between CTCF/cohesin binding
sites, some of which have enhancer-blocking insulator activity. Cohesin shares
this tethering role, but in addition stabilizes interactions between the promoter
and cis-acting intronic elements including enhancers, which are also dependent on
the forkhead box A1/A2 (FOXA1/A2) transcription factors (TFs). Disruption of the 
three-dimensional structure of the CFTR gene by depletion of CTCF or RAD21
increases gene expression, which is accompanied by alterations in histone
modifications and TF occupancy across the locus, and causes internalization of
the gene from the nuclear periphery.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4150766
PMID: 25081205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):6375-86.

MicroRNA-99a and 100 mediated upregulation of FOXA1 in bladder cancer.

Drayton RM(1), Peter S(1), Myers K(1), Miah S(2), Dudziec E(2), Bryant HE(1),
Catto JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Molecular Oncology, University of Sheffield, UK. (2)Academic 
Unit of Molecular Oncology, University of Sheffield, UK; Academic Urology Unit,
University of Sheffield, UK.

Urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder (UCC) is a common disease often
characterized by FGFR3 dysregulation. Whilst upregulation of this oncogene occurs
most frequently in low-grade non-invasive tumors, recent data reveal increased
FGFR3 expression characterizes a common sub-type of invasive UCC sharing
molecular similarities with breast cancer. These similarities include
upregulation of the FOXA1 transcription factor and reduced expression of
microRNAs-99a/100. We have previously identified direct regulation of FGFR3 by
these two microRNAs and now search for further targets. Using a microarray
meta-database we find potential FOXA1 regulation by microRNAs-99a/100. We confirm
direct targeting of the FOXA1 3'UTR by microRNAs-99a/100 and also potential
indirect regulation through microRNA-485-5p/SOX5/JUN-D/FOXL1 and
microRNA-486/FOXO1a. In 292 benign and malignant urothelial samples, we find an
inverse correlation between the expression of FOXA1 and microRNAs-99a/100
(r=-0.33 to -0.43, p<0.05). As for FGFR3 in UCC, tumors with high FOXA1
expression have lower rates of progression than those with low expression (Log
rank p=0.009). Using global gene expression and CpG methylation profiling we find
genotypic consequences of FOXA1 upregulation in UCC. Genetic changes are
associated with regional hypomethylation, occur near FOXA1 binding sites, and
mirror gene expression changes previously reported in FGFR3 mutant-UCC. These
include gene silencing through aberrant hypermethylation (e.g. IGFBP3) and affect
genes characterizing breast cancer sub-types (e.g. ERBB2). In conclusion, we have
identified microRNAs-99a/100 mediate a direct relationship between FGFR3 and
FOXA1 and potentially facilitate cross talk between these pathways in UCC.

PMCID: PMC4171637
PMID: 25071007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Endocrinology. 2014 Oct;155(10):3781-92. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1843. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate a-cell differentiation, glucagon biosynthesis, and
secretion.

Heddad Masson M(1), Poisson C, Guérardel A, Mamin A, Philippe J, Gosmain Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Hypertension and Nutrition, University 
Hospital of Geneva, Medical School, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland.

The Forkhead box A transcription factors are major regulators of glucose
homeostasis. They show both distinct and redundant roles during pancreas
development and in adult mouse ß-cells. In vivo ablation studies have revealed
critical implications of Foxa1 on glucagon biosynthesis and requirement of Foxa2 
in a-cell terminal differentiation. In order to examine the respective role of
these factors in mature a-cells, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) directed
against Foxa1 and Foxa2 in rat primary pancreatic a-cells and rodent a-cell lines
leading to marked decreases in Foxa1 and Foxa2 mRNA levels and proteins. Both
Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon gene expression specifically through the G2
element. Although we found that Foxa2 controls the expression of the glucagon,
MafB, Pou3f4, Pcsk2, Nkx2.2, Kir6.2, and Sur1 genes, Foxa1 only regulates
glucagon gene expression. Interestingly, the Isl1 and Gipr genes were not
controlled by either Foxa1 or Foxa2 alone but by their combination. Foxa1 and
Foxa2 directly activate and bind the promoter region the Nkx2.2, Kir6.2 and Sur1,
Gipr, Isl1, and Pou3f4 genes. We also demonstrated that glucagon secretion is
affected by the combined effects of Foxa1 and Foxa2 but not by either one alone. 
Our results indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon biosynthesis and
secretion as well as a-cell differentiation with both common and unique target
genes.

PMID: 25057789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 21;9(7):e102551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0102551.
eCollection 2014.

Multi-tissue omics analyses reveal molecular regulatory networks for puberty in
composite beef cattle.

Cánovas A(1), Reverter A(2), DeAtley KL(3), Ashley RL(3), Colgrave ML(2), Fortes 
MR(4), Islas-Trejo A(1), Lehnert S(2), Porto-Neto L(2), Rincón G(1), Silver
GA(3), Snelling WM(5), Medrano JF(1), Thomas MG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis,
California, United States of America. (2)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization, Food Futures Flagship and Division of Animal, Food and
Health Sciences, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(3)Department of Animal and Range Sciences, New Mexico State University, Las
Cruces, New Mexico, United States of America. (4)Queensland Alliance for
Agriculture and Food Innovation, Centre for Animal Science, University of
Queensland, Gatton, Queensland, Australia. (5)United States Department of
Agriculture, Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska, United States of
America. (6)Department of Animal Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, United States of America.

Puberty is a complex physiological event by which animals mature into an adult
capable of sexual reproduction. In order to enhance our understanding of the
genes and regulatory pathways and networks involved in puberty, we characterized 
the transcriptome of five reproductive tissues (i.e. hypothalamus, pituitary
gland, ovary, uterus, and endometrium) as well as tissues known to be relevant to
growth and metabolism needed to achieve puberty (i.e., longissimus dorsi muscle, 
adipose, and liver). These tissues were collected from pre- and post-pubertal
Brangus heifers (3/8 Brahman; Bos indicus x 5/8 Angus; Bos taurus) derived from a
population of cattle used to identify quantitative trait loci associated with
fertility traits (i.e., age of first observed corpus luteum (ACL), first service 
conception (FSC), and heifer pregnancy (HPG)). In order to exploit the power of
complementary omics analyses, pre- and post-puberty co-expression gene networks
were constructed by combining the results from genome-wide association studies
(GWAS), RNA-Seq, and bovine transcription factors. Eight tissues among
pre-pubertal and post-pubertal Brangus heifers revealed 1,515 differentially
expressed and 943 tissue-specific genes within the 17,832 genes confirmed by
RNA-Seq analysis. The hypothalamus experienced the most notable up-regulation of 
genes via puberty (i.e., 204 out of 275 genes). Combining the results of GWAS and
RNA-Seq, we identified 25 loci containing a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 
associated with ACL, FSC, and (or) HPG. Seventeen of these SNP were within a gene
and 13 of the genes were expressed in uterus or endometrium. Multi-tissue omics
analyses revealed 2,450 co-expressed genes relative to puberty. The pre-pubertal 
network had 372,861 connections whereas the post-pubertal network had 328,357
connections. A sub-network from this process revealed key transcriptional
regulators (i.e., PITX2, FOXA1, DACH2, PROP1, SIX6, etc.). Results from these
multi-tissue omics analyses improve understanding of the number of genes and
their complex interactions for puberty in cattle.

PMCID: PMC4105537
PMID: 25048735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3159-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.108498. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Dual roles for Id4 in the regulation of estrogen signaling in the mammary gland
and ovary.

Best SA(1), Hutt KJ(2), Fu NY(1), Vaillant F(1), Liew SH(3), Hartley L(4), Scott 
CL(5), Lindeman GJ(5), Visvader JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical
Biology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.
(2)Ovarian Biology Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (3)Ovarian Biology
Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute, Monash Medical Center, Clayton, Victoria
3168, Australia. (4)ACRF Stem Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall
Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (5)ACRF Stem 
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medicine, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia Department of Medical Oncology,
The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia. (6)ACRF Stem
Cells and Cancer Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia Department of Medical Biology, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia visvader@wehi.edu.au.

The HLH transcriptional regulator Id4 exerts important roles in different organs,
including the neural compartment, where Id4 loss usually results in early
lethality. To explore the role of this basally restricted transcription factor in
the mammary gland, we generated a cre-inducible mouse model. MMTV- or
K14-cre-mediated deletion of Id4 led to a delay in ductal morphogenesis,
consistent with previous findings using a germ-line knockout mouse model. A
striking increase in the expression of ERa (Esr1), PR and FoxA1 was observed in
both the basal and luminal cellular subsets of Id4-deficient mammary glands.
Together with chromatin immunoprecipitation of Id4 on the Esr1 and Foxa1 promoter
regions, these data imply that Id4 is a negative regulator of the ERa signaling
axis. Unexpectedly, examination of the ovaries of targeted mice revealed
significantly increased numbers of secondary and antral follicles, and reduced
Id4 expression in the granulosa cells. Moreover, expression of the cascade of
enzymes that are crucial for estrogen biosynthesis in the ovary was decreased in 
Id4-deficient females and uterine weights were considerably lower, indicating
impaired estrogen production. Thus, compromised ovarian function and decreased
circulating estrogen likely contribute to the mammary ductal defects evident in
Id4-deficient mice. Collectively, these data identify Id4 as a novel regulator of
estrogen signaling, where Id4 restrains ERa expression in the basal and luminal
cellular compartments of the mammary gland and regulates estrogen biosynthesis in
the ovary.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25038044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Gene. 2014 Sep 15;548(2):234-43. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.07.038. Epub 2014 Jul
15.

Whole transcriptome RNA-seq analysis: tumorigenesis and metastasis of melanoma.

Zhao H(1), Li Y(2), Wang S(2), Yang Y(2), Wang J(2), Ruan X(2), Yang Y(2), Cai
K(2), Zhang B(2), Cui P(2), Yan J(2), Zhao Y(2), Wakeland EK(3), Li Q(4), Hu
S(5), Fang X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, General Hospital of People's Liberation Army,
Beijing 100853, China. (2)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, 
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
China. (3)Department of Immunology & Microarray Core Facility, The University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; CAS Key
Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (4)Department of Immunology &
Microarray Core Facility, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (5)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 
100101, China. Electronic address: husn@big.ac.cn. (6)CAS Key Laboratory of
Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. Electronic address: fangxd@big.ac.cn.

Melanoma is the most malignant cutaneous cancer and causes over 9000 deaths
annually. Because fatality rates from malignant melanoma (MM) increase
dramatically upon metastasis, we investigated tumorigenesis and metastasis of MM 
in transcriptome analyses of three distinct cell lines that correspond with the
stages of MM pathogenesis: the normal stage (HEMn-LP), the onset of MM (A375),
and the metastasis stage (A2058). Using next-generation sequencing (NGS)
technology, we detected asymmetrical expression of genes among the three cell
lines, notably on chromosomes 9, 11, 12, and 14, suggesting their involvement in 
tumorigenesis and metastasis of MM. These genes were clustered into 41 categories
based on their expression patterns, and their biological functions were analyzed 
using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. In the top cancer-associated category, HIF1A,
IL8, TERT, ONECUT1, and FOXA1 directly interacted with either transcription
factors or cytokines that are known to be involved in the tumorigenesis or
metastasis of other malignant tumors. The present data suggest that cytokine
regulatory pathways in macrophages predominate over other pathways during the
pathogenesis of MM. This study provides new targets for the downstream
mechanistic studies of the tumorigenesis and metastasis of MM and demonstrates a 
new strategy for studies of the progression of other malignant cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25034661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Lab. 2014;60(6):909-18.

The transcriptional regulation of SOX2 on FOXA1 gene and its application in
diagnosis of human breast and lung cancers.

Li X, Chen S, Sun T, Xu Y, Chen Y, Liu Y, Xiang R, Li N.

BACKGROUND: Recent study demonstrated the important contribution of SOX2 to
tumorigenesis and metastasis properties of various types of cancers and strongly 
supported the concept that SOX2 can be used as an effective marker for diagnosis 
and predicting prognosis of cancer patients. However, our previous RNA-Seq
results from human lung cancer cell line A549 showed that some oncogenes,
including FOXA1 are negatively regulated by SOX2.
METHODS: To further verify the transcriptional regulation effect of SOX2 on FOXA1
and elucidate its application in the diagnosis of human lung and breast cancer,
we performed real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting to test the regulation effect 
of SOX2 on the expression of FOXA1 gene. OncoPrint analysis was used to reveal
the alteration of SOX2 and FOXA1 genes in breast invasive carcinoma cases and
lung squamous cell carcinoma cases from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data
portal. Immunohistochemistry staining was performed to test the expression of
SOX2 and FOXA1 in human breast and lung carcinoma.
RESULTS: The results showed that there is an inhibitory effect of SOX2 on the
expression of FOXA1 gene. In addition, these two genes are altered in 5.8% of 484
breast invasive carcinoma cases and 46.4% of 179 lung squamous cell carcinoma
cases from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal, which showed an increased 
percentage of carcinoma cases when compared with single gene alteration.
Immunohistochemistry staining of SOX2 and FOXA1 in human breast and lung
carcinoma further revealed the mutual complementary effect of these two proteins 
in the diagnosis of carcinoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed SOX2 as a negative upstream regulator for FOXA1
gene and demonstrated SOX2 and FOXA1 as effective dual markers in improving the
diagnosis efficiency for human lung and breast tumor.

PMID: 25016694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Lung. 2014 Oct;192(5):781-91. doi: 10.1007/s00408-014-9620-7. Epub 2014 Jul 12.

Peptide regulation of gene expression and protein synthesis in bronchial
epithelium.

Khavinson VKh(1), Tendler SM, Vanyushin BF, Kasyanenko NA, Kvetnoy IM, Linkova
NS, Ashapkin VV, Polyakova VO, Basharina VS, Bernadotte A.

Author information: 
(1)Pavlov Institute of Physiology of RAS, St-Petersburg, Russia.

INTRODUCTION: Some studies have shown that peptides have high treatment potential
due to their biological activity, harmlessness, and tissue-specific action.
Tetrapeptide Ala-Asp-Glu-Leu (ADEL) was effective on models of acute bacterial
lung inflammation, fibrosis, and toxic lung damage in several studies.
METHODS: We measured Ki67, Mcl-1, p53, CD79, and NOS-3 protein levels in the 1st,
7th, and 14th passages of bronchoepithelial human embryonic cell cultures. Gene
expression of NKX2-1, SCGB1A1, SCGB3A2, FOXA1, FOXA2, MUC4, MUC5AC, and SFTPA1
was measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Using the methods of
spectrophotometry, viscometry, and circular dichroism, we studied the ADEL-DNA
interaction in vitro.
RESULTS: Peptide ADEL regulates the levels of Ki67, Mcl-1, p53, CD79, and NOS-3
proteins in cell cultures of human bronchial epithelium in various passages. The 
strongest activating effect of peptide ADEL on bronchial epithelial cell
proliferation through Ki67 and Mcl-1 was observed in "old" cell cultures. ADEL
regulates the expression of genes involved in bronchial epithelium
differentiation: NKX2-1, SCGB1A1, SCGB3A2, FOXA1, and FOXA2. ADEL also activates 
several genes, which reduced expression correlated with pathological lung
development: MUC4, MUC5AC, and SFTPA1. Spectrophotometry, viscometry, and
circular dichroism showed ADEL-DNA interaction, with a binding region in the
major groove (N7 guanine).
CONCLUSIONS: ADEL can bind to specific DNA regions and regulate gene expression
and synthesis of proteins involved in the differentiation and maintenance of
functional activity of the bronchial epithelium. Through activation of some
specific gene expression, peptide ADEL may protect the bronchial epithelium from 
pulmonary pathology. ADEL also may have a geroprotective effect on bronchial
tissue.

PMID: 25015171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jul 9;6(244):244ra91. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3008970.

EGFR as a potential therapeutic target for a subset of muscle-invasive bladder
cancers presenting a basal-like phenotype.

Rebouissou S(1), Bernard-Pierrot I(1), de Reyniès A(2), Lepage ML(1), Krucker
C(1), Chapeaublanc E(1), Hérault A(1), Kamoun A(1), Caillault A(1), Letouzé E(2),
Elarouci N(2), Neuzillet Y(3), Denoux Y(4), Molinié V(5), Vordos D(6), Laplanche 
A(7), Maillé P(8), Soyeux P(9), Ofualuka K(9), Reyal F(10), Biton A(11), Sibony
M(12), Paoletti X(13), Southgate J(14), Benhamou S(15), Lebret T(3), Allory
Y(16), Radvanyi F(17).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 144, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France. Institut Curie, Centre de 
Recherche, 75005 Paris, France. (2)Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, Cartes
d'Identité des Tumeurs Program, 75013 Paris, France. (3)Service d'Urologie,
Hôpital Foch, 92150 Suresnes, France. Université de Versailles,
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, Faculté de Médecine Paris, Ile-de-France Ouest, 78280 
Guyancourt, France. (4)Département de Pathologie, Hôpital Foch, 92150 Suresnes,
France. (5)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Saint Joseph, 75014 Paris,
France. (6)AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Henri Mondor, Service d'Urologie, 94000
Créteil, France. (7)Département de Biostatistique et d'Epidémiologie, Institut de
Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (8)AP-HP, Hôpitaux
Universitaires Henri Mondor, Département de Pathologie, 94000 Créteil, France.
(9)INSERM, Unité 955, 94000 Créteil, France. Université Paris-Est, Faculté de
Médecine, 94000 Créteil, France. (10)CNRS, UMR 144, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, 
France. Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, 75005 Paris, France. Institut Curie,
Département de Chirurgie, 75005 Paris, France. (11)CNRS, UMR 144, Institut Curie,
75005 Paris, France. Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, 75005 Paris, France.
INSERM, U900, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France. (12)AP-HP, Hôpital Cochin,
Département de Pathologie, 75014 Paris, France. (13)INSERM, U900, Institut Curie,
75005 Paris, France. Service de Biostatistique, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris,
France. (14)Jack Birch Unit of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology,
University of York, York Y010 5DD, UK. (15)CNRS, UMR 8200, Institut de
Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. INSERM, U946, 75010 Paris, 
France. (16)AP-HP, Hôpitaux Universitaires Henri Mondor, Département de
Pathologie, 94000 Créteil, France. INSERM, Unité 955, 94000 Créteil, France.
Université Paris-Est, Faculté de Médecine, 94000 Créteil, France. AP-HP, Hôpitaux
Universitaires Henri Mondor, Plateforme de Ressources Biologiques, 94000 Créteil,
France. (17)CNRS, UMR 144, Institut Curie, 75005 Paris, France. Institut Curie,
Centre de Recherche, 75005 Paris, France. francois.radvanyi@curie.fr.

Muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma (MIBC) constitutes a heterogeneous group of
tumors with a poor outcome. Molecular stratification of MIBC may identify
clinically relevant tumor subgroups and help to provide effective targeted
therapies. From seven series of large-scale transcriptomic data (383 tumors), we 
identified an MIBC subgroup accounting for 23.5% of MIBC, associated with shorter
survival and displaying a basal-like phenotype, as shown by the expression of
epithelial basal cell markers. Basal-like tumors presented an activation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway linked to frequent EGFR gains and
activation of an EGFR autocrine loop. We used a 40-gene expression classifier
derived from human tumors to identify human bladder cancer cell lines and a
chemically induced mouse model of bladder cancer corresponding to human
basal-like bladder cancer. We showed, in both models, that tumor cells were
sensitive to anti-EGFR therapy. Our findings provide preclinical proof of concept
that anti-EGFR therapy can be used to target a subset of particularly aggressive 
MIBC tumors expressing basal cell markers and provide diagnostic tools for
identifying these tumors.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25009231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;54:49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.06.013.
Epub 2014 Jul 4.

Androgen receptor and its splice variant, AR-V7, differentially regulate FOXA1
sensitive genes in LNCaP prostate cancer cells.

Krause WC(1), Shafi AA(1), Nakka M(1), Weigel NL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: nweigel@bcm.edu.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is an androgen-dependent disease, and tumors that are
resistant to androgen ablation therapy often remain androgen receptor (AR)
dependent. Among the contributors to castration-resistant PCa are AR splice
variants that lack the ligand-binding domain (LBD). Instead, they have small
amounts of unique sequence derived from cryptic exons or from out of frame
translation. The AR-V7 (or AR3) variant is constitutively active and is expressed
under conditions consistent with CRPC. AR-V7 is reported to regulate a
transcriptional program that is similar but not identical to that of AR. However,
it is unknown whether these differences are due to the unique sequence in AR-V7, 
or simply to loss of the LBD. To examine transcriptional regulation by AR-V7, we 
have used lentiviruses encoding AR-V7 (amino acids 1-627 of AR with the 16 amino 
acids unique to the variant) to prepare a derivative of the androgen-dependent
LNCaP cells with inducible expression of AR-V7. An additional cell line was
generated with regulated expression of AR-NTD (amino acids 1-660 of AR); this
mutant lacks the LBD but does not have the AR-V7 specific sequence. We find that 
AR and AR-V7 have distinct activities on target genes that are co-regulated by
FOXA1. Transcripts regulated by AR-V7 were similarly regulated by AR-NTD,
indicating that loss of the LBD is sufficient for the observed differences.
Differential regulation of target genes correlates with preferential recruitment 
of AR or AR-V7 to specific cis-regulatory DNA sequences providing an explanation 
for some of the observed differences in target gene regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4160387
PMID: 25008967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 22;289(34):23557-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.581439. Epub
2014 Jul 8.

Open chromatin profiling in mice livers reveals unique chromatin variations
induced by high fat diet.

Leung A(1), Parks BW(2), Du J(3), Trac C(4), Setten R(5), Chen Y(5), Brown K(4), 
Lusis AJ(2), Natarajan R(6), Schones DE(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Diabetes and. (2)the Department of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095. (3)Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute and the 
Irell & Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010 and. (4)Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute and. (5)the
Irell & Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010 and. (6)From the Departments of Diabetes and the Irell & Manella
Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010
and rnatarajan@coh.org. (7)Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute and the
Irell & Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010 and dschones@coh.org.

Metabolic diseases result from multiple genetic and environmental factors. We
report here that one manner in which environmental factors can contribute to
metabolic disease progression is through modification to chromatin. We
demonstrate that high fat diet leads to chromatin remodeling in the livers of
C57BL/6J mice, as compared with mice fed a control diet, and that these chromatin
changes are associated with changes in gene expression. We further show that the 
regions of greatest variation in chromatin accessibility are targeted by liver
transcription factors, including HNF4a, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a
(CEBP/a), and FOXA1. Repeating the chromatin and gene expression profiling in
another mouse strain, DBA/2J, revealed that the regions of greatest chromatin
change are largely strain-specific and that integration of chromatin, gene
expression, and genetic data can be used to characterize regulatory regions. Our 
data indicate dramatic changes in the epigenome due to diet and demonstrate
strain-specific dynamics in chromatin remodeling.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4156056
PMID: 25006255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Genomics. 2014 Aug;104(2):105-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 Jul
2.

Strategies to fine-map genetic associations with lipid levels by combining
epigenomic annotations and liver-specific transcription profiles.

Lo KS(1), Vadlamudi S(2), Fogarty MP(2), Mohlke KL(2), Lettre G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Department of Genetics,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (3)Montreal Heart Institute, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Electronic address: guillaume.lettre@umontreal.ca.

Characterization of the epigenome promises to yield the functional elements
buried in the human genome sequence, thus helping to annotate non-coding DNA
polymorphisms with regulatory functions. Here, we develop two novel strategies to
combine epigenomic data with transcriptomic profiles in humans or mice to
prioritize potential candidate SNPs associated with lipid levels by genome-wide
association study (GWAS). First, after confirming that lipid-associated loci that
are also expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) in human livers are enriched
for ENCODE regulatory marks in the human hepatocellular HepG2 cell line, we
prioritize candidate SNPs based on the number of these marks that overlap the
variant position. This method recognized the known SORT1 rs12740374 regulatory
SNP associated with LDL-cholesterol, and highlighted candidate functional SNPs at
15 additional lipid loci. In the second strategy, we combine ENCODE chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) data
and liver expression datasets from knockout mice lacking specific transcription
factors. This approach identified SNPs in specific transcription factor binding
sites that are located near target genes of these transcription factors. We show 
that FOXA2 transcription factor binding sites are enriched at lipid-associated
loci and experimentally validate that alleles of one such proxy SNP located near 
the FOXA2 target gene BIRC5 show allelic differences in FOXA2-DNA binding and
enhancer activity. These methods can be used to generate testable hypotheses for 
many non-coding SNPs associated with complex diseases or traits.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4373602
PMID: 24997396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(13):8310-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku543. Epub 2014 Jun
30.

SUMOylation modulates the transcriptional activity of androgen receptor in a
target gene and pathway selective manner.

Sutinen P(1), Malinen M(1), Heikkinen S(1), Palvimo JJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, PO Box 1627, 
FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland. (2)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern
Finland, Kuopio, PO Box 1627, FI-70211 Kuopio, Finland Department of Pathology,
Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland jorma.palvimo@uef.fi.

Androgen receptor (AR) plays an important regulatory role in prostate cancer.
AR's transcriptional activity is regulated by androgenic ligands, but also by
post-translational modifications, such as SUMOylation. To study the role of AR
SUMOylation in genuine chromatin environment, we compared androgen-regulated gene
expression and AR chromatin occupancy in PC-3 prostate cancer cell lines stably
expressing wild-type (wt) or doubly SUMOylation site-mutated AR (AR-K386R,K520R).
Our genome-wide gene expression analyses reveal that the SUMOylation modulates
the AR function in a target gene and pathway selective manner. The transcripts
that are differentially regulated by androgen and SUMOylation are linked to
cellular movement, cell death, cellular proliferation, cellular development and
cell cycle. Fittingly, SUMOylation mutant AR cells proliferate faster and are
more sensitive to apoptosis. Moreover, ChIP-seq analyses show that the
SUMOylation can modulate the chromatin occupancy of AR on many loci in a fashion 
that parallels their differential androgen-regulated expression. De novo motif
analyses reveal that FOXA1, C/EBP and AP-1 motifs are differentially enriched at 
the wtAR- and the AR-K386R,K520R-preferred genomic binding positions. Taken
together, our data indicate that SUMOylation does not simply repress the AR
activity, but it regulates AR's interaction with the chromatin and the receptor's
target gene selection.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4117771
PMID: 24981513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 25;9(6):e100134. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100134.
eCollection 2014.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells by synthetic
modified mRNAs.

Simeonov KP(1), Uppal H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigative Toxicology, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California, United States of America.

Direct reprogramming by overexpression of defined transcription factors is a
promising new method of deriving useful but rare cell types from readily
available ones. While the method presents numerous advantages over induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell approaches, a focus on murine conversions and a
reliance on retroviral vectors limit potential human applications. Here we
address these concerns by demonstrating direct conversion of human fibroblasts to
hepatocyte-like cells via repeated transfection with synthetic modified mRNAs.
Hepatic induction was achieved with as little as three transcription factor mRNAs
encoding HNF1A plus any two of the factors, FOXA1, FOXA3, or HNF4A in the
presence of an optimized hepatic growth medium. We show that the absolute
necessity of exogenous HNF1A mRNA delivery is explained both by the factor's
inability to be activated by any other factors screened and its simultaneous
ability to strongly induce expression of other master hepatic transcription
factors. Further analysis of factor interaction showed that a series of robust
cross-activations exist between factors that induce a hepatocyte-like state.
Transcriptome and small RNA sequencing during conversion toward hepatocyte-like
cells revealed global preferential activation of liver genes and miRNAs over
those associated with other endodermal tissues, as well as downregulation of
fibroblast-associated genes. Induced hepatocyte-like cells also exhibited hepatic
morphology and protein expression. Our data provide insight into the process by
which direct hepatic reprogramming occurs in human cells. More importantly, by
demonstrating that it is possible to achieve direct reprogramming without the use
of retroviral gene delivery, our results supply a crucial step toward realizing
the potential of direct reprogramming in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC4070971
PMID: 24963715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 24;15:520. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-520.

Global analysis of ZNF217 chromatin occupancy in the breast cancer cell genome
reveals an association with ERalpha.

Frietze S(1), O'Geen H, Littlepage LE, Simion C, Sweeney CA, Farnham PJ, Krig SR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley, CO
80639, USA. seth.frietze@unco.edu.

BACKGROUND: The ZNF217 gene, encoding a C2H2 zinc finger protein, is located at
20q13 and found amplified and overexpressed in greater than 20% of breast tumors.
Current studies indicate ZNF217 drives tumorigenesis, yet the regulatory
mechanisms of ZNF217 are largely unknown. Because ZNF217 associates with
chromatin modifying enzymes, we postulate that ZNF217 functions to regulate
specific gene signaling networks. Here, we present a large-scale functional
genomic analysis of ZNF217, which provides insights into the regulatory role of
ZNF217 in MCF7 breast cancer cells.
RESULTS: ChIP-seq analysis reveals that the majority of ZNF217 binding sites are 
located at distal regulatory regions associated with the chromatin marks H3K27ac 
and H3K4me1. Analysis of ChIP-seq transcription factor binding sites shows
clustering of ZNF217 with FOXA1, GATA3 and ERalpha binding sites, supported by
the enrichment of corresponding motifs for the ERalpha-associated cis-regulatory 
sequences. ERalpha expression highly correlates with ZNF217 in lysates from
breast tumors (n = 15), and ERalpha co-precipitates ZNF217 and its binding
partner CtBP2 from nuclear extracts. Transcriptome profiling following ZNF217
depletion identifies differentially expressed genes co-bound by ZNF217 and
ERalpha; gene ontology suggests a role for ZNF217-ERalpha in expression programs 
associated with ER+ breast cancer studies found in the Molecular Signature
Database. Data-mining of expression data from breast cancer patients correlates
ZNF217 with reduced overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our genome-wide ZNF217 data suggests a functional role for ZNF217 at
ERalpha target genes. Future studies will investigate whether ZNF217 expression
contributes to aberrant ERalpha regulatory events in ER+ breast cancer and
hormone resistance.

PMCID: PMC4082627
PMID: 24962896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Jun;7(3):374-82. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000169.

Association of levels of fasting glucose and insulin with rare variants at the
chromosome 11p11.2-MADD locus: Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic
Epidemiology (CHARGE) Consortium Targeted Sequencing Study.

Cornes BK, Brody JA, Nikpoor N, Morrison AC, Dang HC, Ahn BS, Wang S, Dauriz M,
Barzilay JI, Dupuis J, Florez JC, Coresh J, Gibbs RA, Kao WH, Liu CT, McKnight B,
Muzny D, Pankow JS, Reid JG, White CC, Johnson AD, Wong TY, Psaty BM, Boerwinkle 
E, Rotter JI, Siscovick DS, Sladek R, Meigs JB.

BACKGROUND: Common variation at the 11p11.2 locus, encompassing MADD, ACP2,
NR1H3, MYBPC3, and SPI1, has been associated in genome-wide association studies
with fasting glucose and insulin (FI). In the Cohorts for Heart and Aging
Research in Genomic Epidemiology Targeted Sequencing Study, we sequenced 5 gene
regions at 11p11.2 to identify rare, potentially functional variants influencing 
fasting glucose or FI levels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sequencing (mean depth, 38×) across 16.1 kb in 3566
individuals without diabetes mellitus identified 653 variants, 79.9% of which
were rare (minor allele frequency <1%) and novel. We analyzed rare variants in 5 
gene regions with FI or fasting glucose using the sequence kernel association
test. At NR1H3, 53 rare variants were jointly associated with FI (P=2.73×10(-3));
of these, 7 were predicted to have regulatory function and showed association
with FI (P=1.28×10(-3)). Conditioning on 2 previously associated variants at MADD
(rs7944584, rs10838687) did not attenuate this association, suggesting that there
are >2 independent signals at 11p11.2. One predicted regulatory variant,
chr11:47227430 (hg18; minor allele frequency=0.00068), contributed 20.6% to the
overall sequence kernel association test score at NR1H3, lies in intron 2 of
NR1H3, and is a predicted binding site for forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), a
transcription factor associated with insulin regulation. In human HepG2 hepatoma 
cells, the rare chr11:47227430 A allele disrupted FOXA1 binding and reduced
FOXA1-dependent transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Sequencing at 11p11.2-NR1H3 identified rare variation associated
with FI. One variant, chr11:47227430, seems to be functional, with the rare A
allele reducing transcription factor FOXA1 binding and FOXA1-dependent
transcriptional activity.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4066205
PMID: 24951664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Int J Biol Sci. 2014 Jun 5;10(6):614-9. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.8389. eCollection 2014.

Modulation of androgen receptor by FOXA1 and FOXO1 factors in prostate cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Tindall DJ(2), Huang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; (2)1. Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; ;
2. Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905,
USA; ; 3. Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
MN 55905, USA.

Androgens and the androgen receptor (AR) are essential for growth and
differentiation of the normal prostate gland as well as proliferation and
survival of prostate cancer (PCa). Increasing evidence suggests that reactivation
of the AR plays a pivotal role in disease progression to castration-resistant PCa
(CRPC). Forkhead box (FOX) factors exert two distinct effects on AR function in
PCa. The A-class of FOX proteins, especially FOXA1, functions as a pioneer factor
to facilitate AR transactivation and PCa growth. In contrast, the O-class of FOX 
proteins such as FOXO1 and FOXO3, which are downstream effectors of the PTEN
tumor suppressor, inhibit the transcriptional activity of either full-length AR
or constitutively active splice variants of AR in a direct or indirect manner in 
PCa. FOXO1 also contributes to taxane-mediated inhibition of the AR and CRPC
growth. Therefore, FOX family members not only have a tight relationship with AR,
but also represent a pivotal group of proteins to be targeted for PCa therapy.
The present review focuses primarily on recent advances in the epigenetic,
mechanistic and clinical relevant aspects of regulation of the AR by FOXA1 and
FOXO1 factors in PCa.

PMCID: PMC4062954
PMID: 24948874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):587-99. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0485. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

VGLL1 expression is associated with a triple-negative basal-like phenotype in
breast cancer.

Castilla MÁ(1), López-García MÁ(2), Atienza MR(3), Rosa-Rosa JM(3), Díaz-Martín
J(2), Pecero ML(3), Vieites B(2), Romero-Pérez L(2), Benítez J(3), Calcabrini
A(3), Palacios J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, ItalyInstituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy jose.palacios@salud.madrid.org
macastillamoro@gmail.com. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad
de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda.
Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa 
en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital
Universitario Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación
Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del
Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid,
SpainDepartment of Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
ItalyInstituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (3)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1) is a poorly characterized gene encoding a
transcriptional co-activator structurally homologous to TAZ and YAP that
modulates the Hippo pathway in Drosophila. In this study, we examined the
expression of VGLL1 and its intronic miRNA, miR-934, in breast cancer. VGLL1 and 
miR-934 expression miRNA profiling was carried out on frozen samples of grade 3
invasive ductal carcinomas. VGLL1 protein was also examined in 433 sporadic and
BRCA1-associated breast carcinomas on tissue microarrays. RNA-seq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was used to confirm differences in VGLL1 and miR-934
expression in different breast cancer subtypes, and to correlate their expression
with that of other genes and miRNAs. Of 28 miRNAs differentially expressed in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative grade 3 breast carcinomas,
miR-934 was most strongly upregulated in ER-negative carcinomas, and its
expression was correlated with that of VGLL1. Nuclear VGLL1 expression was
observed in 13% of sporadic breast carcinomas, and while VGLL1 was only
occasionally found in luminal A (0.70%) and B (5.60%) carcinomas, it was often
expressed in HER2-positive (17%), triple-negative (TN) breast carcinomas (>40%)
and BRCA1-associated TN carcinomas (>50%). These findings were confirmed in the
TCGA dataset, which revealed positive associations with luminal progenitor genes 
(GABRP, SLC6A14, FOXC1, PROM1, and BBOX1) and strong negative correlations with
ER-associated genes (ESR1, C6ORF211, GATA3, and FOXA1). Moreover, VGLL1
expression was associated with reduced overall survival. In conclusion, VGLL1 and
miR-934 are mainly expressed in sporadic and BRCA1-associated TN basal-like
breast carcinomas, and their coordinated expression, at least partially mediated 
by the direct modulation of ESR1, might be involved in the maintenance of a
luminal progenitor phenotype.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genome Biol. 2014 May 23;15(5):R71. doi: 10.1186/gb-2014-15-5-r71.

A shared transcriptional program in early breast neoplasias despite genetic and
clinical distinctions.

Brunner AL, Li J, Guo X, Sweeney RT, Varma S, Zhu SX, Li R, Tibshirani R, West
RB.

BACKGROUND: The earliest recognizable stages of breast neoplasia are lesions that
represent a heterogeneous collection of epithelial proliferations currently
classified based on morphology. Their role in the development of breast cancer is
not well understood but insight into the critical events at this early stage will
improve efforts in breast cancer detection and prevention. These microscopic
lesions are technically difficult to study so very little is known about their
molecular alterations.
RESULTS: To characterize the transcriptional changes of early breast neoplasia,
we sequenced 3'- end enriched RNAseq libraries from formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded tissue of early neoplasia samples and matched normal breast and
carcinoma samples from 25 patients. We find that gene expression patterns within 
early neoplasias are distinct from both normal and breast cancer patterns and
identify a pattern of pro-oncogenic changes, including elevated transcription of 
ERBB2, FOXA1, and GATA3 at this early stage. We validate these findings on a
second independent gene expression profile data set generated by whole
transcriptome sequencing. Measurements of protein expression by
immunohistochemistry on an independent set of early neoplasias confirms that ER
pathway regulators FOXA1 and GATA3, as well as ER itself, are consistently
upregulated at this early stage. The early neoplasia samples also demonstrate
coordinated changes in long non-coding RNA expression and microenvironment
stromal gene expression patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first examination of global gene expression in
early breast neoplasia, and the genes identified here represent candidate
participants in the earliest molecular events in the development of breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4072957
PMID: 24887547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Commun. 2014 May 30;5:3972. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4972.

Cooperativity and equilibrium with FOXA1 define the androgen receptor
transcriptional program.

Jin HJ(1), Zhao JC(1), Wu L(1), Kim J(1), Yu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. (2)1]
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA [2] Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The pioneering factor FOXA1 opens chromatin to facilitate androgen receptor (AR) 
binding to prostate-specific genes. How FOXA1 controls the AR cistrome, however, 
is incompletely understood. Here we show that AR directly binds chromatin through
the androgen response elements (AREs). FOXA1 is not required for AR-chromatin
interaction, but instrumental in recruiting AR to low-affinity half-AREs by
opening local chromatin around adjacent FKHD sites. Too much FOXA1 creates
excessive open chromatin regions, which serve as reservoirs that retain AR via
abundant half-AREs, thereby reducing its availability for specific sites. FOXA1
downregulation, by contrast, relinquishes AR to permissively bind AREs across the
genome, resulting in substantial AR-binding events and AR target gene expression 
even in the absence of androgen. Taken together, our data illustrate the
mechanistic details by which cooperativity and equilibrium with FOXA1 define AR
cistrome and reveal a previously unknown function of FOXA1 in inhibiting AR
signalling and castration-resistant prostate cancer growth.

PMCID: PMC4088269
PMID: 24875621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1242. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.224.

Tip30 controls differentiation of murine mammary luminal progenitor to estrogen
receptor-positive luminal cell through regulating FoxA1 expression.

Chen F(1), Li A(1), Gao S(2), Hollern D(3), Williams M(4), Liu F(5), VanSickle
EA(3), Andrechek E(3), Zhang C(3), Yang C(3), Luo R(6), Xiao H(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 
[2] Cancer Center, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China [3] Traditional 
Chinese Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Southern Medical University, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)1] Department of Physiology, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI, USA [2] Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.
(4)1] Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA 
[2] Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
MI, USA. (5)1] Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
MI, USA [2] Traditional Chinese Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (6)1] Cancer Center,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China [2] Traditional Chinese
Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Southern Medical University, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.

Estrogen receptor-alpha positive (ER(+)) breast cancers comprise the majority of 
human breast cancers, but molecular mechanisms underlying this subtype of breast 
cancers remain poorly understood. Here, we show that ER(+) mammary luminal tumors
arising in Tip30(-/-)MMTV-Neu mice exhibited increased enrichment of luminal
progenitor gene signature. Deletion of the Tip30 gene increased proportion of
mammary stem and progenitor cell populations, and raised susceptibility to ER(+) 
mammary luminal tumors in female Balb/c mice. Moreover, Tip30(-/-) luminal
progenitors displayed increases in propensity to differentiate to mature ER(+)
luminal cells and FoxA1 expression. Knockdown of FoxA1 expression in Tip30(-/-)
progenitors by shRNA specific for FoxA1 reduced their differentiation toward
ER(+) mature luminal cells. Taken together, our results suggest that TIP30 is a
key regulator for maintaining ER(+) and ER(-)luminal pools in the mammary luminal
lineage, and loss of it promotes expansion of ER(+) luminal progenitors and
mature cells and ER(+) mammary tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4047867
PMID: 24853420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS One. 2014 May 21;9(5):e98069. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098069. eCollection
2014.

Switch in FOXA1 status associates with endometrial cancer progression.

Tangen IL(1), Krakstad C(1), Halle MK(1), Werner HM(1), Oyan AM(2), Kusonmano
K(3), Petersen K(4), Kalland KH(2), Akslen LA(5), Trovik J(1), Hurtado A(6),
Salvesen HB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Science, University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (2)Center for Cancer Biomarkers, Department 
of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Department of
Microbiology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (3)Center for Cancer
Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;
Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway; Computational Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(4)Computational Biology Unit, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. (5)Center
for Cancer Biomarkers, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway; Department of Pathology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen,
Norway. (6)Breast Cancer Research group, Centre for Molecular Medicine Norway,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is suggested to be
important in hormone dependent cancers, although with little data for endometrial
cancer. We investigated expression levels of FOXA1 in primary and metastatic
endometrial cancer in relation to clinical phenotype, and transcriptional
alterations related to FOXA1 status.
METHODS: Protein expression of FOXA1 was explored by immunohistochemistry in 529 
primary and 199 metastatic endometrial carcinoma lesions. mRNA levels from
corresponding 158 fresh frozen primary and 42 metastatic lesions were analyzed
using Agilent Microarrays (44k) in parallel.
RESULTS: Low FOXA1 protein expression in primary tumors significantly correlated 
with low FOXA1 mRNA, high age, non-endometrioid histology, high grade, loss of
ERa and PR and poor survival (all p-values <0.05). Through a Connectivity Map
search, HDAC inhibitors were suggested as potential treatment for patients with
low FOXA1 expression. An increase in FOXA1 expression was observed from primary
to metastatic lesions and it correlated with CDKN2A expression in metastases.
CONCLUSION: Low FOXA1 is associated with poor survival and suggests a potential
for HDAC inhibitors in endometrial carcinoma. A switch in FOXA1 expression from
primary to metastatic lesions is observed and gene expression indicates a link
between FOXA1 and CDKN2A in metastatic lesions.

PMCID: PMC4029819
PMID: 24849812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochem J. 2014 Sep 1;462(2):315-27. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140174.

HEXIM1 plays a critical role in the inhibition of the androgen receptor by
anti-androgens.

Yeh IJ(1), Song K(2), Wittmann BM(1), Bai X(3), Danielpour D(2), Montano MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, U.S.A. (2)Division of General Medical Science-Oncology, Case
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, U.S.A. (3)Center for RNA Biology, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland, OH 44106, U.S.A.

We show that HEXIM1 (hexamethylene bis-acetamide inducible 1) functions as an AR 
(androgen receptor) co-repressor as it physically interacts with the AR and is
required for the ability of anti-androgens to inhibit androgen-induced target
gene expression and cell proliferation. Oncomine database and IHC
(immunohistochemistry) analyses of human prostate tissues revealed that
expression of HEXIM1 mRNA and protein are down-regulated during the development
and progression of prostate cancer. Enforced down-regulation of HEXIM1 in
parental hormone-dependent LNCaP cells results in resistance to the inhibitory
action of anti-androgens. Conversely, ectopic expression of HEXIM1 in the CRPC
(castration-resistant prostate cancer) cell line, C4-2, enhances their
sensitivity to the repressive effects of the anti-androgen bicalutamide. Novel
insight into the mechanistic basis for HEXIM1 inhibition of AR activity is
provided by the present studies showing that HEXIM1 induces expression of the
histone demethylase KDM5B (lysine-specific demethylase 5B) and inhibits histone
methylation, resulting in the inhibition of FOXA1 (forkhead box A1) licensing
activity. This is a new mechanism of action attributed to HEXIM1, and distinct
from what has been reported so far to be involved in HEXIM1 regulation of other
nuclear hormone receptors, including the oestrogen receptor.

PMID: 24844355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Lab Invest. 2014 Jul;94(7):726-39. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.64. Epub 2014 May 
19.

FOXA1 deletion in luminal epithelium causes prostatic hyperplasia and alteration 
of differentiated phenotype.

DeGraff DJ(1), Grabowska MM(2), Case TC(2), Yu X(2), Herrick MK(2), Hayward
WJ(2), Strand DW(2), Cates JM(3), Hayward SW(2), Gao N(4), Walter MA(5), Buttyan 
R(6), Yi Y(7), Kaestner KH(8), Matusik RJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, PA, USA.
(2)Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA.
(5)Department Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, USA.
(6)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, USA. (7)Institute for Integrative
Genomics and Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)1] Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, PA, USA
[2] Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA [3] Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

The forkhead box (Fox) superfamily of transcription factors has essential roles
in organogenesis and tissue differentiation. Foxa1 and Foxa2 are expressed during
prostate budding and ductal morphogenesis, whereas Foxa1 expression is retained
in adult prostate epithelium. Previous characterization of prostatic tissue
rescued from embryonic Foxa1 knockout mice revealed Foxa1 to be essential for
ductal morphogenesis and epithelial maturation. However, it is unknown whether
Foxa1 is required to maintain the differentiated status in adult prostate
epithelium. Here, we employed the PBCre4 transgenic system and determined the
impact of prostate-specific Foxa1 deletion in adult murine epithelium.
PBCre4/Foxa1(loxp/loxp) mouse prostates showed progressive florid hyperplasia
with extensive cribriform patterning, with the anterior prostate being most
affected. Immunohistochemistry studies show mosaic Foxa1 KO consistent with
PBCre4 activity, with Foxa1 KO epithelial cells specifically exhibiting altered
cell morphology, increased proliferation, and elevated expression of basal cell
markers. Castration studies showed that, while PBCre4/Foxa1(loxp/loxp) prostates 
did not exhibit altered sensitivity in response to hormone ablation compared with
control prostates, the number of Foxa1-positive cells in mosaic Foxa1 KO
prostates was significantly reduced compared with Foxa1-negative cells following 
castration. Unexpectedly, gene expression profile analyses revealed that Foxa1
deletion caused abnormal expression of seminal vesicle-associated genes in KO
prostates. In summary, these results indicate Foxa1 expression is required for
the maintenance of prostatic cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4451837
PMID: 24840332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 May 15;10(5):e1003598. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003598. 
eCollection 2014.

Inference of RNA polymerase II transcription dynamics from chromatin
immunoprecipitation time course data.

wa Maina C(1), Honkela A(2), Matarese F(3), Grote K(4), Stunnenberg HG(3), Reid
G(5), Lawrence ND(6), Rattray M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Dedan Kimathi University 
of Technology, Nyeri, Kenya. (2)Helsinki Institute for Information Technology
HIIT, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. 
(3)Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (4)Genomatix Software GmbH, Muenchen, Germany.
(5)Institute for Molecular Biology, Mainz, Germany. (6)Department of Computer
Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (7)Faculty of Life
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Gene transcription mediated by RNA polymerase II (pol-II) is a key step in gene
expression. The dynamics of pol-II moving along the transcribed region influence 
the rate and timing of gene expression. In this work, we present a probabilistic 
model of transcription dynamics which is fitted to pol-II occupancy time course
data measured using ChIP-Seq. The model can be used to estimate transcription
speed and to infer the temporal pol-II activity profile at the gene promoter.
Model parameters are estimated using either maximum likelihood estimation or via 
Bayesian inference using Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling. The Bayesian approach
provides confidence intervals for parameter estimates and allows the use of
priors that capture domain knowledge, e.g. the expected range of transcription
speeds, based on previous experiments. The model describes the movement of pol-II
down the gene body and can be used to identify the time of induction for
transcriptionally engaged genes. By clustering the inferred promoter activity
time profiles, we are able to determine which genes respond quickly to stimuli
and group genes that share activity profiles and may therefore be co-regulated.
We apply our methodology to biological data obtained using ChIP-seq to measure
pol-II occupancy genome-wide when MCF-7 human breast cancer cells are treated
with estradiol (E2). The transcription speeds we obtain agree with those obtained
previously for smaller numbers of genes with the advantage that our approach can 
be applied genome-wide. We validate the biological significance of the pol-II
promoter activity clusters by investigating cluster-specific transcription factor
binding patterns and determining canonical pathway enrichment. We find that
rapidly induced genes are enriched for both estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) and
FOXA1 binding in their proximal promoter regions.

PMCID: PMC4022483
PMID: 24830797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Genes (Basel). 2014 May 12;5(2):366-84. doi: 10.3390/genes5020366.

Characterization of the genomic architecture and mutational spectrum of a small
cell prostate carcinoma.

Scott AF(1), Mohr DW(2), Ling H(3), Scharpf RB(4), Zhang P(5), Liptak GS(6).

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. afscott@jhmi.edu.
(2)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. dwmohr@jhmi.edu.
(3)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. hling1@jhmi.edu. (4)Department of
Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. 
rscharpf@jhsph.edu. (5)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
pzhang13@jhmi.edu. (6)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Upstate Medical Center,
Golisano Children's Hospital, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA. gliptak@rochester.rr.com.

We present the use of a series of laboratory, analytical and interpretation
methods to investigate personalized cancer care for a case of small cell prostate
carcinoma (SCPC), a rare and aggressive tumor with poor prognosis, for which the 
underlying genomic architecture and mutational spectrum has not been well
characterized. We performed both SNP genotyping and exome sequencing of a Virchow
node metastasis from a patient with SCPC. A variety of methods were used to
analyze and interpret the tumor genome for copy number variation, loss of
heterozygosity (LOH), somatic mosaicism and mutations in genes from known cancer 
pathways. The combination of genotyping and exome sequencing approaches provided 
more information than either technique alone. The results showed widespread
evidence of copy number changes involving most chromosomes including the possible
loss of both alleles of CDKN1B (p27/Kip1). LOH was observed for the regions
encompassing the tumor suppressors TP53, RB1, and CHD1. Predicted damaging
somatic mutations were observed in the retained TP53 and RB1 alleles. Mutations
in other genes that may be functionally relevant were noted, especially the
recently reported high confidence cancer drivers FOXA1 and CCAR1. The disruption 
of multiple cancer drivers underscores why SCPC may be such a difficult cancer to
manage.

PMCID: PMC4094938
PMID: 24823478  [PubMed]


163. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Aug 15;326(2):326-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.04.020. Epub
2014 May 5.

Foxa1 contributes to the repression of Nanog expression by recruiting Grg3 during
the differentiation of pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Chen T(1), He S(1), Zhang Z(1), Gao W(1), Yu L(2), Tan Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan
University, Hunan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and
Chemometrics, College of Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry
and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University, Hunan, China. Electronic address:
yulihnbme@hnu.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and
Chemometrics, College of Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry
and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University, Hunan, China. Electronic address:
yjtan@hnu.edu.cn.

Transcription factor Foxa1 plays a critical role during neural differentiation
and is induced immediately after retinoic acid (RA)-initiated differentiation of 
pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma cells, correlated with the downregulated
expression of pluripotency-related genes such as Nanog. To study whether Foxa1
participates in the repression of pluripotency factors, we expressed Foxa1
ectopically in P19 cells and identified that Nanog was repressed directly by
Foxa1. We confirmed that Foxa1 was able to interact with Grg3, which is a
transcriptional corepressor that expresses in P19 cells as well as during
RA-induced P19 cell differentiation. Knockdown of Foxa1 or Grg3 delayed the
downregulation of Nanog expression during RA-induced P19 cell differentiation.
Furthermore, we found that Foxa1 recruited Grg3 to the Nanog promoter -2kb
upstream region and switched the promoter to an inactive chromatin status
represented by typical modifications in histone H3. Together, our results
suggested a critical involvement of Foxa1 in the negative regulation of Nanog
expression during the differentiation of pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24803390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 20;289(25):17620-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570853. Epub
2014 May 6.

Histone demethylase jumonji AT-rich interactive domain 1B (JARID1B) controls
mammary gland development by regulating key developmental and lineage
specification genes.

Zou MR(1), Cao J(1), Liu Z(1), Huh SJ(2), Polyak K(3), Yan Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, and. (3)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, and
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138. (4)From the
Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
qin.yan@yale.edu.

The JmjC domain-containing H3K4 histone demethylase jumonji AT-rich interactive
domain 1B (JARID1B) (also known as KDM5B and PLU1) is overexpressed in breast
cancer and is a potential target for breast cancer treatment. To investigate the 
in vivo function of JARID1B, we developed Jarid1b(-/-) mice and characterized
their phenotypes in detail. Unlike previously reported Jarid1b(-/-) strains, the 
majority of these Jarid1b(-/-) mice were viable beyond embryonic and neonatal
stages. This allowed us to further examine phenotypes associated with the loss of
JARID1B in pubertal development and pregnancy. These Jarid1b(-/-) mice exhibited 
decreased body weight, premature mortality, decreased female fertility, and
delayed mammary gland development. Related to these phenotypes, JARID1B loss
decreased serum estrogen level and reduced mammary epithelial cell proliferation 
in early puberty. In mammary epithelial cells, JARID1B loss diminished the
expression of key regulators for mammary morphogenesis and luminal lineage
specification, including FOXA1 and estrogen receptor a. Mechanistically, JARID1B 
was required for GATA3 recruitment to the Foxa1 promoter to activate Foxa1
expression. These results indicate that JARID1B positively regulates mammary
ductal development through both extrinsic and cell-autonomous mechanisms.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4067197
PMID: 24802759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;28(6):949-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1213. Epub 2014 May
6.

NFI transcription factors interact with FOXA1 to regulate prostate-specific gene 
expression.

Grabowska MM(1), Elliott AD, DeGraff DJ, Anderson PD, Anumanthan G, Yamashita H, 
Sun Q, Friedman DB, Hachey DL, Yu X, Sheehan JH, Ahn JM, Raj GV, Piston DW,
Gronostajski RM, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery (M.M.G., G.A. H.Y., Q.S., X.Y., R.J.M.),
Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics (A.D.E., D.W.P.), and
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center (R.J.M.), Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232; Department of Pathology (D.J.D.), Penn State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033; Department of
Biological Sciences (P.D.A.), Salisbury University, Salisbury, Maryland 21801;
Mass Spectrometry Research Center (D.B.F., D.L.H.), Department of Biochemistry,
Department of Biochemistry and Center for Structural Biology (J.H.S.), and
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology (R.J.M.), Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232; Department of Chemistry (J.-M.A.), University of
Texas Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75080; Department of Urology (G.V.R.), University of 
Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas 75390; and Department of Biochemistry (R.M.G.),
Developmental Genomics Group, NY State Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and
Life Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14203.

Androgen receptor (AR) action throughout prostate development and in maintenance 
of the prostatic epithelium is partly controlled by interactions between AR and
forkhead box (FOX) transcription factors, particularly FOXA1. We sought to
identity additional FOXA1 binding partners that may mediate prostate-specific
gene expression. Here we identify the nuclear factor I (NFI) family of
transcription factors as novel FOXA1 binding proteins. All four family members
(NFIA, NFIB, NFIC, and NFIX) can interact with FOXA1, and knockdown studies in
androgen-dependent LNCaP cells determined that modulating expression of NFI
family members results in changes in AR target gene expression. This effect is
probably mediated by binding of NFI family members to AR target gene promoters,
because chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies found that NFIB bound to the
prostate-specific antigen enhancer. Förster resonance energy transfer studies
revealed that FOXA1 is capable of bringing AR and NFIX into proximity, indicating
that FOXA1 facilitates the AR and NFI interaction by bridging the complex. To
determine the extent to which NFI family members regulate AR/FOXA1 target genes, 
motif analysis of publicly available data for ChIP followed by sequencing was
undertaken. This analysis revealed that 34.4% of peaks bound by AR and FOXA1
contain NFI binding sites. Validation of 8 of these peaks by ChIP revealed that
NFI family members can bind 6 of these predicted genomic elements, and 4 of the 8
associated genes undergo gene expression changes as a result of individual NFI
knockdown. These observations suggest that NFI regulation of FOXA1/AR action is a
frequent event, with individual family members playing distinct roles in AR
target gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4042066
PMID: 24801505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 22;14:278. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-278.

Breast tumor specific mutation in GATA3 affects physiological mechanisms
regulating transcription factor turnover.

Adomas AB, Grimm SA, Malone C, Takaku M, Sims JK, Wade PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, 111 T,W, Alexander Dr, 27709 Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
wadep2@niehs.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA3 is a favorable prognostic indicator in
estrogen receptor-a (ERa)-positive breast tumors in which it participates with
ERa and FOXA1 in a complex transcriptional regulatory program driving tumor
growth. GATA3 mutations are frequent in breast cancer and have been classified as
driver mutations. To elucidate the contribution(s) of GATA3 alterations to
cancer, we studied two breast cancer cell lines, MCF7, which carries a
heterozygous frameshift mutation in the second zinc finger of GATA3, and T47D,
wild-type at this locus.
METHODS: Immunofluorescence staining and subcellular fractionation were employed 
to verify cellular localization of GATA3 in T47D and MCF7 cells. To test protein 
stability, cells were treated with translation inhibitor, cycloheximide or
proteasome inhibitor, MG132, and GATA3 abundance was measured over time using
immunoblot. GATA3 turn-over in response to hormone was determined by treating the
cells with estradiol or ERa agonist, ICI 182,780. DNA binding ability of
recombinant GATA3 was evaluated using electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
heparin chromatography. Genomic location of GATA3 in MCF7 and T47D cells was
assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with next-generation sequencing
(ChIP-seq).
RESULTS: GATA3 localized in the nucleus in T47D and MCF7 cells, regardless of the
mutation status. The truncated protein in MCF7 had impaired interaction with
chromatin and was easily released from the nucleus. Recombinant mutant GATA3 was 
able to bind DNA to a lesser degree than the wild-type protein. Heterozygosity
for the truncating mutation conferred protection from regulated turnover of
GATA3, ERa and FOXA1 following estrogen stimulation in MCF7 cells. Thus, mutant
GATA3 uncoupled protein-level regulation of master regulatory transcription
factors from hormone action. Consistent with increased protein stability,
ChIP-seq profiling identified greater genome-wide accumulation of GATA3 in MCF7
cells bearing the mutation, albeit with a similar distribution across the genome,
comparing to T47D cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that this specific, cancer-derived mutation in GATA3
deregulates physiologic protein turnover, stabilizes GATA3 binding across the
genome and modulates the response of breast cancer cells to estrogen signaling.

PMCID: PMC4021073
PMID: 24758297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 15;9(4):e93873. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093873. eCollection
2014.

CMT: a constrained multi-level thresholding approach for ChIP-Seq data analysis.

Rezaeian I(1), Rueda L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Computer Science, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, Canada.

Genome-wide profiling of DNA-binding proteins using ChIP-Seq has emerged as an
alternative to ChIP-chip methods. ChIP-Seq technology offers many advantages over
ChIP-chip arrays, including but not limited to less noise, higher resolution, and
more coverage. Several algorithms have been developed to take advantage of these 
abilities and find enriched regions by analyzing ChIP-Seq data. However, the
complexity of analyzing various patterns of ChIP-Seq signals still needs the
development of new algorithms. Most current algorithms use various heuristics to 
detect regions accurately. However, despite how many formulations are available, 
it is still difficult to accurately determine individual peaks corresponding to
each binding event. We developed Constrained Multi-level Thresholding (CMT), an
algorithm used to detect enriched regions on ChIP-Seq data. CMT employs a
constraint-based module that can target regions within a specific range. We show 
that CMT has higher accuracy in detecting enriched regions (peaks) by objectively
assessing its performance relative to other previously proposed peak finders.
This is shown by testing three algorithms on the well-known FoxA1 Data set, four 
transcription factors (with a total of six antibodies) for Drosophila
melanogaster and the H3K4ac antibody dataset.

PMCID: PMC3988018
PMID: 24736605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2014 Jun;31(5):565-72. doi: 10.1007/s10585-014-9650-9. Epub 
2014 Apr 1.

Molecular response of the axillary lymph node microenvironment to metastatic
colonization.

Valente AL(1), Kane JL, Ellsworth DL, Shriver CD, Ellsworth RE.

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, 620 Seventh Street, Windber, PA, 15963, USA.

Breast stroma plays an active role in tumorigenesis, undergoing both phenotypic
and molecular changes that facilitate and promote tumor development and growth.
The metastatic microenvironment also plays a role in successful colonization;
however, genetic changes in these secondary microenvironments are not well
described. To improve understanding of molecular changes associated with
metastatic colonization, gene expression patterns from lymph node tissues from
women with at least one positive, as well as one negative node, were compared.
Lymph node tissue was microdissected and hybridized to U133A 2.0 gene expression 
arrays. Differential expression was detected using Partek(®) Genomics Suite 6.6 
with FDR <0.05 and >2-fold change defining significance. Twenty-two genes were
differentially expressed, 14 genes, including AZGP1, FOXA1 and PIP, were
expressed at significantly higher levels in colonized lymph nodes and eight
genes, such as CXCL2 and HPGDS, were expressed at significantly higher levels in 
non-metastatic lymph nodes. Thus, lymph node tissues harboring metastases have
different gene expression patterns from those without metastases. Many
differentially expressed genes are involved in cellular proliferation and
survival, immune function and mesenchymal-epithelial transition, suggesting that 
repression of immune response and restoration of an epithelial phenotype in the
host tissue are critical for successful establishment of lymph node metastases.

PMID: 24687565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 1;111(13):4892-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315445111. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Genome-wide activity of unliganded estrogen receptor-a in breast cancer cells.

Caizzi L(1), Ferrero G, Cutrupi S, Cordero F, Ballaré C, Miano V, Reineri S,
Ricci L, Friard O, Testori A, Corà D, Caselle M, Di Croce L, De Bortoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Systems Biology, University of Turin, 10043 Orbassano,
Turin, Italy.

Estrogen receptor-a (ERa) has central role in hormone-dependent breast cancer and
its ligand-induced functions have been extensively characterized. However,
evidence exists that ERa has functions that are independent of ligands. In the
present work, we investigated the binding of ERa to chromatin in the absence of
ligands and its functions on gene regulation. We demonstrated that in MCF7 breast
cancer cells unliganded ERa binds to more than 4,000 chromatin sites.
Unexpectedly, although almost entirely comprised in the larger group of
estrogen-induced binding sites, we found that unliganded-ERa binding is
specifically linked to genes with developmental functions, compared with
estrogen-induced binding. Moreover, we found that siRNA-mediated down-regulation 
of ERa in absence of estrogen is accompanied by changes in the expression levels 
of hundreds of coding and noncoding RNAs. Down-regulated mRNAs showed enrichment 
in genes related to epithelial cell growth and development. Stable ERa
down-regulation using shRNA, which caused cell growth arrest, was accompanied by 
increased H3K27me3 at ERa binding sites. Finally, we found that FOXA1 and AP2<U+03B3>
binding to several sites is decreased upon ERa silencing, suggesting that
unliganded ERa participates, together with other factors, in the maintenance of
the luminal-specific cistrome in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3977241
PMID: 24639548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):236-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.3493.

A Fox of a different color: FoxA1 programs a new regulatory T cell subset.

Delgoffe GM(1), Vignali DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):272-82.

PMID: 24603791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2014 Apr;141(7):1514-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.102426. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

A secretory cell type develops alongside multiciliated cells, ionocytes and
goblet cells, and provides a protective, anti-infective function in the frog
embryonic mucociliary epidermis.

Dubaissi E(1), Rousseau K, Lea R, Soto X, Nardeosingh S, Schweickert A, Amaya E, 
Thornton DJ, Papalopulu N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, University of Manchester,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

The larval epidermis of Xenopus is a bilayered epithelium, which is an excellent 
model system for the study of the development and function of mucosal and
mucociliary epithelia. Goblet cells develop in the outer layer while
multiciliated cells and ionocytes sequentially intercalate from the inner to the 
outer layer. Here, we identify and characterise a fourth cell type, the small
secretory cell (SSC). We show that the development of these cells is controlled
by the transcription factor Foxa1 and that they intercalate into the outer layer 
of the epidermis relatively late, at the same time as embryonic hatching.
Ultrastructural and molecular characterisation shows that these cells have an
abundance of large apical secretory vesicles, which contain highly glycosylated
material, positive for binding of the lectin, peanut agglutinin, and an antibody 
to the carbohydrate epitope, HNK-1. By specifically depleting SSCs, we show that 
these cells are crucial for protecting the embryo against bacterial infection.
Mass spectrometry studies show that SSCs secrete a glycoprotein similar to
Otogelin, which may form the structural component of a mucus-like protective
layer, over the surface of the embryo, and several potential antimicrobial
substances. Our study completes the characterisation of all the epidermal cell
types in the early tadpole epidermis and reinforces the suitability of this
system for the in vivo study of complex epithelia, including investigation of
innate immune defences.

PMCID: PMC3957375
PMID: 24598166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Anticancer Res. 2014 Mar;34(3):1307-19.

Cell identity disruption in breast cancer precursors.

Coradini D(1), Boracchi P, Oriana S, Biganzoli E, Ambrogi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Community Health Sciences, Medical Statistics,
Biometry and Bioinformatics, University of Milan, Via Vanzetti 5, 20133, Milan,
Italy. danila.coradini@yahoo.it.

BACKGROUND: Mammary epithelial cell identity depends on a set of genes
epigenetically-regulated by maintenance proteins, the best-characterized of which
belong to the Trithorax and Polycomb groups. Perturbations in expression of these
proteins may disrupt cell identity and trigger tumor initiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The pattern of expression of a panel of genes involved in 
control of cell identity and mammary gland remodeling was investigated in two
precancerous lesions, atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) and ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) and compared to the corresponding histologically normal tissue.
RESULTS: ADH and DCIS showed a close association in overexpression of Polycomb
complex components, silencing of Homeobox A (HOXA) cluster gene, and
overexpression of the genes involved in estrogen signaling, specifically,
forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) pioneer factors, and
estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1).
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that disruption of epigenetic
control is associated with loss of cell identity and acquisition of a
constitutive estrogen-dependent terminally-differentiated luminal phenotype.

PMID: 24596378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Anticancer Res. 2014 Mar;34(3):1261-7.

Overexpression of androgen receptor and forkhead-box A1 protein in apocrine
breast carcinoma.

Sasahara M(1), Matsui A, Ichimura Y, Hirakata Y, Murata Y, Marui E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, National Hospital Organization, Tokyo Medical
Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan.
matsuiakira@kankakuki.go.jp.

AIM: Apocrine breast carcinoma often lacks estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone
receptor (PgR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor type-2 (HER2)
expression. Accordingly, development of a new treatment strategy is important for
this type of cancer. The growth stimulus through the androgen receptor (AR) can
be a candidate for targeted treatment. Therefore, we examined the factors related
to AR transcription.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We immunohistochemically evaluated 54 apocrine cancer
lesions for ER, PgR, AR, HER2, Ki-67, forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1), and
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) expression.
RESULTS: ER, PgR, and HER2 were expressed at a low level, thus 44 out of 54
(81.4%) cases were of triple-negative breast cancer. AR, PSA and FOXA1 were
expressed in 100% (54/54), 48% (26/54) and 93% (50/54) of cases, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Most of apocrine breast carcinomas were
immunohistochemically-positive for AR and FOXA1. Anti-androgenic therapies can
potentially serve as a cancer-targeting therapy for apocrine breast carcinoma.

PMID: 24596370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Apr;14(4):210. doi: 10.1038/nri3643. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Regulatory T cells: mind control.

Bordon Y.

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):272-82.

PMID: 24577439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. BMC Bioinformatics. 2014;15 Suppl 2:S10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-15-S2-S10. Epub
2014 Jan 24.

Transcriptional regulation prediction of antiestrogen resistance in breast cancer
based on RNA polymerase II binding data.

Zhang D, Wang G, Wang Y.

BACKGROUND: Although endocrine therapy impedes estrogen-ER signaling pathway and 
thus reduces breast cancer mortality, patients remain at continued risk of
relapse after tamoxifen or other endocrine therapies. Understanding the
mechanisms of endocrine resistance, particularly the role of transcriptional
regulation is very important and necessary.
METHODS: We propose a two-step workflow based on linear model to investigate the 
significant differences between MCF7 and OHT cells stimulated by 17ß-estradiol
(E2) respect to regulatory transcription factors (TFs) and their interactions. We
additionally compared predicted regulatory TFs based on RNA polymerase II (PolII)
binding quantity data and gene expression data, which were taken from
MCF7/MCF7+E2 and OHT/OHT+E2 cell lines following the same analysis workflow.
Enrichment analysis concerning diseases and cell functions and regulatory pattern
analysis of different motifs of the same TF also were performed.
RESULTS: The results showed PolII data could provide more information and predict
more recognizably important regulatory TFs. Large differences in TF regulatory
mode were found between two cell lines. Through verified through GO annotation,
enrichment analysis and related literature regarding these TFs, we found some
regulatory TFs such as AP-1, C/EBP, FoxA1, GATA1, Oct-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B, maintained OHT
cells through molecular interactions or signaling pathways that were different
from the surviving MCF7 cells. From TF regulatory interaction network, we
identified E2F, E2F-1 and AP-2 as hub-TFs in MCF7 cells; whereas, in addition to 
E2F and E2F-1, we identified C/EBP and Oct-1 as hub-TFs in OHT cells. Notably, we
found the regulatory patterns of different motifs of the same TF were very
different from one another sometimes.
CONCLUSIONS: We inferred some regulatory TFs, such as AP-1 and NF-<U+03BA>B, cooperated 
with ER through both genomic action and non-genomic action. The TFs that were
involved in both protein-protein interactions and signaling pathways could be one
of the key resistant mechanisms of endocrine therapy and thus also could be new
treatment targets for endocrine resistance. Our flexible workflow could be
integrated into an existing analytical framework and guide biologists to further 
determine underlying mechanisms in human diseases.

PMCID: PMC4015922
PMID: 24564526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Apr;144(2):249-61. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-2867-0. 
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Differential expression of progesterone receptor, FOXA1, GATA3, and p53 between
pre- and postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Hosoda M(1), Yamamoto M, Nakano K, Hatanaka KC, Takakuwa E, Hatanaka Y, Matsuno
Y, Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Hokkaido University Hospital, Kita 14 Nishi 5,
Kita-ku, Sapporo, 060-8648, Japan.

Estrogen receptor (ER) is essential for estrogen-dependent growth, and its level 
of expression is considered a crucial determinant of response to endocrine
therapy and prognosis in ER-positive breast cancer. On the other hand, the
clinical role of progesterone receptor (PgR) in ER-positive breast cancer remains
controversial, although testing of PgR by immunohistochemistry (IHC) has become
routine. Recent studies indicated that plasma estradiol levels were related to
the expression levels of estrogen-responsive genes in ER-positive breast cancer
tissues in both pre- and postmenopausal women. In this study, we analyzed the
expression levels of estrogen-responsive genes (PgR and TFF1), a
progesterone-responsive gene (RANKL), ER-related genes (FOXA1 and GATA3), HER2,
Ki67 and p53 in ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer tissues by IHC.
Correlations between the expression levels of these molecular markers and
clinicopathological factors, including prognosis, were compared between pre- and 
postmenopausal women. Serum levels of estrone, estradiol, progesterone, and
testosterone were also measured. Expression levels of PgR, TFF1, RANKL, and GATA3
were significantly higher in premenopausal women than in postmenopausal women.
Serum estradiol levels were positively correlated with Ki67 labeling index (LI)
in premenopausal women, but not in postmenopausal women. High expression of FOXA1
and GATA3 was significantly associated with improved disease-free survival in
premenopausal women, but not in postmenopausal women, whereas high expression of 
PgR and low expression of p53 were significantly correlated with the improved
disease-free survival in postmenopausal women, but not in premenopausal women.
Moreover, the best cutoff points of Ki67 LI for disease-free survival were 30 %
for premenopausal women and 14 % for postmenopausal women. Expression levels of
ER, TFF1, and RANKL were not associated with the disease-free survival in either 
pre- or postmenopausal women. Our results suggest that the mechanisms of
development and estrogen-dependent growth of ER-positive breast cancer might
differ according to menopausal status.

PMID: 24549642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):272-82. doi: 10.1038/nm.3485. Epub 2014 Feb 16.

FoxA1 directs the lineage and immunosuppressive properties of a novel regulatory 
T cell population in EAE and MS.

Liu Y(1), Carlsson R(1), Comabella M(2), Wang J(1), Kosicki M(1), Carrion B(1),
Hasan M(1), Wu X(1), Montalban X(2), Dziegiel MH(3), Sellebjerg F(4), Sørensen
PS(4), Helin K(1), Issazadeh-Navikas S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de Catalunya (CEM-Cat),
Unitat de Neuroimmunologia Clínica, Hospital Universitari Vall d´Hebron
(HUVH)-Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Blood Bank,
Copenhagen University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Danish Multiple Sclerosis
Center, University of Copenhagen and Department of Neurology, Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Apr;14(4):210.
    Nat Med. 2014 Mar;20(3):236-7.

The defective generation or function of regulatory T (Treg) cells in autoimmune
disease contributes to chronic inflammation and tissue injury. We report the
identification of FoxA1 as a transcription factor in T cells that, after ectopic 
expression, confers suppressive properties in a newly identified Treg cell
population, herein called FoxA1(+) Treg cells. FoxA1 bound to the Pdl1 promoter, 
inducing programmed cell death ligand 1 (Pd-l1) expression, which was essential
for the FoxA1(+) Treg cells to kill activated T cells. FoxA1(+) Treg cells
develop primarily in the central nervous system in response to autoimmune
inflammation, have a distinct transcriptional profile and are
CD4(+)FoxA1(+)CD47(+)CD69(+)PD-L1(hi)FoxP3(-). Adoptive transfer of stable
FoxA1(+) Treg cells inhibited experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in a
FoxA1-and Pd-l1-dependent manner. The development of FoxA1(+) Treg cells is
induced by interferon-ß (IFN-ß) and requires T cell-intrinsic IFN-a/ß receptor
(Ifnar) signaling, as the frequency of FoxA1(+) Treg cells was reduced in
Ifnb(-/-) and Ifnar(-/-) mice. In individuals with relapsing-remitting multiple
sclerosis, clinical response to treatment with IFN-ß was associated with an
increased frequency of suppressive FoxA1(+) Treg cells in the blood. These
findings suggest that FoxA1 is a lineage-specification factor that is induced by 
IFN-ß and supports the differentiation and suppressive function of FoxA1(+) Treg 
cells.

PMID: 24531377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Biosci. 2014 Feb 17;4(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2045-3701-4-9.

Expression of a Y-located human proto-oncogene TSPY in a transgenic mouse model
of prostate cancer.

Kido T, Schubert S, Hatakeyama S, Ohyama C, Schmidtke J, Lau YF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Genetics, Department of Medicine, VA
Medical Center & Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, 4150
Clement Street, San Francisco, CA, USA. chris.lau@ucsf.edu.

BACKGROUND: The human TSPY is the putative gene for the gonadoblastoma locus on
the Y chromosome (GBY). Various molecular, pathological and transgenic mouse
studies suggest that TSPY is a Y-located proto-oncogene contributing to the
initiation/progression in human cancers, including germ cell tumors and various
somatic cancers, such as prostate and liver cancer, and melanoma. The TgTSPY9
transgenic mouse line harbors a 8.2-kb human TSPY structural gene, which is
tandemly integrated in the mouse Y chromosome, and expressed in a similar pattern
as that of the endogenous gene in the human genome. This mouse model of human
TSPY gene offers an opportunity to examine its behavior and potential
contribution in various mouse models of human diseases, such as human cancers. We
had investigated the expression of such TSPY-transgene in the LADY mouse model of
prostate cancer, harboring a SV40 T antigen gene directed by a rat probasin
promoter; and compared the expression pattern with those of endogenous TSPY gene 
and biomarkers in human prostate cancer specimens.
RESULTS: By introducing the Y-located TSPY-transgene to the LADY mice, we had
examined the expression pattern of the human TSPY during prostatic oncogenesis in
this mouse model of prostate cancer. Our results showed that the TSPY-transgene
was activated in selected areas of the hypercellular stroma but not in the
intraepithelial cells/neoplasia in the prostates of TgTSPY9/LADY mice. Using a
specific biomarker, FOXA1, for epithelial cells, we demonstrated that
TSPY-positive cells proliferated exclusively in the cancerous stroma in the LADY 
model at late stages of tumorigenesis. In contrast, in the human situation, TSPY 
was predominantly co-expressed with FOXA1 in the epithelial cells of PIN lesions 
and FOXA1 and another cancer biomarker, AMACR, in the adenocarcinoma cells in
clinical prostate cancer samples of various degrees of malignancy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that human TSPY could be abnormally activated during
prostatic oncogenesis, and could possibly contribute to the heterogeneity of
prostate cancer. The differential expression patterns of the human TSPY between
the LADY mouse model and clinical prostate cancer suggest potential limitations
of current mouse models for studies of either TSPY behavior in diseased
conditions or prostate cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3942074
PMID: 24528896  [PubMed]


179. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(1):11-6.

FOXA1: a promising prognostic marker in breast cancer.

Hu Q(1), Luo Z, Xu T, Zhang JY, Zhu Y, Chen WX, Zhong SL, Zhao JH, Tang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, China E-mail : 
doczhaojianhua@163.com, doctangjinhai@163.com.

Accurate diagnosis and proper monitoring of cancer patients remain important
obstacles for successful cancer treatment. The search for cancer biomarkers can
aid in more accurate prediction of clinical outcome and may also reveal novel
predictive factors and therapeutic targets. One such prognostic marker seems to
be FOXA1. Many studies have shown that FOXA1 is strongly expressed in a vast
majority of cancers, including breast cancer, in which high expression is
associated with a good prognosis. In this review, we summarize the role of this
transcription factor in the development and prognosis of breast cancer in the
hope of providing insights into utility of FOXA1 as a novel biomarker.

PMID: 24528009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. BMC Cancer. 2014 Feb 11;14:78. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-78.

FOXA1 promotes tumor cell proliferation through AR involving the Notch pathway in
endometrial cancer.

Qiu M, Bao W, Wang J, Yang T, He X, Liao Y, Wan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First People's Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Xinsongjiang Road, Shanghai,
China. wanxp@sjtu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests that forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is
frequently dysregulated in many types of human cancers. However, the exact
function and mechanism of FOXA1 in human endometrial cancer (EC) remains unclear.
METHODS: FOXA1 expression, androgen receptor (AR) expression, and the
relationships of these two markers with clinicopathological factors were
determined by immunohistochemistry analysis. FOXA1 and AR were up-regulated by
transient transfection with plasmids, and were down-regulated by transfection
with siRNA or short hairpin RNA (shRNA). The effects of FOXA1 depletion and FOXA1
overexpression on AR-mediated transcription as well as Notch pathway and their
impact on EC cell proliferation were examined by qRT-PCR, western blotting,
co-immunoprecipitation, ChIP-PCR, MTT, colony-formation, and xenograft
tumor-formation assays.
RESULTS: We found that the expression of FOXA1 and AR in ECs was significantly
higher than that in a typical hyperplasia and normal tissues. FOXA1 expression
was significantly correlated with AR expression in clinical tissues. High FOXA1
levels positively correlated with pathological grade and depth of myometrial
invasion in EC. High AR levels also positively correlated with pathological grade
in EC. Moreover, the expression of XBP1, MYC, ZBTB16, and UHRF1, which are
downstream targets of AR, was promoted by FOXA1 up-regulation or inhibited by
FOXA1 down-regulation. Co-immunoprecipitation showed that FOXA1 interacted with
AR in EC cells. ChIP-PCR assays showed that FOXA1 and AR could directly bind to
the promoter and enhancer regions upstream of MYC. Mechanistic investigation
revealed that over-expression of Notch1 and Hes1 proteins by FOXA1 could be
reversed by AR depletion. In addition, we showed that down-regulation of AR
attenuated FOXA1-up-regulated cell proliferation. However, AR didn't influence
the promotion effect of FOXA1 on cell migration and invasion. In vivo xenograft
model, FOXA1 knockdown reduced the rate of tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FOXA1 promotes cell proliferation by AR
and activates Notch pathway. It indicated that FOXA1 and AR may serve as
potential gene therapy in EC.

PMCID: PMC3926330
PMID: 24512546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Feb 28;445(1):48-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.108. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

The microRNA miR-17 regulates lung FoxA1 expression during
lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury.

Xu Z(1), Zhang C(2), Cheng L(3), Hu M(3), Tao H(3), Song L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiothoracic Surgery of the First Affiliated Hospital, Hunan University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan 41007, China. (2)University of
South China, College of Life Science, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan 410208, 
China. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hunan University of
Chinese Medicine, Changsha, Hunan 410208, China; Division of Stem Cell Regulation
and Application, State Key Laboratory of Chinese Medicine Powder and Medicine
Innovation in Hunan (Incubation), Hunan University of Chinese Medicine, Changsha,
Hunan 410208, China; University of South China, College of Life Science,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hengyang, Hunan 421001, China. 
Electronic address: songlan311492@163.com.

Acute lung injury (ALI) is a severe pulmonary disease that causes a high number
of fatalities worldwide. Studies have shown that FoxA1 expression is upregulated 
during ALI and may play an important role in ALI by promoting the apoptosis of
alveolar type II epithelial cells. However, the mechanism of FoxA1 overexpression
in ALI is unclear. In this study, an in vivo murine model of ALI and alveolar
type II epithelial cells injury was induced using lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS
upregulated FoxA1 in the lung tissue of the in vivo ALI model and in
LPS-challenged type II epithelial cells. In contrast, miR-17 was significantly
downregulated in these models. After miR-17 antagomir injection, the expression
of FoxA1 was significantly increased in ALI mice. MiR-17 mimics could
significantly inhibit FoxA1 mRNA and protein expression, whereas the miR-17
inhibitor could significantly increase FoxA1 mRNA and protein expression in
LPS-induced type II epithelial cells. Thus, our results suggest that the
downregulation of miR-17 expression could lead to FoxA1 overexpression in ALI.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24486549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Anal Chem. 2014 Mar 4;86(5):2361-70. doi: 10.1021/ac404241y. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Fast screening of ligand-protein interactions based on ligand-induced protein
stabilization of gold nanoparticles.

New SY(1), Aung KM, Lim GL, Hong S, Tan SK, Lu Y, Cheung E, Su X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (A*STAR) , 3 Research Link, 117602 Singapore.

High throughput screening of small molecular weight (LMW) ligands for protein and
sensitive determination of ligand-induced protein stabilization is an important
task in drug discovery and in protein structural and functional genomics studies.
In this study, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and their aggregation property are used
to develop a rapid and less equipment intensive assay for screening the
interactions between LMW ligands and transcription factors (TFs) and human serum 
albumin. The assay is based on the fact that the aggregation/discpersion status
of AuNPs is very sensitive to the conformation of surrounding proteins, and when 
a LMW ligand binds to the proteins, it can enhance proteins' salt and thermal
stability, and therefore the protective effect on AuNPs from aggregation. Two
TFs, i.e. FoxA1 (Forkhead box A1) and AP-2<U+03B3> (activating enhancer binding protein 
2 gamma), and 14 compounds from an NCI compounds library and human serum albumin 
(HSA) and three known ligands (ibuprofen, warfarin, and phenytoin) are involved
to demonstrate the concept and to prove its generality and robustness. With this 
AuNP method, two strong LMW binders are identified for FoxA1 and AP-2<U+03B3>; ligand
induced protein stabilization is determined. The results have been verified using
surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy (SPR) and differential static light
scattering (DSLS) techniques. Tryptophan fluorescent measurement is also
conducted to provide further information on protein conformational change upon
LMW ligand loading as can be observed from AuNPs' UV-vis spectra. FoxA1 and AP-2<U+03B3>
are pivotal in regulating the transcriptional activity of estrogen receptor alpha
and controlling the expression of estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells.
Identification of drug candidates targeting these two transcription factors could
be an alternative in treating breast cancer, in particular those that have become
endocrine resistance.

PMID: 24484401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Tissue Cell. 2014 Apr;46(2):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2013.12.006. Epub 2013
Dec 31.

Valproic acid promotes differentiation of hepatocyte-like cells from whole human 
umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

An SY(1), Han J(1), Lim HJ(1), Park SY(1), Kim JH(2), Do BR(2), Kim JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, HurimBioCell Inc., Seoul 157-793, Republic
of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College 
of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim@korea.ac.kr.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are mesoderm-derived cells that are considered a
good source of somatic cells for treatment of many degenerative diseases.
Previous studies have reported the differentiation of mesodermal MSCs into
endodermal and ectodermal cell types beyond their embryonic lineages, including
hepatocytes and neurons. However, the molecular pathways responsible for the
direct or indirect cell type conversion and the functional ability of the
differentiated cells remain unclear and need further research. In the present
study, we demonstrated that valproic acid (VPA), which is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, induced an increase in the expression of endodermal genes including
CXCR4, SOX17, FOXA1, FOXA2, GSC, c-MET, EOMES, and HNF-1ß in human umbilical cord
derived MSCs (hUCMSCs). In addition, we found that VPA is able to increase these 
endodermal genes in hUCMSCs by activating signal transduction of AKT and ERK. VPA
pretreatment increased hepatic differentiation at the expense of adipogenic
differentiation. The effects of VPA on modulating hUCMSCs fate were diminished by
blocking AKT and ERK activation using specific signaling inhibitors. Together,
our results suggest that VPA contributes to the lineage conversion of hUCMSCs to 
hepatic cell fate by upregulating the expression of endodermal genes through AKT 
and ERK activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Apr;88(4):967-82. doi: 10.1007/s00204-014-1197-7. Epub 2014
Jan 28.

A simple transcriptomic signature able to predict drug-induced hepatic steatosis.

Benet M(1), Moya M, Donato MT, Lahoz A, Hervás D, Guzmán C, Gómez-Lechón MJ,
Castell JV, Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad Mixta en Hepatología Experimental, IIS Hospital La Fe, Avenida de
Campanar, 21, 46009, Valencia, Spain.

It is estimated that only a few marketed drugs are able to directly induce liver 
steatosis. However, many other drugs may exacerbate or precipitate fatty liver in
the presence of other risk factors or in patients prone to non-alcoholic fatty
liver disease. On the other hand, current in vitro tests for drug-induced
steatosis in preclinical research are scarce and not very sensitive or
reproducible. In the present study, we have investigated the effect of
well-characterized steatotic drugs on the expression profile of 47 transcription 
factors (TFs) in human hepatoma HepG2 cells and found that these drugs are able
to up- and down-regulate a substantial number of these factors. Multivariate data
analysis revealed a common TF signature for steatotic drugs, which consistently
and significantly repressed FOXA1, HEX and SREBP1C in cultured cells. This
signature was also observed in the livers of rats and in cultured human
hepatocytes. Therefore, we selected these three TFs as predictive biomarkers for 
iatrogenic steatosis. With these biomarkers, a logistic regression analysis
yielded a predictive model, which was able to correctly classify 92 % of drugs.
The developed algorithm also predicted that ibuprofen, nifedipine and irinotecan 
are potential steatotic drugs, whereas troglitazone is not. In summary, this is a
sensitive, specific and simple RT-PCR test that can be easily implemented in
preclinical drug development to predict drug-induced steatosis. Our results also 
indicate that steatotic drugs affect expression of both common and specific
subsets of TF and lipid metabolism genes, thus generating complex transcriptomic 
responses that cause or contribute to steatosis in hepatocytes.

PMID: 24469900  [PubMed - in process]


185. Oncol Rep. 2014 Mar;31(3):1225-34. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.2982. Epub 2014 Jan 20.

Forkhead-box A1 suppresses the progression of endometrial cancer via crosstalk
with estrogen receptor a.

Wang J(1), Bao W(2), Qiu M(1), Liao Y(1), Che Q(1), Yang T(1), He X(2), Qiu H(1),
Wan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shanghai First People's Hospital
Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, International Peace Maternity 
and Child Health Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, P.R. China.

Mechanisms governing the function of Forkhead-box A1 (FOXA1), a member of the FOX
class of transcription factors, have been extensively studied. However, little is
known about the activities and expression pattern of FOXA1 in endometrial cancer 
(EC). In the present study, we investigated the level of FOXA1 in multiple human 
EC cell lines and clinical samples by immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR and Western
blot analysis. FOXA1 overexpression was observed in estrogen receptor
(ER)a-positive EC cell lines (P=0.0048). In endometrial tissues, FOXA1 was
significantly upregulated in both normal endometrium and well-differentiated
endometrial cancer tissues (P<0.001). Functional analyses of FOXA1 were evaluated
by MTT, plate colony formation and Transwell assay. The results revealed that
forced expression of FOXA1 inhibited EC cell proliferation, whereas FOXA1
depletion promoted cell viability and was associated with tumorigenesis. The nude
mouse tumor xenograft assay also confirmed that ablation of FOXA1 expression
promoted cell proliferation. Furthermore, we found that knockdown of FOXA1
decreased the expression of ERa, and FOXA1 interacted with this receptor in the
EC cell lines. Collectively, these experiments suggest that FOXA1 is a tumor
suppressor in EC and has a possible interaction with ERa.

PMID: 24452315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. EMBO J. 2014 Feb 18;33(4):312-26. doi: 10.1002/embj.201385895. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Tissue-specific pioneer factors associate with androgen receptor cistromes and
transcription programs.

Pihlajamaa P(1), Sahu B, Lyly L, Aittomäki V, Hautaniemi S, Jänne OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Androgen receptor (AR) binds male sex steroids and mediates physiological
androgen actions in target tissues. ChIP-seq analyses of AR-binding events in
murine prostate, kidney and epididymis show that in vivo AR cistromes and their
respective androgen-dependent transcription programs are highly tissue specific
mediating distinct biological pathways. This high order of tissue specificity is 
achieved by the use of exclusive collaborating factors in the three
androgen-responsive tissues. We find two novel collaborating factors for AR
signaling in vivo--Hnf4a (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a) in mouse kidney and AP-2a
(activating enhancer binding protein 2a) in mouse epididymis--that define
tissue-specific AR recruitment. In mouse prostate, FoxA1 serves for the same
purpose. FoxA1, Hnf4a and AP-2a motifs are over-represented within unique
AR-binding loci, and the cistromes of these factors show substantial overlap with
AR-binding events distinct to each tissue type. These licensing or pioneering
factors are constitutively bound to chromatin and guide AR to specific genomic
loci upon hormone exposure. Collectively, liganded receptor and its DNA-response 
elements are required but not sufficient for establishment of tissue-specific
transcription programs.

PMCID: PMC3989639
PMID: 24451200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):557-65. doi: 10.4161/epi.27696. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Chromatin remodeling mediated by the FOXA1/A2 transcription factors activates
CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

Kerschner JL(1), Gosalia N(1), Leir SH(1), Harris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program; Lurie Children's Research Center; Chicago,
IL USA; Department of Pediatrics; Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine; Chicago, IL USA.

The forkhead box A transcription factors, FOXA1 and FOXA2, function as pioneer
factors to open condensed chromatin and facilitate binding of other proteins. We 
showed previously that these factors are key components of a transcriptional
network that drives enhancer function at the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) locus in intestinal epithelial cells. The CFTR
promoter apparently lacks tissue-specific regulatory elements and expression of
the gene is controlled by multiple cis-acting elements, which coordinate gene
expression in different cell types. Here we show that concurrent depletion of
FOXA1 and FOXA2 represses CFTR expression and alters the three-dimensional
architecture of the active locus by diminishing interactions between the promoter
and intronic cis-acting elements. Reduction of FOXA1/A2 also modifies the
enrichment profile of the active enhancer marks H3K27ac and H3K4me2 across the
CFTR locus and alters chromatin accessibility at individual cis-elements.
Moreover, loss of FOXA1/A2 suppresses the recruitment of other members of the
transcriptional network including HNF1 and CDX2, to multiple cis-elements. These 
data reveal a complex molecular mechanism underlying the role of FOXA1/A2 in
achieving high levels of CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4121366
PMID: 24440874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):523-32. doi: 10.4161/epi.27688. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Effect of estrogen receptor a binding on functional DNA methylation in breast
cancer.

Ung M(1), Ma X(2), Johnson KC(3), Christensen BC(3), Cheng C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH
USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology; Center for Systems Biology; The
University of Texas at Dallas; Dallas, TX USA. (3)Department of Community and
Family Medicine; Section of Biostatistics and Epidemiology; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA; Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH USA.
(4)Department of Genetics; Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth; Hanover, NH
USA; Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences; Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA; Norris Cotton Cancer Center; Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth; Lebanon, NH USA.

Epigenetic modifications introduce an additional layer of regulation that
drastically expands the instructional capability of the human genome. The
regulatory consequences of DNA methylation is context dependent; it can induce,
enhance, and suppress gene expression, or have no effect on gene regulation.
Therefore, it is essential to account for the genomic location of its occurrence 
and the protein factors it associates with to improve our understanding of its
function and effects. Here, we use ENCODE ChIP-seq and DNase I hypersensitivity
data, along with large-scale breast cancer genomic data from The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) to computationally dissect the intricacies of DNA methylation in
regulation of cancer transcriptomes. In particular, we identified a relationship 
between estrogen receptor a (ERa) activity and DNA methylation patterning in
breast cancer. We found compelling evidence that methylation status of DNA
sequences at ERa binding sites is tightly coupled with ERa activity. Furthermore,
we predicted several transcription factors including FOXA1, GATA1, and SUZ12 to
be associated with breast cancer by examining the methylation status of their
binding sites in breast cancer. Lastly, we determine that methylated CpGs highly 
correlated with gene expression are enriched in regions 1kb or more downstream of
TSSs, suggesting more significant regulatory roles for CpGs distal to gene TSSs. 
Our study provides novel insights into the role of ERa in breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC4121363
PMID: 24434785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):3607-22. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1382. Epub 2014
Jan 13.

Three-tiered role of the pioneer factor GATA2 in promoting androgen-dependent
gene expression in prostate cancer.

Wu D(1), Sunkel B, Chen Z, Liu X, Ye Z, Li Q, Grenade C, Ke J, Zhang C, Chen H,
Nephew KP, Huang TH, Liu Z, Jin VX, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH 43210, USA,
Ohio State Biochemistry Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100021, China and Medical
Sciences Program and Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA.

In prostate cancer, androgen receptor (AR) binding and androgen-responsive gene
expression are defined by hormone-independent binding patterns of the pioneer
factors FoxA1 and GATA2. Insufficient evidence of the mechanisms by which GATA2
contributes to this process precludes complete understanding of a key determinant
of tissue-specific AR activity. Our observations suggest that GATA2 facilitates
androgen-responsive gene expression by three distinct modes of action. By
occupying novel binding sites within the AR gene locus, GATA2 positively
regulates AR expression before and after androgen stimulation. Additionally,
GATA2 engages AR target gene enhancers prior to hormone stimulation, producing an
active and accessible chromatin environment via recruitment of the histone
acetyltransferase p300. Finally, GATA2 functions in establishing and/or
sustaining basal locus looping by recruiting the Mediator subunit MED1 in the
absence of androgen. These mechanisms may contribute to the generally positive
role of GATA2 in defining AR genome-wide binding patterns that determine
androgen-responsive gene expression profiles. We also find that GATA2 and FoxA1
exhibit both independent and codependent co-occupancy of AR target gene
enhancers. Identifying these determinants of AR transcriptional activity may
provide a foundation for the development of future prostate cancer therapeutics
that target pioneer factor function.

PMCID: PMC3973339
PMID: 24423874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Breast Cancer. 2015 Sep;22(5):520-8. doi: 10.1007/s12282-013-0515-x. Epub 2014
Jan 11.

Impact of GATA-3 and FOXA1 expression in patients with hormone
receptor-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer.

Hisamatsu Y(1), Tokunaga E, Yamashita N, Akiyoshi S, Okada S, Nakashima Y,
Taketani K, Aishima S, Oda Y, Morita M, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, 812-8582, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Determining the indications for adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) in
patients with hormone receptor (HR)-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer are
difficult. The transcription factors GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA-3) and
Forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1) are crucial for the hormone responsive phenotype 
of breast cancer. This study evaluated whether the expression of GATA-3 and FOXA1
is a prognostic and predictive marker of outcomes in patients with
HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer.
METHODS: The expression of GATA-3 and FOXA1 was analyzed immunohistochemically in
214 patients with invasive breast cancer to evaluate the association with the
clinicopathological features and the prognosis.
RESULTS: GATA-3 expression was positively correlated with FOXA1 expression
(P < 0.0001). Both GATA-3 and FOXA1 were positively correlated with ER
(P < 0.0001 each) and PR expression (P = 0.0001 and P = 0.0009, respectively),
and inversely correlated with nuclear grade (P = 0.0002 and P = 0.0018,
respectively) and Ki67 index (P = 0.0052 and P = 0.0049, respectively).
Expression of GATA-3 and FOXA1 was associated with better prognosis. FOXA1 was an
independent favorable prognostic marker in HR-positive/HER2-negative breast
cancer. Disease-free survival rates were similar in patients with
HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer and high FOXA1 expression given adjuvant 
hormone therapy (HT) alone and those given CT plus HT.
CONCLUSION: GATA-3 and FOXA1 are associated with a less aggressive phenotype and 
a better prognosis in patients with HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer.
FOXA1 may be useful in identifying those patients who may not require adjuvant
CT.

PMID: 24415069  [PubMed - in process]


191. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 2;9(1):e84428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084428. eCollection 
2014.

DACH1: its role as a classifier of long term good prognosis in luminal breast
cancer.

Powe DG(1), Dhondalay GK(2), Lemetre C(3), Allen T(4), Habashy HO(5), Ellis
IO(6), Rees R(2), Ball GR(2).

Author information: 
(1)The John van Geest Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University,
Nottingham, United Kingdom ; Department of Cellular Pathology, Nottingham
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom. (2)The John van Geest
Cancer Research Centre, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, United Kingdom. 
(3)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of
America. (4)Department of Computing and Informatics, Nottingham Trent University,
Nottingham, United Kingdom. (5)Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine,
Mansoura University, Mansoura City, Daqahlia, Egypt. (6)Department of Cellular
Pathology, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Oestrogen receptor (ER) positive (luminal) tumours account for the
largest proportion of females with breast cancer. Theirs is a heterogeneous
disease presenting clinical challenges in managing their treatment. Three main
biological luminal groups have been identified but clinically these can be
distilled into two prognostic groups in which Luminal A are accorded good
prognosis and Luminal B correlate with poor prognosis. Further biomarkers are
needed to attain classification consensus. Machine learning approaches like
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) have been used for classification and
identification of biomarkers in breast cancer using high throughput data. In this
study, we have used an artificial neural network (ANN) approach to identify DACH1
as a candidate luminal marker and its role in predicting clinical outcome in
breast cancer is assessed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A reiterative ANN approach incorporating a network
inferencing algorithm was used to identify ER-associated biomarkers in a
publically available cDNA microarray dataset. DACH1 was identified in having a
strong influence on ER associated markers and a positive association with ER. Its
clinical relevance in predicting breast cancer specific survival was investigated
by statistically assessing protein expression levels after immunohistochemistry
in a series of unselected breast cancers, formatted as a tissue microarray.
RESULTS: Strong nuclear DACH1 staining is more prevalent in tubular and lobular
breast cancer. Its expression correlated with ER-alpha positive tumours
expressing PgR, epithelial cytokeratins (CK)18/19 and 'luminal-like' markers of
good prognosis including FOXA1 and RERG (p<0.05). DACH1 is increased in patients 
showing longer cancer specific survival and disease free interval and reduced
metastasis formation (p<0.001). Nuclear DACH1 showed a negative association with 
markers of aggressive growth and poor prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Nuclear DACH1 expression appears to be a Luminal A biomarker
predictive of good prognosis, but is not independent of clinical stage, tumour
size, NPI status or systemic therapy.

PMCID: PMC3879319
PMID: 24392136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 15;386(2):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.028. Epub 2013 
Dec 25.

Identification of ELF3 as an early transcriptional regulator of human urothelium.

Böck M(1), Hinley J(2), Schmitt C(1), Wahlicht T(2), Kramer S(3), Southgate J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Computer Science I12, Technische Universität München,
Boltzmannstr. 3, 85748 Garching, Germany. (2)Jack Birch Unit for Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
(3)Institute of Computer Science, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz,
Staudingerweg 9, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (4)Jack Birch Unit for Molecular
Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology, University of York, York YO10 5DD, UK.
Electronic address: jennifer.southgate@york.ac.uk.

Despite major advances in high-throughput and computational modelling techniques,
understanding of the mechanisms regulating tissue specification and
differentiation in higher eukaryotes, particularly man, remains limited.
Microarray technology has been explored exhaustively in recent years and several 
standard approaches have been established to analyse the resultant datasets on a 
genome-wide scale. Gene expression time series offer a valuable opportunity to
define temporal hierarchies and gain insight into the regulatory relationships of
biological processes. However, unless datasets are exactly synchronous, time
points cannot be compared directly. Here we present a data-driven analysis of
regulatory elements from a microarray time series that tracked the
differentiation of non-immortalised normal human urothelial (NHU) cells grown in 
culture. The datasets were obtained by harvesting differentiating and control
cultures from finite bladder- and ureter-derived NHU cell lines at different time
points using two previously validated, independent differentiation-inducing
protocols. Due to the asynchronous nature of the data, a novel ranking analysis
approach was adopted whereby we compared changes in the amplitude of experiment
and control time series to identify common regulatory elements. Our approach
offers a simple, fast and effective ranking method for genes that can be applied 
to other time series. The analysis identified ELF3 as a candidate transcriptional
regulator involved in human urothelial cytodifferentiation.
Differentiation-associated expression of ELF3 was confirmed in cell culture
experiments and by immunohistochemical demonstration in situ. The importance of
ELF3 in urothelial differentiation was verified by knockdown in NHU cells, which 
led to reduced expression of FOXA1 and GRHL3 transcription factors in response to
PPAR<U+03B3> activation. The consequences of this were seen in the repressed expression 
of late/terminal differentiation-associated uroplakin 3a gene expression and in
the compromised development and regeneration of urothelial barrier function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24374157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Genome Biol. 2013 Dec 27;14(12):R147. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-12-r147.

Development of an Illumina-based ChIP-exonuclease method provides insight into
FoxA1-DNA binding properties.

Serandour AA, Brown GD, Cohen JD, Carroll JS.

ChIP-exonuclease (ChIP-exo) is a modified ChIP-seq approach for high resolution
mapping of transcription factor DNA sites. We describe an Illumina-based ChIP-exo
method which provides a global improvement of the data quality of estrogen
receptor (ER) ChIP and insights into the motif structure for key ER-associated
factors. ChIP-exo of the ER pioneer factor FoxA1 identifies protected DNA with a 
predictable 8 bp overhang from the Forkhead motif, which we term mesas. We show
that mesas occur in multiple cellular contexts and exist as single or overlapping
motifs. Our Illumina-based ChIP-exo provides high resolution mapping of
transcription factor binding sites.

PMCID: PMC4053927
PMID: 24373287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Oncol. 2014 Mar;44(3):700-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2218. Epub 2013 Dec 19.

The pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 (panobinostat) alters the invasive
breast cancer cell phenotype.

Fortunati N(1), Marano F(2), Bandino A(3), Frairia R(2), Catalano MG(2), Boccuzzi
G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncological Endocrinology, AO Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino,
University of Turin, I-10126 Torino, Italy. (2)Department of Medical Sciences,
University of Turin, I-10126 Torino, Italy. (3)Department of Oncology,
Biochemistry Section, University of Turin, I-10100 Torino, Italy.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a very aggressive type of tumour and its 
aggressiveness is linked to E-cadherin downregulation. In estrogen-sensitive
breast cancer, high levels of E-cadherin fit with high levels of ERa and MTA3 (a 
component of the transcription Mi-2/NuRD complex with intrinsic DAC activity). In
TNBC the E-cadherin downregulation could be due to epigenetic silencing of the
CDH1 gene as well as to the lack of a fully functioning ERa-activated pathway. We
report that the pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589, a potent
anti-proliferative agent, induced E-cadherin expression on cell membranes of
MDA-MB-231 cells (TNBC), determining a reduction of cell invasion and migration. 
Even though E-cadherin expression in breast cancer is also regulated by estradiol
and the ERa/MTA3/Snail/Slug pathway, LBH589 is able to increase E-cadherin
without affecting the estrogen pathway. In fact, no expression of ERa, PR and
FoxA1 was observed in MDA-MB-231 cells before and after LBH589 treatment;
furthermore, the drug caused an increase in Snail and Slug expression with a
concomitant reduction of MTA3 levels. Taking into consideration its
anti-proliferative and anti-invasive properties, we suggest the use of LBH589 in 
aggressive breast cancer refractory to hormonal therapy.

PMID: 24366407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 5;8(12):e81110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081110. eCollection
2013.

The proteasome inhibitor bortezomib induces an inhibitory chromatin environment
at a distal enhancer of the estrogen receptor-a gene.

Powers GL(1), Rajbhandari P, Solodin NM, Bickford B, Alarid ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McArdle Laboratories for Cancer Research and
University of Wisconsin Carbone Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Expression of the estrogen receptor-a (ERa) gene, ESR1, is a clinical biomarker
used to predict therapeutic outcome of breast cancer. Hence, there is significant
interest in understanding the mechanisms regulating ESR1 gene expression.
Proteasome activity is increased in cancer and we previously showed that
proteasome inhibition leads to loss of ESR1 gene expression in breast cancer
cells. Expression of ESR1 mRNA in breast cancer cells is controlled predominantly
through a proximal promoter within ~400 base pair (bp) of the transcription start
site (TSS). Here, we show that loss of ESR1 gene expression induced by the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib is associated with inactivation of a distal
enhancer located 150 kilobases (kb) from the TSS. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays reveal several bortezomib-induced changes at the distal site including
decreased occupancy of three critical transcription factors, GATA3, FOXA1, and
AP2<U+03B3>. Bortezomib treatment also resulted in decreased histone H3 and H4
acetylation and decreased occupancy of histone acetyltransferase, p300. These
data suggest a mechanism to explain proteasome inhibitor-induced loss of ESR1
mRNA expression that highlights the importance of the chromatin environment at
the -150 kb distal enhancer in regulation of basal expression of ESR1 in breast
cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3855213
PMID: 24339902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2013 Nov 28;4(4):193-206. eCollection 2013.

Fine mapping of variants associated with endometriosis in the WNT4 region on
chromosome 1p36.

Luong HT(1), Painter JN, Shakhbazov K, Chapman B, Henders AK, Powell JE, Nyholt
DR, Montgomery GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Genome-wide association studies show strong evidence of association with
endometriosis for markers on chromosome 1p36 spanning the potential candidate
genes WNT4, CDC42 and LINC00339. WNT4 is involved in development of the uterus,
and the expression of CDC42 and LINC00339 are altered in women with
endometriosis. We conducted fine mapping to examine the role of coding variants
in WNT4 and CDC42 and determine the key SNPs with strongest evidence of
association in this region. We identified rare coding variants in WNT4 and CDC42 
present only in endometriosis cases. The frequencies were low and cannot account 
for the common signal associated with increased risk of endometriosis. Genotypes 
for five common SNPs in the region of chromosome 1p36 show stronger association
signals when compared with rs7521902 reported in published genome scans. Of
these, three SNPs rs12404660, rs3820282, and rs55938609 were located in DNA
sequences with potential functional roles including overlap with transcription
factor binding sites for FOXA1, FOXA2, ESR1, and ESR2. Functional studies will be
required to identify the gene or genes implicated in endometriosis risk.

PMCID: PMC3852639
PMID: 24319535  [PubMed]


198. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 11;33(50):5666-74. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.508. Epub 2013 Dec 2.

Elevated levels of FOXA1 facilitate androgen receptor chromatin binding resulting
in a CRPC-like phenotype.

Robinson JL(1), Hickey TE(2), Warren AY(3), Vowler SL(1), Carroll T(1), Lamb
AD(4), Papoutsoglou N(5), Neal DE(6), Tilley WD(2), Carroll JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK [2] Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (2)Dame
Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories and the Adelaide Prostate Cancer
Research Centre, School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (3)Department of Histopathology, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundations Trust, Cambridge, UK. (4)1] Cancer Research UK
Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK [2] Department of
Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK [3] Department of Urology,
Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundations Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Urology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundations Trust,
Cambridge, UK. (6)1] Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK [2] Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK [3] Dame Roma Mitchell Cancer Research Laboratories and the
Adelaide Prostate Cancer Research Centre, School of Medicine, University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.

Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) continues to pose a significant
clinical challenge with new generation second-line hormonal therapies affording
limited improvement in disease outcome. As the androgen receptor (AR) remains a
critical driver in CRPC, understanding the determinants of its transcriptional
activity is important for developing new AR-targeted therapies. FOXA1 is a key
component of the AR transcriptional complex yet its role in prostate cancer
progression and the relationship between AR and FOXA1 are not completely
resolved. It is well established that FOXA1 levels are elevated in advanced
prostate cancer and metastases. We mimicked these conditions by overexpressing
FOXA1 in the androgen-responsive LNCaP prostate cancer cell line and observed a
significant increase in AR genomic binding at novel regions that possess
increased chromatin accessibility. High levels of FOXA1 resulted in increased
proliferation at both sub-optimal and high 5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
concentrations. Immunohistochemical staining for FOXA1 in a clinical prostate
cancer cohort revealed that high FOXA1 expression is associated with shorter time
to biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy (hazard ratio (HR) 5.0, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.2-21.1, P=0.028), positive surgical margins and higher
stage disease at diagnosis. The gene expression program that results from FOXA1
overexpression is enriched for PTEN, Wnt and other pathways typically represented
in CRPC gene signatures. Together, these results suggest that in an
androgen-depleted state, elevated levels of FOXA1 enhance AR binding at genomic
regions not normally occupied by AR, which in turn facilitates prostate cancer
cell growth.

PMCID: PMC4051595
PMID: 24292680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Anal Biochem. 2014 Mar 1;448:95-104. doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2013.11.017. Epub 2013 Nov
26.

Studying forkhead box protein A1-DNA interaction and ligand inhibition using gold
nanoparticles, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and fluorescence anisotropy.

Aung KM(1), New SY(1), Hong S(2), Sutarlie L(1), Lim MG(2), Tan SK(2), Cheung
E(3), Su X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, Agency for Science,
Technology, and Research (A(*)STAR), Singapore. (2)Cancer Biology and
Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology, and 
Research (A(*)STAR), Singapore. (3)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome
Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A(*)STAR), 
Singapore; Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore; School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. Electronic address:
cheungcwe@gis.a-star.edu.sg. (4)Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, 
Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A(*)STAR), Singapore. Electronic
address: xd-su@imre.a-star.edu.sg.

Forkhead box protein 1 (FoxA1) is a member of the forkhead family of winged helix
transcription factors that plays pivotal roles in the development and
differentiation of multiple organs and in the regulation of estrogen-stimulated
genes. Conventional analytical methods-electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) and fluorescence anisotropy (FA)-as well as a gold nanoparticles
(AuNPs)-based assay were used to study DNA binding properties of FoxA1 and ligand
interruption of FoxA1-DNA binding. In the AuNPs assay, the distinct ability of
protein-DNA complex to protect AuNPs against salt-induced aggregation was
exploited to screen sequence selectivity and determine the binding affinity
constant based on AuNPs color change and absorbance spectrum shift. Both
conventional EMSA and FA and the AuNPs assay suggested that FoxA1 binds to DNA in
a core sequence-dependent manner and the flanking sequence also played a role to 
influence the affinity. The EMSA and AuNPs were found to be more sensitive than
FA in differentiation of sequence-dependent affinity. With the addition of a spin
filtration step, AuNPs assay has been extended for studying small molecular
ligand inhibition of FoxA1-DNA interactions enabling drug screening. The results 
correlate very well with those obtained using FA.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24291642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec 5;93(6):1046-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.026. Epub
2013 Nov 27.

Fine-scale mapping of the FGFR2 breast cancer risk locus: putative functional
variants differentially bind FOXA1 and E2F1.

Meyer KB, O'Reilly M, Michailidou K, Carlebur S, Edwards SL, French JD,
Prathalingham R, Dennis J, Bolla MK, Wang Q, de Santiago I, Hopper JL, Tsimiklis 
H, Apicella C, Southey MC, Schmidt MK, Broeks A, Van 't Veer LJ, Hogervorst FB,
Muir K, Lophatananon A, Stewart-Brown S, Siriwanarangsan P, Fasching PA, Lux MP, 
Ekici AB, Beckmann MW, Peto J, Dos Santos Silva I, Fletcher O, Johnson N, Sawyer 
EJ, Tomlinson I, Kerin MJ, Miller N, Marme F, Schneeweiss A, Sohn C, Burwinkel B,
Guénel P, Truong T, Laurent-Puig P, Menegaux F, Bojesen SE, Nordestgaard BG,
Nielsen SF, Flyger H, Milne RL, Zamora MP, Arias JI, Benitez J, Neuhausen S,
Anton-Culver H, Ziogas A, Dur CC, Brenner H, Müller H, Arndt V, Stegmaier C,
Meindl A, Schmutzler RK, Engel C, Ditsch N, Brauch H, Brüning T, Ko YD; GENICA
Network, Nevanlinna H, Muranen TA, Aittomäki K, Blomqvist C, Matsuo K, Ito H,
Iwata H, Yatabe Y, Dörk T, Helbig S, Bogdanova NV, Lindblom A, Margolin S,
Mannermaa A, Kataja V, Kosma VM, Hartikainen JM, Chenevix-Trench G; kConFab
Investigators; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group, Wu AH, Tseng CC, Van Den
Berg D, Stram DO, Lambrechts D, Thienpont B, Christiaens MR, Smeets A,
Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A, Seibold P, Flesch-Janys D, Radice P, Peterlongo P,
Bonanni B, Bernard L, Couch FJ, Olson JE, Wang X, Purrington K, Giles GG, Severi 
G, Baglietto L, McLean C, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Schumacher F, Le Marchand L,
Simard J, Goldberg MS, Labrèche F, Dumont M, Teo SH, Yip CH, Phuah SY, Kristensen
V, Grenaker Alnæs G, Børresen-Dale AL, Zheng W, Deming-Halverson S, Shrubsole M, 
Long J, Winqvist R, Pylkäs K, Jukkola-Vuorinen A, Kauppila S, Andrulis IL, Knight
JA, Glendon G, Tchatchou S, Devilee P, Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve CM, García-Closas
M, Figueroa J, Chanock SJ, Lissowska J, Czene K, Darabi H, Eriksson K, Hooning
MJ, Martens JW, van den Ouweland AM, van Deurzen CH, Hall P, Li J, Liu J,
Humphreys K, Shu XO, Lu W, Gao YT, Cai H, Cox A, Reed MW, Blot W, Signorello LB, 
Cai Q, Pharoah PD, Ghoussaini M, Harrington P, Tyrer J, Kang D, Choi JY, Park SK,
Noh DY, Hartman M, Hui M, Lim WY, Buhari SA, Hamann U, Försti A, Rüdiger T, Ulmer
HU, Jakubowska A, Lubinski J, Jaworska K, Durda K, Sangrajrang S, Gaborieau V,
Brennan P, McKay J, Vachon C, Slager S, Fostira F, Pilarski R, Shen CY, Hsiung
CN, Wu PE, Hou MF, Swerdlow A, Ashworth A, Orr N, Schoemaker MJ, Ponder BA,
Dunning AM, Easton DF.

The 10q26 locus in the second intron of FGFR2 is the locus most strongly
associated with estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer in genome-wide
association studies. We conducted fine-scale mapping in case-control studies
genotyped with a custom chip (iCOGS), comprising 41 studies (n = 89,050) of
European ancestry, 9 Asian ancestry studies (n = 13,983), and 2 African ancestry 
studies (n = 2,028) from the Breast Cancer Association Consortium. We identified 
three statistically independent risk signals within the locus. Within risk
signals 1 and 3, genetic analysis identified five and two variants, respectively,
highly correlated with the most strongly associated SNPs. By using a combination 
of genetic fine mapping, data on DNase hypersensitivity, and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays to study protein-DNA binding, we identified rs35054928,
rs2981578, and rs45631563 as putative functional SNPs. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that FOXA1 preferentially bound to the risk-associated
allele (C) of rs2981578 and was able to recruit ERa to this site in an
allele-specific manner, whereas E2F1 preferentially bound the risk variant of
rs35054928. The risk alleles were preferentially found in open chromatin and
bound by Ser5 phosphorylated RNA polymerase II, suggesting that the risk alleles 
are associated with changes in transcription. Chromatin conformation capture
demonstrated that the risk region was able to interact with the promoter of
FGFR2, the likely target gene of this risk region. A role for FOXA1 in mediating 
breast cancer susceptibility at this locus is consistent with the finding that
the FGFR2 risk locus primarily predisposes to estrogen-receptor-positive disease.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3852923
PMID: 24290378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Feb;42(4):2245-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1236. Epub 2013
Nov 27.

Establishment of active chromatin structure at enhancer elements by mixed-lineage
leukemia 1 to initiate estrogen-dependent gene expression.

Jeong KW(1), Andreu-Vieyra C, You JS, Jones PA, Stallcup MR.

Author information: 
(1)Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Gachon
University, Incheon 406-840, Republic of Korea, Departments of Urology and
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck 
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90089-9176, USA, Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Konkuk
University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea and Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

A number of genome-wide analyses have revealed that estrogen receptor a binding
to and regulation of its target genes correlate with binding of FOXA1, a pioneer 
factor, to nearby DNA sites in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. The enhancer
element-specific histone H3K4me1/2 mark is enriched at the specific FOXA1/ERa
recruitment sites in chromatin, but the mechanism by which these enhancer marks
are established in chromatin before hormone treatment is unclear. Here, we show
that mixed-lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) protein is a key determinant that maintains 
permissive chromatin structure of the TFF1 enhancer region. MLL1 occupies the
TFF1 enhancer region and methylates H3K4 before hormone stimulation. In vitro,
MLL1 binds directly to the CpG-rich region of the TFF1 enhancer, and its binding 
is dependent on hypomethylation of DNA. Furthermore, the depletion of MLL1 in
MCF-7 cells results in a dramatic decrease of chromatin accessibility and
recruitment of FOXA1 and ERa to the enhancer element. Our study defines the
mechanism by which MLL1 nucleates histone H3K4 methylation marks in CpG-enriched 
regions to maintain permissive chromatin architecture and allow FOXA1 and
estrogen receptor a binding to transcriptional regulatory sites in breast cancer 
cells.

PMCID: PMC3936730
PMID: 24288367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 12;8(11):e78839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078839.
eCollection 2013.

Functional analysis of a breast cancer-associated FGFR2 single nucleotide
polymorphism using zinc finger mediated genome editing.

Robbez-Masson LJ(1), Bödör C, Jones JL, Hurst HC, Fitzgibbon J, Hart IR, Grose
RP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Barts Cancer Institute - a Cancer Research UK
Centre of Excellence, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom.

Genome wide association studies have identified single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) within fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) as one of the highest
ranking risk alleles in terms of development of breast cancer. The potential
effect of these SNPs, in intron two, was postulated to be due to the differential
binding of cis-regulatory elements, such as transcription factors, since all the 
SNPs in linkage disequilibrium were located in a regulatory DNA region. A Runx2
binding site was reported to be functional only in the minor, disease associated 
allele of rs2981578, resulting in increased expression of FGFR2 in cancers from
patients homozygous for that allele. Moreover, the increased risk conferred by
the minor FGFR2 allele associates most strongly in oestrogen receptor alpha
positive (ERa) breast tumours, suggesting a potential interaction between ERa and
FGFR signalling. Here, we have developed a human cell line model system to study 
the effect of the putative functional SNP, rs2981578, on cell behaviour. MCF7
cells, an ERa positive breast cancer cell line homozygous for the wild-type
allele were edited using a Zinc Finger Nuclease approach. Unexpectedly, the
acquisition of a single risk allele in MCF7 clones failed to affect proliferation
or cell cycle progression. Binding of Runx2 to the risk allele was not observed. 
However FOXA1 binding, an important ERa partner, appeared decreased at the
rs2981578 locus in the risk allele cells. Differences in allele specific
expression (ASE) of FGFR2 were not observed in a panel of 72 ERa positive breast 
cancer samples. Thus, the apparent increased risk of developing ERa positive
breast cancer seems not to be caused by rs2981578 alone. Rather, the observed
increased risk of developing breast cancer might be the result of a coordinated
effect of multiple SNPs forming a risk haplotype in the second intron of FGFR2.

PMCID: PMC3827080
PMID: 24265722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2013 Sep;42(5):736-40.

[Association between polymorphism of FOXA1 gene and type 2 diabetes].

[Article in Chinese]

Lü L(1), Li Y, Qiao Y, Tang Y, Yan Z, Cheng Y, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health,
Jilin University,Changchun 130021,China. lvle2009wl@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect the relationship between FOXA1 gene polymorphism and type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
METHODS: The techniques of mass chromatographic analysis were used to detect the 
polymorphism of FOXA1 gene in 190 patients with T2DM and 193 healthy control
persons without T2DM. We used the software SPSS 13.0 for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between the case and control group
about sex and age distribution. The distribution of genotypic frequency in
control group consistented with the Hardy-Weinberg law. The frequency of the TT, 
TC and CC genotype in case were 76.5%, 19.3% and 4.3%. The frequency of the TT,
TC and CC genotype in control were 78.1%, 20.3% and 1.6%. There was no
significant difference between the case and control group about genotype
frequency (chi2 = 2.49, P = 0.287). There may be no significant difference
between the TC, TG, HDL-C, LDL-C level and genotypes of rs7144658 in mutant.
CONCLUSION: There may be no significant relationship between the polymorphism of 
FOXA1 gene and T2DM. Genic mutation on rs7144658 may not affect the lipid level
in type 2 diabetics.

PMID: 24218877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Cell Sci. 2014 Jan 1;127(Pt 1):85-100. doi: 10.1242/jcs.132779. Epub 2013 Nov
8.

Tumor suppressor SCUBE2 inhibits breast-cancer cell migration and invasion
through the reversal of epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Lin YC(1), Lee YC, Li LH, Cheng CJ, Yang RB.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
114 Taiwan.

Signal peptide-CUB-EGF domain-containing protein 2 (SCUBE2) belongs to a secreted
and membrane-associated multi-domain SCUBE protein family. We previously
demonstrated that SCUBE2 is a novel breast-tumor suppressor and could be a useful
prognostic marker. However, the role of SCUBE2 in breast-cancer cell migration
and invasion and how it is regulated during the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) remain undefined. In this study, we showed that ectopic SCUBE2
overexpression could enhance the formation of E-cadherin-containing adherens
junctions by ß-catenin-SOX-mediated induction of forkhead box A1 (a positive
regulator of E-cadherin) and upregulation of E-cadherin, which in turn led to
epithelial transition and inhibited migration and invasion of aggressive
MDA-MB-231 breast-carcinoma cells. SCUBE2 expression was repressed together with 
that of E-cadherin in TGF-ß-induced EMT; direct expression of SCUBE2 alone was
sufficient to inhibit the TGF-ß-induced EMT. Furthermore, quantitative DNA
methylation, methylation-specific PCR, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
revealed that SCUBE2 expression was inactivated by DNA hypermethylation at the
CpG islands by recruiting and binding DNA methyltransferase 1 during
TGF-ß-induced EMT. Together, our results suggest that SCUBE2 plays a key role in 
suppressing breast-carcinoma-cell mobility and invasiveness by increasing the
formation of the epithelial E-cadherin-containing adherens junctions to promote
epithelial differentiation and drive the reversal of EMT.

PMID: 24213532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. BMC Genomics. 2013 Oct 4;14:680. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-680.

A systematic approach identifies FOXA1 as a key factor in the loss of epithelial 
traits during the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer.

Wang H(1), Meyer CA, Fei T, Wang G, Zhang F, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092,
China. wanghaiyun@tongji.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is an important mechanism in
cancer metastasis. Although transcription factors including SNAIL, SLUG, and
TWIST1 regulate the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, other unknown
transcription factors could also be involved. Identification of the full
complement of transcription factors is essential for a more complete
understanding of gene regulation in this process. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) technologies have been used to detect
genome-wide binding of transcription factors; here, we developed a systematic
approach to integrate existing ChIP-Seq and transcriptome data. We scanned
multiple transcription factors to investigate their functional impact on the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell
line.
RESULTS: Among the transcription factors tested, impact scores identified the
forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) as the most significant transcription factor in
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. FOXA1 physically associates with the
promoters of its predicted target genes. Several critical
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition effectors involved in cellular adhesion and 
cellular communication were identified in the regulatory network of FOXA1,
including FOXA2, FGA, FGB, FGG, and FGL1. The implication of FOXA1 in the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via its regulatory network indicates that
FOXA1 may play an important role in the initiation of lung cancer metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified FOXA1 as a potentially important transcription factor 
and negative regulator in the initial stages of lung cancer metastasis. FOXA1 may
modulate the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via its transcriptional
regulatory network. Further, this study demonstrates how ChIP-Seq and expression 
data could be integrated to delineate the impact of transcription factors on a
specific biological process.

PMCID: PMC3852829
PMID: 24093963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 20;8(9):e76043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076043. eCollection
2013.

High-throughput RNA FISH analysis by imaging flow cytometry reveals that pioneer 
factor Foxa1 reduces transcriptional stochasticity.

Lalmansingh AS(1), Arora K, Demarco RA, Hager GL, Nagaich AK.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Biotechnology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Genes are regulated at the single-cell level. Here, we performed RNA FISH of
thousands of cells by flow cytometry (flow-RNA FISH) to gain insight into
transcriptional variability between individual cells. These experiments utilized 
the murine adenocarcinoma 3134 cell line with 200 copies of the MMTV-Ras reporter
integrated at a single genomic locus. The MMTV array contains approximately
800-1200 binding sites for the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and 600 binding sites
for the pioneer factor Foxa1. Hormone activation of endogenous GR by
dexamethasone treatment resulted in highly variable changes in the RNA FISH
intensity (25-300 pixel intensity units) and size (1.25-15 µm), indicative of
probabilistic or stochastic mechanisms governing GR and cofactor activation of
the MMTV promoter. Exogenous expression of the pioneer factor Foxa1 increased the
FISH signal intensity and size as expected for a chromatin remodeler that
enhances transcriptional competence through increased chromatin accessibility. In
addition, specific analysis of Foxa1-enriched cell sub-populations showed that
low and high Foxa1 levels substantially lowered the cell-to-cell variability in
the FISH intensity as determined by a noise calculation termed the % coefficient 
of variation. These results suggest that an additional function of the pioneer
factor Foxa1 may be to decrease transcriptional noise.

PMCID: PMC3779185
PMID: 24073287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2464. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3464.

Master regulators of FGFR2 signalling and breast cancer risk.

Fletcher MN(1), Castro MA, Wang X, de Santiago I, O'Reilly M, Chin SF, Rueda OM, 
Caldas C, Ponder BA, Markowetz F, Meyer KB.

Author information: 
(1)1] Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge 
CB2 0RE, UK [2] Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing
Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK [3] [4].

The fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) locus has been consistently
identified as a breast cancer risk locus in independent genome-wide association
studies. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying FGFR2-mediated risk are
still unknown. Using model systems we show that FGFR2-regulated genes are
preferentially linked to breast cancer risk loci in expression quantitative trait
loci analysis, supporting the concept that risk genes cluster in pathways. Using 
a network derived from 2,000 transcriptional profiles we identify SPDEF, ERa,
FOXA1, GATA3 and PTTG1 as master regulators of fibroblast growth factor receptor 
2 signalling, and show that ERa occupancy responds to fibroblast growth factor
receptor 2 signalling. Our results indicate that ERa, FOXA1 and GATA3 contribute 
to the regulation of breast cancer susceptibility genes, which is consistent with
the effects of anti-oestrogen treatment in breast cancer prevention, and suggest 
that fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 signalling has an important role in
mediating breast cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3778544
PMID: 24043118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Neoplasia. 2013 Sep;15(9):1009-17.

AR variant ARv567es induces carcinogenesis in a novel transgenic mouse model of
prostate cancer.

Liu G(1), Sprenger C, Sun S, Epilepsia KS, Haugk K, Zhang X, Coleman I, Nelson
PS, Plymate S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Androgen deprivation therapy remains the primary treatment modality for patients 
with metastatic prostate cancer but is uniformly marked by progression to
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) after a period of regression.
Continued activation of androgen receptor (AR) signaling is attributed as one of 
the most important mechanisms underlying failure of therapy. Recently, the
discovery of constitutively active AR splice variants (AR-Vs) adds more credence 
to this idea. Expression of AR-Vs in metastases portends a rapid progression of
the tumor. However, the precise role of the AR-Vs in CRPC still remains unknown. 
ARv567es is one of the two AR variants frequently found in human CRPC xenografts 
and metastases. Herein, we developed a probasin (Pb) promoter-driven ARv567es
transgenic mouse, Pb-ARv567es, to evaluate the role of ARv567es in both
autonomous prostate growth and progression to CRPC. We found that expression of
ARv567es in the prostate results in epithelial hyperplasia by 16 weeks and
invasive adenocarcinoma is evident by 1 year of age. The underlying genetic
cellular events involved a cell cycle-related transcriptome and differential
expression of a spectrum of genes that are critical for tumor initiation and
progression. These findings indicate that ARv567es could induce tumorigenesis de 
novo and signifies the critical role of AR-Vs in CRPC. Thus, the Pb-ARv567es
mouse could provide a novel model in which the role of AR variants in prostate
cancer progression can be examined.

PMCID: PMC3769880
PMID: 24027426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Eur Urol. 2014 Jun;65(6):1191-7. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2013.07.006. Epub 2013 Jul
26.

Analytic and clinical validation of a prostate cancer-enhanced messenger RNA
detection assay in whole blood as a prognostic biomarker for survival.

Danila DC(1), Anand A(2), Schultz N(3), Heller G(4), Wan M(5), Sung CC(5), Dai
C(2), Khanin R(3), Fleisher M(5), Lilja H(6), Scher HI(7).

Author information: 
(1)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. (2)Genitourinary Oncology Service,
Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (3)Department of Computational Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (5)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Laboratory
Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Urology
Service, Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY, USA; Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK. (7)Genitourinary Oncology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA; Department of Medicine, Weill
Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: scherh@mskcc.org.

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers based on detecting prostate cancer (PCa)-specific
transcripts in blood are associated with inferior outcomes, but their validation 
in a clinical context is lacking.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether detecting enhanced transcripts for PCa in whole
blood using an analytically valid assay has prognostic significance relative to
circulating tumor cell (CTC) enumeration.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The detection of KLK3, KLK2, HOXB13, GRHL2,
and FOXA1 in whole blood by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was studied in 97 men with metastatic castration-resistant PCa (mCRPC)
as a prognostic factor for overall survival.
INTERVENTION: The 2.5 ml of blood was collected in PAXgene tubes for total RNA
extraction and 7.5 ml for CTC enumeration from patients with progressive mCRPC.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: PCa-enriched genes were detected
using a sensitive RT-PCR assay in whole blood from patients with mCRPC.
Analytical validity of the assay was established in a clinical laboratory
environment. The frequency of detecting transcripts was compared to CTC
enumeration using CellSearch in an independent data set and survival associations
were explored by concordance probability estimate (CPE).
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: Two or more genes were detected by PCR in 53% of
patients (51 of 97; 95% confidence interval [CI], 43-63%), and unfavorable CTC
counts (five of more cells) were seen in 46% (45 of 97; 95% CI, 36-56%).
Importantly, transcripts were detectable in 11 of 52 patients with favorable CTC 
counts (21%; 95% CI, 8-35%). Transcript detection predicted overall survival in a
proportional hazards model. Significantly, the predictive accuracy of RT-PCR
detection in combination with CTC enumeration had a CPE of 0.752 (standard error:
0.038), although this was limited by the number of patients evaluated.
CONCLUSIONS: This validated RT-PCR assay detecting prostate-specific RNA in whole
blood is prognostic for survival and may assess patient risk in tandem with
CellSearch CTC enumeration. Its clinical utility is being prospectively explored.

Copyright © 2013 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4113474
PMID: 23954088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 May;14(5):399-400. doi: 10.4161/cbt.24426.

Uncovering the genetic landscape driving castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Martin TJ(1), Peer CJ, Figg WD.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Program, Medical Oncology Branch, Office of the Clinical
Director, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Comment on
    Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):239-43.

Identification of the mechanisms that drive progression of metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) has fostered interest since early
androgen studies in the 1940s. Little knowledge has surfaced about the role
mutations play in prostate cancer development. A group at the Michigan Center for
Translation Pathology studied exomes of lethal, metastatic CRPC and documented
the overall mutation rates. In classifying these mutations, the monoclonal cause 
of CRPC was recognized. Nine identified genes showed significant mutations. Six
of these genes had previously been reported as mutated in prostate cancer. The
analysis also found significantly mutated androgen receptor (AR) cofactors and
linked proteins, including FOXA1 and MLL2. Another finding concerned an
aberration in CHD1. Prostate cancers with deletions or mutations in CHD1 showed a
strong correlation with ETS gene family fusion negative prostate cancers (96%).
In profiling these exomes, this group provides an original method to identify
deletions and mutations that drive CRPC progression.

PMCID: PMC3672183
PMID: 23917376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;33(18):3594-610. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00280-13. Epub 2013 Jul
8.

Genome-wide analysis of chromatin states reveals distinct mechanisms of
sex-dependent gene regulation in male and female mouse liver.

Sugathan A(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Chromatin state maps were developed to elucidate sex differences in chromatin
structure and their impact on sex-differential chromatin accessibility and
sex-biased gene expression in mouse liver. Genes in active, inactive, and poised 
chromatin states exhibited differential responsiveness to ligand-activated
nuclear receptors and distinct enrichments for functional gene categories.
Sex-biased genes were clustered by chromatin environments and mapped to
DNase-hypersensitive sites (DHS) classified by sex bias in chromatin
accessibility and enhancer modifications. Results were integrated with
genome-wide binding data for five transcription factors implicated in growth
hormone-regulated, sex-biased liver gene expression, leading to the following
findings. (i) Sex-biased DHS, but not sex-biased genes, are frequently
characterized by sex-differential chromatin states, indicating distal regulation.
(ii) Trimethylation of histone H3 at K27 (H3K27me3) is a major sex-biased
repressive mark at highly female-biased but not at highly male-biased genes.
(iii) FOXA factors are associated with sex-dependent chromatin opening at
male-biased but not female-biased regulatory sites. (iv) Sex-biased STAT5 binding
is enriched at sex-biased DHS marked as active enhancers and preferentially
targets sex-biased genes with sex-differences in local chromatin marks. (v) The
male-biased repressor BCL6 preferentially targets female-biased genes and
regulatory sites in a sex-independent chromatin state. (vi) CUX2, a
female-specific repressor of male-biased genes, also activates strongly
female-biased genes, in association with loss of H3K27me3 marks. Chromatin states
are thus a major determinant of sex-biased chromatin accessibility and gene
expression, with FOXA pioneer factors proposed to confer sex-dependent chromatin 
opening and STAT5, but not BCL6, regulating sex-biased genes by binding to sites 
in a sex-biased chromatin state.

PMCID: PMC3753870
PMID: 23836885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Liver Int. 2014 Feb;34(2):281-95. doi: 10.1111/liv.12239. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Overexpression of miR-122 promotes the hepatic differentiation and maturation of 
mouse ESCs through a miR-122/FoxA1/HNF4a-positive feedback loop.

Deng XG(1), Qiu RL, Wu YH, Li ZX, Xie P, Zhang J, Zhou JJ, Zeng LX, Tang J,
Maharjan A, Deng JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: microRNA-122 is the only identified liver-specific miRNA and
plays a crucial role in liver development, maintenance of hepatic homeostasis as 
well as tumourigenesis. In our previous differentiation of ESCs into hepatocytes,
microRNA-122 (miR-122) was expressed at a relatively low level. Here, we aim to
elucidate the effect and underlying mechanisms of miR-122 during differentiation 
of ESCs into hepatocytes.
METHODS: Mouse ESCs were initially induced towards HPCs by activin A, FGF-4 and
sodium butyrate and were subsequently transfected with a recombinant adenovirus
expressing vector pAV.Ex1d-CMV>miR-122/IRES/eGFP 9 days after induction. Cells
were analysed by real-time PCR, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry, microscopy
and functional assays. Furthermore, microarray analysis was performed.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that overexpression of miR-122 could effectively promote
hepatic differentiation and maturation, as assessed by morphological and
functional tests. The microarray analysis revealed that 323 genes were
down-regulated, whereas 59 were up-regulated. Particularly, two liver-specific
transcription factors, FoxA1 and HNF4a, were significantly up-regulated.
Moreover, the expression of E-cadherin was dramatically increased and the
proliferation of HPCs was suppressed, whereas knockdown of FoxA1 reduced
E-cadherin expression and increased the proliferation of HPCs. In addition, the
expression levels of FoxA1, HNF4a and E-cadherin in time-course transfection
experiments with miR-122 were not significantly increased except in cells in
which transfection with miR-122 occurred 9 days after induction.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of miR-122 at an appropriate stage could promote
hepatic differentiation and maturation by regulating the balance between
proliferation and differentiation, as well as the balance between EMT and MET,
partially through a miR-122/FoxA1/HNF4a-positive feedback loop.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23834235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nat Genet. 2013 Aug;45(8):907-11. doi: 10.1038/ng.2686. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

A genome-wide association meta-analysis of self-reported allergy identifies
shared and allergy-specific susceptibility loci.

Hinds DA(1), McMahon G, Kiefer AK, Do CB, Eriksson N, Evans DM, St Pourcain B,
Ring SM, Mountain JL, Francke U, Davey-Smith G, Timpson NJ, Tung JY.

Author information: 
(1)23andMe, Inc., Mountain View, California, USA. dhinds@23andMe.com

Allergic disease is very common and carries substantial public-health burdens. We
conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide associations with self-reported cat,
dust-mite and pollen allergies in 53,862 individuals. We used generalized
estimating equations to model shared and allergy-specific genetic effects. We
identified 16 shared susceptibility loci with association P<5×10(-8), including 8
loci previously associated with asthma, as well as 4p14 near TLR1, TLR6 and TLR10
(rs2101521, P=5.3×10(-21)); 6p21.33 near HLA-C and MICA (rs9266772,
P=3.2×10(-12)); 5p13.1 near PTGER4 (rs7720838, P=8.2×10(-11)); 2q33.1 in PLCL1
(rs10497813, P=6.1×10(-10)), 3q28 in LPP (rs9860547, P=1.2×10(-9)); 20q13.2 in
NFATC2 (rs6021270, P=6.9×10(-9)), 4q27 in ADAD1 (rs17388568, P=3.9×10(-8)); and
14q21.1 near FOXA1 and TTC6 (rs1998359, P=4.8×10(-8)). We identified one locus
with substantial evidence of differences in effects across allergies at 6p21.32
in the class II human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region (rs17533090, P=1.7×10(-12)),
which was strongly associated with cat allergy. Our study sheds new light on the 
shared etiology of immune and autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3753407
PMID: 23817569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 16;288(33):24020-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.473819. Epub
2013 Jun 28.

Interaction of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) with estrogen receptor (ER) a and
activator protein 1 (AP1) in dexamethasone-mediated interference of ERa activity.

Karmakar S(1), Jin Y, Nagaich AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Therapeutic Proteins, Office of Biotechnology Products, Office of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The role of glucocorticoids in the inhibition of estrogen (17-ß-estradiol
(E2))-regulated estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer cell proliferation 
is well established. We and others have seen that synthetic glucocorticoid
dexamethasone (Dex) antagonizes E2-stimulated endogenous ERa target gene
expression. However, how glucocorticoids negatively regulate the ERa signaling
pathway is still poorly understood. ChIP studies using ERa- and glucocorticoid
receptor (GR)-positive MCF-7 cells revealed that GR occupies several ERa-binding 
regions (EBRs) in cells treated with E2 and Dex simultaneously. Interestingly,
there was little or no GR loading to these regions when cells were treated with
E2 or Dex alone. The E2+Dex-dependent GR recruitment is associated with the
displacement of ERa and steroid receptor coactivator-3 from the target EBRs
leading to the repression of ERa-mediated transcriptional activation. The
recruitment of GR to EBRs requires assistance from ERa and FOXA1 and is
facilitated by AP1 binding within the EBRs. The GR binding to EBRs is mediated
via direct protein-protein interaction between the GR DNA-binding domain and ERa.
Limited mutational analyses indicate that arginine 488 located within the
C-terminal zinc finger domain of the GR DNA-binding domain plays a critical role 
in stabilizing this interaction. Together, the results of this study unravel a
novel mechanism involved in glucocorticoid inhibition of ERa transcriptional
activity and E2-mediated cell proliferation and thus establish a foundation for
future exploitation of the GR signaling pathway in the treatment of ER-positive
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3745347
PMID: 23814048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Vitam Horm. 2013;93:203-12. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416673-8.00006-X.

FOXP1 and estrogen signaling in breast cancer.

Ijichi N(1), Ikeda K, Horie-Inoue K, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

Breast cancers are considered to be primarily regulated by estrogen signaling
pathways because estrogen-dependent proliferation is observed in the majority of 
breast cancer cases. Thus, hormone therapy using antiestrogen drugs such as
tamoxifen is effective for breast cancers expressing estrogen receptor a (ERa).
However, acquired resistance during the endocrine therapy is a critical
unresolved problem in breast cancer. Recently, a forkhead transcription factor
FOXA1 has been reported to play an important role in the regulation of
ERa-mediated transcription and proliferation of breast cancer. Interestingly,
immunohistochemical analysis of breast cancer specimens has revealed that nuclear
immunoreactivities of FOXP1 as well as those of FOXA1 are positively correlated
with hormone receptor status, including ERa and progesterone receptor. In
particular, the double-positive immunoreactivities of FOXP1 and FOXA1 are
significantly associated with a favorable prognosis for survival of breast cancer
patients receiving adjuvant tamoxifen therapy. The functions of FOXP1 and FOXA1
have been characterized in cultured cells; further, similar to FOXA1, FOXP1 is
assumed to be a critical transcription factor for ERa signaling, and both
forkhead transcription factors can serve as predictive factors for acquired
endocrine resistance in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Br J Cancer. 2013 Jul 23;109(2):444-51. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2013.326. Epub 2013 Jun 
25.

Diagnostic SOX10 gene signatures in salivary adenoid cystic and breast basal-like
carcinomas.

Ivanov SV(1), Panaccione A, Nonaka D, Prasad ML, Boyd KL, Brown B, Guo Y, Sewell 
A, Yarbrough WG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, Yale School of Medicine, 800
Howard Avenue, New Haven, CT 06519-1369, USA. sergey.ivanov@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: Salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is an insidious slow-growing 
cancer with the propensity to recur and metastasise to distant sites. Basal-like 
breast carcinoma (BBC) is a molecular subtype that constitutes 15-20% of breast
cancers, shares histological similarities and basal cell markers with ACC, lacks 
expression of ER (oestrogen receptor), PR (progesterone receptor), and HER2
(human epidermal growth factor receptor 2), and, similar to ACC, metastasises
predominantly to the lung and brain. Both cancers lack targeted therapies owing
to poor understanding of their molecular drivers.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling, immunohistochemical staining, western blot,
RT-PCR, and in silico analysis of massive cancer data sets were used to identify 
novel markers and potential therapeutic targets for ACC and BBC. For the
detection and comparison of gene signatures, we performed co-expression analysis 
using a recently developed web-based multi-experiment matrix tool for
visualisation and rank aggregation.
RESULTS: In ACC and BBC we identified characteristic and overlapping SOX10 gene
signatures that contained a large set of novel potential molecular markers. SOX10
was validated as a sensitive diagnostic marker for both cancers and its
expression was linked to normal and malignant myoepithelial/basal cells. In ACC, 
BBC, and melanoma (MEL), SOX10 expression strongly co-segregated with the
expression of ROPN1B, GPM6B, COL9A3, and MIA. In ACC and breast cancers, SOX10
expression negatively correlated with FOXA1, a cell identity marker and major
regulator of the luminal breast subtype. Diagnostic significance of several
conserved elements of the SOX10 signature (MIA, TRIM2, ROPN1, and ROPN1B) was
validated on BBC cell lines.
CONCLUSION: SOX10 expression in ACC and BBC appears to be a part of a highly
coordinated transcriptional programme characteristic for cancers with
basal/myoepithelial features. Comparison between ACC/BBC and other cancers, such 
as neuroblastomaand MEL, reveals potential molecular markers specific for these
cancers that are likely linked to their cell identity. SOX10 as a novel
diagnostic marker for ACC and BBC provides important molecular insight into their
molecular aetiology and cell origin. Given that SOX10 was recently described as a
principal driver of MEL, identification of conserved elements of the SOX10
signatures may help in better understanding of SOX10-related signalling and
development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

PMCID: PMC3721393
PMID: 23799842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Breast Cancer. 2015 May;22(3):308-16. doi: 10.1007/s12282-013-0482-2. Epub 2013
Jun 16.

FOXA1 expression after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is a prognostic marker in
estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Kawase M(1), Toyama T, Takahashi S, Sato S, Yoshimoto N, Endo Y, Asano T,
Kobayashi S, Fujii Y, Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology, Immunology and Surgery, Nagoya City University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have indicated that the response to chemotherapy and
the prognostic impact of a pathological complete response (pCR) after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy differ among breast cancer subtypes. Predictors of response to
chemotherapy and prognostic factors for survival might be different in estrogen
receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer.
METHODS: Women with Stage II to III ER-positive HER2-negative breast cancer
treated with anthracycline and taxane-containing neoadjuvant chemotherapy between
2003 and 2011 were retrospectively analyzed. Expression of forkhead box A1
(FOXA1), B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2) and microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT)
as well as ER, progesterone receptor, HER2 and Ki67 was examined by
immunohistochemistry in pre- and post-treatment specimens. Factors predictive of 
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and distant disease-free survival were
analyzed.
RESULTS: Tumor grade was positively correlated with Ki67 expression. Expression
levels of ER were positively correlated with expression levels of HER2, BCL2,
FOXA1 and MAPT in pre-treatment tumors. The Ki67 labeling index was the only
factor that was significantly associated with clinical response measured by the
reduction of tumor volume and pCR. Lymph node status, expression of ER before
neoadjuvant chemotherapy and expression of FOXA1 after neoadjuvant chemotherapy
were significantly associated with distant disease-free survival, both by
univariate and multivariate analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with ER-positive HER2-negative breast cancer should be
selected for neoadjuvant chemotherapy. FOXA1 expression could be a prognostic
marker in ER-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 23771556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):753-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.026.

PDEF promotes luminal differentiation and acts as a survival factor for
ER-positive breast cancer cells.

Buchwalter G(1), Hickey MM, Cromer A, Selfors LM, Gunawardane RN, Frishman J,
Jeselsohn R, Lim E, Chi D, Fu X, Schiff R, Brown M, Brugge JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and can be classified based on gene
expression profiles that reflect distinct epithelial subtypes. We identify
prostate-derived ETS factor (PDEF) as a mediator of mammary luminal epithelial
lineage-specific gene expression and as a factor required for tumorigenesis in a 
subset of breast cancers. PDEF levels strongly correlate with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive luminal breast cancer, and PDEF transcription is inversely
regulated by ER and GATA3. Furthermore, PDEF is essential for luminal breast
cancer cell survival and is required in models of endocrine resistance. These
results offer insights into the function of this ETS factor that are clinically
relevant and may be of therapeutic value for patients with breast cancer treated 
with endocrine therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3711136
PMID: 23764000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Aug;41(14):6892-904. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt469. Epub 2013
May 30.

KDM4B is a master regulator of the estrogen receptor signalling cascade.

Gaughan L(1), Stockley J, Coffey K, O'Neill D, Jones DL, Wade M, Wright J, Moore 
M, Tse S, Rogerson L, Robson CN.

Author information: 
(1)Solid Tumour Target Discovery Group, Northern Institute for Cancer Research,
Newcastle University, Paul O'Gorman Building, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.
luke.gaughan@ncl.ac.uk

The importance of the estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer (BCa) development
makes it a prominent target for therapy. Current treatments, however, have
limited effectiveness, and hence the definition of new therapeutic targets is
vital. The ER is a member of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily of
transcription factors that requires co-regulator proteins for complete
regulation. Emerging evidence has implicated a small number of histone
methyltransferase (HMT) and histone demethylase (HDM) enzymes as regulators of ER
signalling, including the histone H3 lysine 9 tri-/di-methyl HDM enzyme KDM4B.
Two recent independent reports have demonstrated that KDM4B is required for
ER-mediated transcription and depletion of the enzyme attenuates BCa growth in
vitro and in vivo. Here we show that KDM4B has an overarching regulatory role in 
the ER signalling cascade by controlling expression of the ER and FOXA1 genes,
two critical components for maintenance of the estrogen-dependent phenotype.
KDM4B interacts with the transcription factor GATA-3 in BCa cell lines and
directly co-activates GATA-3 activity in reporter-based experiments. Moreover, we
reveal that KDM4B recruitment and demethylation of repressive H3K9me3 marks
within upstream regulatory regions of the ER gene permits binding of GATA-3 to
drive receptor expression. Ultimately, our findings confirm the importance of
KDM4B within the ER signalling cascade and as a potential therapeutic target for 
BCa treatment.

PMCID: PMC3737554
PMID: 23723241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Oct;9(5):578-85. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9447-2.

Effect of a matrigel sandwich on endodermal differentiation of human embryonic
stem cells.

Lawton BR(1), Sosa JA, Roman S, Krause DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA, betty.lawton@yale.edu.

Definitive endoderm can be derived from human embryonic stem cells using low
serum medium with cytokines involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition,
including Activin A and Wnt3A. The purpose of this study was to develop an
improved protocol that permits the induction of definitive endoderm while
avoiding the high rate of cell death that often occurs with existing protocols.
By including insulin and other nutrients, we demonstrate that cell viability can 
be preserved throughout differentiation. In addition, modifying a matrigel
sandwich method previously reported to induce precardiac mesoderm allows for
enhanced endodermal differentiation based on expression of endoderm-associated
genes. The morphological and migratory characteristics of cells cultured by the
technique, as well as gene expression patterns, indicate that the protocol can
emulate key events in gastrulation towards the induction of definitive endoderm.

PMID: 23719997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jan 25;382(1):633-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.04.026.
Epub 2013 May 16.

Chromatin and epigenetic determinants of estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1)
signaling.

Magnani L(1), Lupien M.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre-University Health
Network, Canada; Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada;
Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Electronic address: l.magnani@imperial.ac.uk.

The oestrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) is a transcription factor that potentiates
the response to diverse stimuli, including oestrogen and growth factors, in
various tissue types. Its recruitment to the DNA is directly regulated by the
chromatin landscape, inclusive of chromatin compaction and epigenetic
modifications. In this review we discuss our current understanding of the
interplay between ESR1 signaling and the chromatin landscape. We present how the 
chromatin landscape primes the lineage-specific response and contributes to
stimuli-specific signaling. Finally, we discuss recent efforts to decipher the
relationship between genetic and epigenetic as it relates to ESR1 signaling in
breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 May 11;15(3):R37. doi: 10.1186/bcr3421.

Molecular apocrine breast cancers are aggressive estrogen receptor negative
tumors overexpressing either HER2 or GCDFP15.

Lehmann-Che J, Hamy AS, Porcher R, Barritault M, Bouhidel F, Habuellelah H,
Leman-Detours S, de Roquancourt A, Cahen-Doidy L, Bourstyn E, de Cremoux P, de
Bazelaire C, Albiter M, Giacchetti S, Cuvier C, Janin A, Espié M, de Thé H,
Bertheau P.

INTRODUCTION: Molecular apocrine (MA) tumors are estrogen receptor (ER) negative 
breast cancers characterized by androgen receptor (AR) expression. We analyzed a 
group of 58 transcriptionally defined MA tumors and proposed a new tool to
identify these tumors.
METHODS: We performed quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) for ESR1, 
AR, FOXA1 and AR-related genes, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) for ER, PR, Human 
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), CK5/6, CK17, EGFR, Ki67, AR, FOXA1 and
GCDFP15 and we analyzed clinical features.
RESULTS: MA tumors were all characterized by ESR1(-) AR(+) FOXA1(+) and
AR-related genes positive mRNA profile. IHC staining on these tumors showed 93%
ER(-), only 58% AR(+) and 90% FOXA1(+). 67% and 57% MA tumors were HER2(3+) and
GCDFP15(+), respectively. Almost all MA tumors (94%) had the IHC signature
HER2(3+) or GCDFP15(+) but none of the 13 control basal-like (BL) tumors did.
Clinically, MA tumors were rather aggressive, with poor prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: MA tumors could be better defined by their qRT-PCR-AR profile than by
AR IHC. In addition, we found that HER2 or GCDFP15 protein overexpression is a
sensitive and specific tool to differentiate MA from BL in the context of ER
negative tumors. A composite molecular and IHC signature could, therefore, help
to identify MA tumors in daily practice.

PMCID: PMC4053236
PMID: 23663520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Zh Evol Biokhim Fiziol. 2013 Jan-Feb;49(1):67-77.

[Production and characteristics of the growth and marker properties of
mesenchymal stem cells of urinary bladder].

[Article in Russian]

Zhidkova OV, Petrov NS, Popov BV.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are capable for transdifferentiation into cells of
another functional phenotype and are a perspective resourse of recovery therapy. 
MSC of different tissues differ by differentiation potential and in some cases
express tissue-specific markers, which indicates close mesenchymal and
parenchymal phenotypes of the same tissue. The homoorgan MSC might possibly be
induced more effectively for tissue-specific differentiation and the preferred
for cell therapy of diseases of the same organ as compared with widely used cells
of the bone marrow origin. By using explants of the urinary bladder tissue, we
obtained primary urinary bladder cell cultures of MSC of fetal and mature Balb/c 
mice (MSC-UBF and MSC-UBM) and characterized their properties in the course of
long-term passing in culture. Unlike cells of mature animals, MSC-UBF have the
steady capability for growth in vitro, clonogenic activity, and differentiation
into adipose and bone cells. MSC-UBF express mesenchymal markers CD29, XD44,
CD49f, CD90, and CD105, but not panleukocytic marker CD45, and do not differ by
these parameters from the bone marrow MSC. Under normal conditions, MSC-UBF
produce such urothelial markers as Ck14 and FOXA1, although their expression
level is significantly lower than in the urinary bladder tissue. The
hypomethylating reagent 5-azacytidin produces in MSC-UBF the expression of
activator of urothelial differentiation PPARgamma and of markers of functional
urothelium--UP1a, UP1b, UP3a, and UP3b. The obtained data indicate a possibility 
of epigenetic reprogramming of the urinary bladder MSC into urothelium at their
treatment with 5-azacytidin, which can serve a basis for a novel model of cell
therapy of urinary bladder diseases.

PMID: 23662484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Pathol. 2013 Aug;230(4):453-6. doi: 10.1002/path.4208.

Lack of evidence for frequent MED12 p.L1224F mutation in prostate tumours from
Caucasian patients.

Stoehr R(1), Taubert H, Gaisa NT, Smeets D, Kneitz B, Giedl J, Ruemmele P,
Wieland WF, Rau TT, Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, 91054, Erlangen,
Germany. robert.stoehr@uk-erlangen.de

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2013 Oct;231(2):271.

Recently mutations in the MED12 gene have been reported in 5.4% of prostate
tumours from Caucasian patients analysed by exome sequencing (Barbieri CE, Baca
SC, Lawrence MS, et al. Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP, FOXA1 and
MED12 mutations in prostate cancer. Nature Genet 2012; 44: 685-689). In more than
70% of prostate tumours with MED12 mutation, a recurrent p.L1224F mutation in
exon 26 was found. In order to validate this MED12 p.L1224F mutation, an
unselected cohort of prostate tumours from Caucasian patients was analysed by
Sanger sequencing. Overall, 223 prostate tumours and three lymph node metastases 
were analysed. The MED12 p.L1224F mutation could not be detected in any of the
cases. So far, the recently reported MED12 p.L1224F mutation could not be
validated in our unselected cohort of prostate tumours. Contrary to the findings 
of Barbieri et al, our data indicate either that the p.L1224F mutation in the
MED12 gene plays no role in prostate carcinogenesis or that this alteration is
only relevant in a small subgroup of tumours.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23661306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Oct;114(10):2203-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24584.

Estrogen receptor alpha: molecular mechanisms and emerging insights.

Candelaria NR(1), Liu K, Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5506, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is a cellular receptor for the female sex hormone
estrogen and other natural and synthetic ligands and play critical roles in
normal development and physiology and in the etiology and treatment of
endocrine-related diseases. ERa is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
of transcription factors and regulates target gene expression in a
ligand-dependent manner. It has also been shown to interact with G-protein
coupled receptors and associated signaling molecules in the cytoplasm.
Transcriptionally, ERa either binds DNA directly through conserved estrogen
response element sequence motifs or indirectly by tethering to other interacting 
transcription factors and nucleate transcriptional regulatory complexes which
include an array of co-regulator proteins. Genome-scale studies of ERa
transcriptional activity and localization have revealed mechanistic complexity
and insights including novel interactions with several transcription factors,
including FOXA1, AP-2g, GATA3, and RUNX1, which function as pioneering,
collaborative, or tethering factors. The major challenge and exciting prospect
moving forward is the comprehensive definition and integration of ERa complexes
and mechanisms and their tissue-specific roles in normal physiology and in human 
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23649536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Neurosci. 2013 May 1;33(18):8022-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4774-12.2013.

Foxa1 and foxa2 are required for the maintenance of dopaminergic properties in
ventral midbrain neurons at late embryonic stages.

Stott SR(1), Metzakopian E, Lin W, Kaestner KH, Hen R, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council National Institute for
Medical Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

The maintained expression of transcription factors throughout the development of 
mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons suggests multiple roles at various
stages in development. Two members of the forkhead/winged helix transcription
factor family, Foxa1 and Foxa2, have been recently shown to have an important
influence in the early development of mDA neurons. Here we present data
demonstrating that these genes are also involved in the later maintenance of the 
mDA system. We conditionally removed both genes in postmitotic mDA neurons using 
the dopamine transporter-cre mouse. Deletion of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 resulted in 
a significant reduction in the number of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive mDA
neurons. The decrease was predominantly observed in the substantia nigra region
of the mDA system, which led to a loss of TH+ fibers innervating the striatum.
Further analysis demonstrated that the reduction in the number of TH+ cells in
the mutant mice was not due to apoptosis or cell-fate change. Using reporter
mouse lines, we found that the mDA neurons were still present in the ventral
midbrain, but that they had lost much of their dopaminergic phenotype. The
majority of these neurons remained in the ventral mesencephalon until at least 18
months of age. Chromatin immunoprecipitation suggested that the loss of the mDA
phenotype is due to a reduction in the binding of the nuclear orphan receptor,
Nurr-1 to the promoter region of TH. These results extend previous findings and
demonstrate a later role for Foxa genes in regulating the maintenance of
dopaminergic phenotype in mDA neurons.

PMID: 23637192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 Jan;19(1):53-60. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0433-z.
Epub 2013 Apr 28.

Forkhead box protein A1 inhibits the expression of uncoupling protein 2 in
hydrogen peroxide-induced A549 cell line.

Song L(1), Xu Z, Li L, Hu M, Cheng L, Chen L, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hunan University of Chinese 
Medicine, Changsha, Hunan, 410208, China, songlan311492@163.com.

Forkhead box protein A1 (FoxA1) is a transcription factor that is involved in
embryonic development and cell differentiation. In this study, we show that
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) treatment upregulated expression of FoxA1 and UCP2 in
the A549 cell line. Overexpression of FoxA1 by full-length complementary DNA
reduced UCP2 expression, while silencing of FoxA1 expression by small interfering
RNA significantly increased UCP2 levels. FoxA1 binds to a site from -919 to
-913 bp relative to the UCP2 transcription start site. The overexpression of
FoxA1 promoted the DNA binding activity and attenuated the transcription of UCP2 
promoter as shown by electromobility shift, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
and luciferase reporter assay. These data indicate an important role of FoxA1 in 
regulating expression of UCP2.

PMCID: PMC3857427
PMID: 23625627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 8;8(4):e60455. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060455. Print 2013.

Reduced androgen receptor expression accelerates the onset of ERBB2 induced
breast tumors in female mice.

Hodgson MC(1), Vanostran G, Alghamdi S, Poppiti RJ, Agoulnik AI, Agoulnik IU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biology and Pharmacology, Herbert Wertheim College of
Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, Florida, United States of
America.

Androgen receptor (AR) is commonly expressed in both the epithelium of normal
mammary glands and in breast cancers. AR expression in breast cancers is
independent of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) status and is frequently associated 
with overexpression of the ERBB2 oncogene. AR signaling effects on breast cancer 
progression may depend on ERa and ERBB2 status. Up to 30% of human breast cancers
are driven by overactive ERBB2 signaling and it is not clear whether AR
expression affects any steps of tumor progression in this cohort of patients. To 
test this, we generated mammary specific Ar depleted mice (MARKO) by combining
the floxed allele of Ar with the MMTV-cre transgene on an MMTV-NeuNT background
and compared them to littermate MMTV-NeuNT, Ar(fl)/+ control females.
Heterozygous MARKO females displayed reduced levels of AR in mammary glands with 
mosaic AR expression in ductal epithelium. The loss of AR dramatically
accelerated the onset of MMTV-NeuNT tumors in female MARKO mice. In this report
we show that accelerated MMTV-NeuNT-dependent tumorigenesis is due specifically
to the loss of AR, as hormonal levels, estrogen and progesterone receptors
expression, and MMTV-NeuNT expression were similar between MARKO and control
groups. MMTV-NeuNT induced tumors in both cohorts displayed distinct loss of AR
in addition to ERa, PR, and the pioneer factor FOXA1. Erbb3 mRNA levels were
significantly elevated in tumors in comparison to normal mammary glands. Thus the
loss of AR in mouse mammary epithelium accelerates malignant transformation
rather than the rate of tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3620158
PMID: 23593223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Urol. 2013 Apr;189(4):1597. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.12.067. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Re: loss of the urothelial differentiation marker FOXA1 is associated with high
grade, late stage bladder cancer and increased tumor proliferation.

Wood DP.

Comment on
    PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36669.

PMID: 23561391  [PubMed]


230. Genome Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1307-18. doi: 10.1101/gr.154922.113. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Comprehensive prediction in 78 human cell lines reveals rigidity and compactness 
of transcription factor dimers.

Jankowski A(1), Szczurek E, Jauch R, Tiuryn J, Prabhakar S.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore
138672, Singapore.

The binding of transcription factors (TFs) to their specific motifs in genomic
regulatory regions is commonly studied in isolation. However, in order to
elucidate the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation, it is essential to
determine which TFs bind DNA cooperatively as dimers and to infer the precise
nature of these interactions. So far, only a small number of such dimeric
complexes are known. Here, we present an algorithm for predicting
cell-type-specific TF-TF dimerization on DNA on a large scale, using DNase I
hypersensitivity data from 78 human cell lines. We represented the universe of
possible TF complexes by their corresponding motif complexes, and analyzed their 
occurrence at cell-type-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites. Based on ~1.4
billion tests for motif complex enrichment, we predicted 603 highly significant
cell-type-specific TF dimers, the vast majority of which are novel. Our
predictions included 76% (19/25) of the known dimeric complexes and showed
significant overlap with an experimental database of protein-protein
interactions. They were also independently supported by evolutionary
conservation, as well as quantitative variation in DNase I digestion patterns.
Notably, the known and predicted TF dimers were almost always highly compact and 
rigidly spaced, suggesting that TFs dimerize in close proximity to their
partners, which results in strict constraints on the structure of the DNA-bound
complex. Overall, our results indicate that chromatin openness profiles are
highly predictive of cell-type-specific TF-TF interactions. Moreover, cooperative
TF dimerization seems to be a widespread phenomenon, with multiple TF complexes
predicted in most cell types.

PMCID: PMC3730104
PMID: 23554463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;73(12):3725-36. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3468. Epub 
2013 Mar 28.

Androgen receptor-independent function of FoxA1 in prostate cancer metastasis.

Jin HJ(1), Zhao JC, Ogden I, Bergan RC, Yu J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

FoxA1 (FOXA1) is a pioneering transcription factor of the androgen receptor (AR) 
that is indispensible for the lineage-specific gene expression of the prostate.
To date, there have been conflicting reports on the role of FoxA1 in prostate
cancer progression and prognosis. With recent discoveries of recurrent FoxA1
mutations in human prostate tumors, comprehensive understanding of FoxA1 function
has become very important. Here, through genomic analysis, we reveal that FoxA1
regulates two distinct oncogenic processes via disparate mechanisms. FoxA1
induces cell growth requiring the AR pathway. On the other hand, FoxA1 inhibits
cell motility and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) through
AR-independent mechanism directly opposing the action of AR signaling. Using
orthotopic mouse models, we further show that FoxA1 inhibits prostate tumor
metastasis in vivo. Concordant with these contradictory effects on tumor
progression, FoxA1 expression is slightly upregulated in localized prostate
cancer wherein cell proliferation is the main feature, but is remarkably
downregulated when the disease progresses to metastatic stage for which cell
motility and EMT are essential. Importantly, recently identified FoxA1 mutants
have drastically attenuated ability in suppressing cell motility. Taken together,
our findings illustrate an AR-independent function of FoxA1 as a metastasis
inhibitor and provide a mechanism by which recurrent FoxA1 mutations contribute
to prostate cancer progression.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3686855
PMID: 23539448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 1;27(7):734-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.209569.112. Epub 2013 Mar
25.

Amplitude modulation of androgen signaling by c-MYC.

Ni M(1), Chen Y, Fei T, Li D, Lim E, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Androgen-stimulated growth of the molecular apocrine breast cancer subtype is
mediated by an androgen receptor (AR)-regulated transcriptional program. However,
the molecular details of this AR-centered regulatory network and the roles of
other transcription factors that cooperate with AR in the network remain elusive.
Here we report a positive feed-forward loop that enhances breast cancer growth
involving AR, AR coregulators, and downstream target genes. In the absence of an 
androgen signal, TCF7L2 interacts with FOXA1 at AR-binding sites and represses
the basal expression of AR target genes, including MYC. Direct AR regulation of
MYC cooperates with AR-mediated activation of HER2/HER3 signaling. HER2/HER3
signaling increases the transcriptional activity of MYC through phosphorylation
of MAD1, leading to increased levels of MYC/MAX heterodimers. MYC in turn
reinforces the transcriptional activation of androgen-responsive genes. These
results reveal a novel regulatory network in molecular apocrine breast cancers
regulated by androgen and AR in which MYC plays a central role as both a key
target and a cooperating transcription factor to drive oncogenic growth.

PMCID: PMC3639415
PMID: 23530127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 25;50(2):185-99. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.02.018. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Nkx2-1 represses a latent gastric differentiation program in lung adenocarcinoma.

Snyder EL(1), Watanabe H, Magendantz M, Hoersch S, Chen TA, Wang DG, Crowley D,
Whittaker CA, Meyerson M, Kimura S, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 May;13(5):291.

Tissue-specific differentiation programs become dysregulated during cancer
evolution. The transcription factor Nkx2-1 is a master regulator of pulmonary
differentiation that is downregulated in poorly differentiated lung
adenocarcinoma. Here we use conditional murine genetics to determine how the
identity of lung epithelial cells changes upon loss of their master cell-fate
regulator. Nkx2-1 deletion in normal and neoplastic lungs causes not only loss of
pulmonary identity but also conversion to a gastric lineage. Nkx2-1 is likely to 
maintain pulmonary identity by recruiting transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2
to lung-specific loci, thus preventing them from binding gastrointestinal
targets. Nkx2-1-negative murine lung tumors mimic mucinous human lung
adenocarcinomas, which express gastric markers. Loss of the gastrointestinal
transcription factor Hnf4a leads to derepression of the embryonal proto-oncogene 
Hmga2 in Nkx2-1-negative tumors. These observations suggest that loss of both
active and latent differentiation programs is required for tumors to reach a
primitive, poorly differentiated state.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3721642
PMID: 23523371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Clin Neurosci. 2013 May;20(5):654-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2012.03.055. Epub 2013
Mar 16.

Forkhead-box A1 transcription factor is a novel adverse prognosis marker in human
glioma.

Wang L(1), Qin H, Li L, Feng F, Ji P, Zhang J, Li G, Zhao Z, Gao G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tangdu Hospital, 569 Xinsi Road, Baqiao District, 
Xi'an City 710038, China.

Forkhead-box A1 (FOXA1), a member of the FOX family of transcription factors, has
been implicated in certain tumor types including breast, prostate, lung, thyroid 
and esophageal squamous cell carcinomas. The aim of this study was to investigate
the clinicopathological significance of FOXA1 expression in human malignant
glioma. FOXA1 expression in human glioma and non-neoplastic brain tissue was
measured by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR), Western blot and immunohistochemistry. The association of FOXA1
immunostaining with clinicopathological factors and prognosis in patients with
glioma was also investigated. The expression levels of FOXA1 messenger RNA (mRNA)
and protein in glioma tissues were significantly higher than those in
corresponding non-neoplastic brain tissue (both p<0.001). In addition, the
expression of FOXA1 was upregulated in high-grade glioma tissue compared with
that in low-grade tissues, and increased with ascending World Health Organization
(WHO) tumor grade (p=0.001). The increased expression of FOXA1 protein was also
significantly correlated with low Karnofsky performance scale score (p=0.02).
Moreover, the overall survival rate for patients with high FOXA1 protein
expression was clearly lower than that for patients with low FOXA1 protein
expression (p=0.01). Multivariate analysis showed that high FOXA1 protein
expression was an independent prognostic factor for overall survival (p=0.02) in 
patients with glioma. In conclusion, our results suggest, for the first time,
that FOXA1 might be a potential regulator of progression of human glioma and its 
upregulation might be closely associated with a poor clinical outcome for
patients with this serious disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23510544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11705-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.388173. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Neurogenin3 cooperates with Foxa2 to autoactivate its own expression.

Ejarque M(1), Cervantes S, Pujadas G, Tutusaus A, Sanchez L, Gasa R.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory, Institut D'Investigacions Biomèdiques August 
Pi i Sunyer-Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor Neurogenin3 functions as a master regulator of endocrine
pancreas formation, and its deficiency leads to the development of diabetes in
humans and mice. In the embryonic pancreas, Neurogenin3 is transiently expressed 
at high levels for a narrow time window to initiate endocrine differentiation in 
scattered progenitor cells. The mechanisms controlling these rapid and robust
changes in Neurogenin3 expression are poorly understood. In this study, we
characterize a Neurogenin3 positive autoregulatory loop whereby this factor may
rapidly induce its own levels. We show that Neurogenin3 binds to a conserved
upstream fragment of its own gene, inducing deposition of active chromatin marks 
and the activation of Neurog3 transcription. Additionally, we show that the
broadly expressed endodermal forkhead factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 can cooperate
synergistically to amplify Neurogenin3 autoregulation in vitro. However, only
Foxa2 colocalizes with Neurogenin3 in pancreatic progenitors, thus indicating a
primary role for this factor in regulating Neurogenin3 expression in vivo.
Furthermore, in addition to decreasing Neurog3 autoregulation, inhibition of
Foxa2 by RNA interference attenuates Neurogenin3-dependent activation of the
endocrine developmental program in cultured duct mPAC cells. Hence, these data
uncover the potential functional cooperation between the endocrine
lineage-determining factor Neurogenin3 and the widespread endoderm progenitor
factor Foxa2 in the implementation of the endocrine developmental program in the 
pancreas.

PMCID: PMC3636860
PMID: 23471965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Dev Cell. 2013 Feb 25;24(4):342-4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.02.005.

Pioneering barren land: mitotic bookmarking by transcription factors.

Rada-Iglesias A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. alvaro.rada-iglesias@uni-koeln.de

Comment on
    Genes Dev. 2013 Feb 1;27(3):251-60.

Genome condensation during mitosis presents a chromatin landscape largely
inaccessible to RNA polymerase II and most transcription factors. Caravaca et al.
(2013) now report in Genes and Development that the pioneer transcription factor 
FOXA1 is retained at mitotic chromosomes, bookmarking the genome to enable gene
expression reestablishment upon mitotic exit.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23449470  [PubMed]


237. EMBO J. 2013 Mar 20;32(6):858-73. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.35. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

FOXA1 mediates p16(INK4a) activation during cellular senescence.

Li Q(1), Zhang Y, Fu J, Han L, Xue L, Lv C, Wang P, Li G, Tong T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center on Aging, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China.

Mechanisms governing the transcription of p16(INK4a), one of the master
regulators of cellular senescence, have been extensively studied. However, little
is known about chromatin dynamics taking place at its promoter and distal
enhancer. Here, we report that Forkhead box A1 protein (FOXA1) is significantly
upregulated in both replicative and oncogene-induced senescence, and in turn
activates transcription of p16(INK4a) through multiple mechanisms. In addition to
acting as a classic sequence-specific transcriptional activator, FOXA1 binding
leads to a decrease in nucleosome density at the p16(INK4a) promoter in senescent
fibroblasts. Moreover, FOXA1, itself a direct target of Polycomb-mediated
repression, antagonizes Polycomb function at the p16(INK4a) locus. Finally, a
systematic survey of putative FOXA1 binding sites in the p16(INK4a) genomic
region revealed an ~150 kb distal element that could loop back to the promoter
and potentiate p16(INK4a) expression. Overall, our findings establish several
mechanisms by which FOXA1 controls p16(INK4a) expression during cellular
senescence.

PMCID: PMC3604725
PMID: 23443045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Breast Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 18;15(1):303. doi: 10.1186/bcr3360.

A functional link between FOXA1 and breast cancer SNPs.

Katika MR, Hurtado A.

Genome-wide association studies have revealed a multitude of breast
cancer-associated SNPs. The majority of these SNPs are located in noncoding
regions of the genome. Yet how they contribute to breast cancer development is
unknown. Recently, a groundbreaking study by the Lupien group has shown that
risk-associated SNPs of breast cancer are enriched for FOXA1 binding sites, which
influences the function of this transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC3745646
PMID: 23427833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Front Oncol. 2013 Feb 14;3:20. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00020. eCollection 2013.

FOXA1 mutations in hormone-dependent cancers.

Robinson JL(1), Holmes KA, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Robinson Way Cambridge, UK ; Department of Oncology,
University of Cambridge Cambridge, UK.

The forkhead protein, FOXA1, is a critical interacting partner of the nuclear
hormone receptors, oestrogen receptor-a (ER) and androgen receptor (AR), which
are major drivers of the two most common cancers, namely breast and prostate
cancer. Over the past few years, progress has been made in our understanding of
how FOXA1 influences nuclear receptor function, with both common and distinct
roles in the regulation of ER or AR. Recently, another level of regulation has
been described, with the discovery that FOXA1 is mutated in 1.8% of breast and
3-5% prostate cancers. In addition, a subset of both cancer types exhibit
amplification of the genomic region encompassing the FOXA1 gene. Furthermore,
there is evidence of somatic changes that influence the DNA sequence under FOXA1 
binding regions, which may indirectly influence FOXA1-mediated regulation of ER
and AR activity. These recent observations provide insight into the heterogeneity
observed in ER and AR driven cancers.

PMCID: PMC3572741
PMID: 23420418  [PubMed]


240. Prostate. 2013 Jun;73(9):986-95. doi: 10.1002/pros.22646. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

Combination effects of dietary soy and methylselenocysteine in a mouse model of
prostate cancer.

Christensen MJ(1), Quiner TE, Nakken HL, Lephart ED, Eggett DL, Urie PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Dietetics, and Food Science, Brigham Young
University, Provo, Utah 84602, USA. merrill_christensen@byu.edu

BACKGROUND: High dietary intake of soy or selenium (Se) is associated with
decreased risk of prostate cancer. Soy constituents and various chemical forms of
Se have each been shown to downregulate expression of the androgen receptor (AR) 
and AR-regulated genes in the prostate. We hypothesized that downregulation of AR
and AR-regulated genes by the combination of these dietary components would
inhibit tumorigenesis in the TRansgenic Adenocarcinoma of Mouse Prostate (TRAMP) 
mouse.
METHODS: Male mice were exposed from conception to stock diets high or low in
soy, with or without a supplement of Se-methylseleno-L-cysteine (MSC) in a 2<U+2009>×<U+2009>2 
factorial design. Mice were sacrificed at 18 weeks. Prostate histopathology,
urogenital tract (UGT) weight, hepatic activity of androgen-metabolizing enzymes,
and expression of AR, AR-regulated, and AR-associated FOX family genes, in the
dorsolateral prostate were examined.
RESULTS: High soy intake decreased activity of hepatic aromatase and
5a-reductase, expression of AR, AR-regulated genes, FOXA1, UGT weight, and tumor 
progression, and upregulated protective FOXO3. Supplemental MSC upregulated
AKR1C14, which reduces 5a-dihydrotestosterone.
CONCLUSIONS: Soy is an effective pleiotropic dietary agent for prevention of
prostate cancer. The finding of effects of soy on FOX family gene expression in
animals is novel. Combination effects of supplemental MSC may depend upon the soy
content of the basal diet to which it is added.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4629493
PMID: 23389815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. BMC Clin Pathol. 2013 Feb 6;13:5. doi: 10.1186/1472-6890-13-5.

A simple immunohistochemical panel comprising 2 conventional markers, Ki67 and
p53, is a powerful tool for predicting patient outcome in luminal-type breast
cancer.

Kobayashi T(1), Iwaya K, Moriya T, Yamasaki T, Tsuda H, Yamamoto J, Matsubara O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Pathology, National Defense Medical College, 3-2 Namiki,
Tokorozawa, Saitama, 359-8513, Japan. tkobayashi.g@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Ki67 is widely used in order to distinguish the "A" and "B" subtypes 
of luminal-type breast cancer. This study aimed to validate the prognostic value 
of adding p53 to Ki67 for characterizing luminal-type breast cancer.
METHODS: Immunostaining for Ki67, p53, and the molecular markers HER2, CK5/6,
CK14, EGFR, FOXA1, GATA3, and P-cadherin was examined hormone receptor
(HR)-positive cancer tissues from 150 patients. The prognostic value of an
immunohistochemical panel comprising Ki67 and p53 was compared with that of the
single Ki67 labeling index (LI), and uni- and multivariate analyses were
performed.
RESULTS: Division of the patients based on the immunohistochemistry results into 
favorable- (low Ki67 LI, p53-negative) and unfavorable- (high Ki67 LI and/or
p53-positive) phenotype groups yielded distinctly different Kaplan-Meier's curves
of both disease-free (P<0.0001) and overall survival (P=0.0007). These
differences were much more distinct than those between the corresponding low Ki67
LI vs. high Ki67LI curves. While the prognostic values of the other molecular
markers were not significant, combined Ki67-p53 status was an independent
prognostic factor by multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that an immunohistochemical panel comprising Ki67
and p53 is a practical tool for management of patients with HR-positive breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3577510
PMID: 23384409  [PubMed]


242. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055528. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for formation of the intervertebral discs.

Maier JA(1), Lo Y, Harfe BD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and the Genetics Institute, University of 
Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

The intervertebral disc (IVD) is composed of 3 main structures, the collagenous
annulus fibrosus (AF), which surrounds the gel-like nucleus pulposus (NP), and
hyaline cartilage endplates, which are attached to the vertebral bodies. An IVD
is located between each vertebral body. Degeneration of the IVD is thought to be 
a major cause of back pain, a potentially chronic condition for which there exist
few effective treatments. The NP forms from the embryonic notochord. Foxa1 and
Foxa2, transcription factors in the forkhead box family, are expressed early
during notochord development. However, embryonic lethality and the absence of the
notochord in Foxa2 null mice have precluded the study of potential roles these
genes may play during IVD formation. Using a conditional Foxa2 allele in
conjunction with a tamoxifen-inducible Cre allele (ShhcreER(T2)), we removed
Foxa2 from the notochord of E7.5 mice null for Foxa1.
Foxa1(-/-);Foxa2(c/c);ShhcreER(T2) double mutant animals had a severely deformed 
nucleus pulposus, an increase in cell death in the tail, decreased hedgehog
signaling, defects in the notochord sheath, and aberrant dorsal-ventral
patterning of the neural tube. Embryos lacking only Foxa1 or Foxa2 from the
notochord were indistinguishable from control animals, demonstrating a functional
redundancy for these genes in IVD formation. In addition, we provide in vivo
genetic evidence that Foxa genes are required for activation of Shh in the
notochord.

PMCID: PMC3561292
PMID: 23383217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Lab Invest. 2013 Apr;93(4):408-21. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan
28.

Neural lineage-specific homeoprotein BRN2 is directly involved in TTF1 expression
in small-cell lung cancer.

Sakaeda M(1), Sato H, Ishii J, Miyata C, Kamma H, Shishido-Hara Y, Shimoyamada H,
Fujiwara M, Endo T, Tanaka R, Kondo H, Goya T, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) plays crucial roles in thyroid, lung, and
developing brain morphogenesis. Because TTF1-expressing neoplasms are generated
from organs and tissues that normally express TTF1, such as the thyroid
follicular epithelium and peripheral lung airway epithelium, TTF1 is widely used 
as a cell lineage-specific and diagnostic marker for thyroid carcinomas and for
lung adenocarcinomas with terminal respiratory unit (TRU) differentiation.
However, among lung neuroendocrine tumors, small-cell carcinomas (small-cell lung
cancers (SCLCs)), most of which are generated from the central airway, also
frequently express TTF1 at high levels. To clarify how SCLCs express TTF1, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms of its expression using cultivated lung
cancer cells and focusing upon neural cell-specific transcription factors. Both
SCLC cells and lung adenocarcinoma cells predominantly expressed isoform 2 of
TTF1, and TTF1 promoter assays in SCLC cells revealed that the crucial region for
activation of the promoter, which is adjacent to the transcription start site of 
TTF1 isoform 2, has potent FOX-, LHX-, and BRN2-binding sites. Transfection
experiments using expression vectors for FOXA1, FOXA2, LHX2, LHX6, and BRN2
showed that BRN2 substantially upregulated TTF1 expression, whereas FOXA1/2
weakly upregulated TTF1 expression. BRN2 and FOXA1/2 binding to the TTF1 promoter
was confirmed through chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, and TTF1
expression in SCLC cells was considerably downregulated after BRN2 knockdown.
Furthermore, the TTF1 promoter in SCLC cells was scarcely methylated, and
immunohistochemical examinations using a series of primary lung tumors indicated 
that TTF1 and BRN2 were coexpressed only in SCLC cells. These findings suggest
that TTF1 expression in SCLC is a cell lineage-specific phenomenon that involves 
the developing neural cell-specific homeoprotein BRN2.

PMID: 23358112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Genes Dev. 2013 Feb 1;27(3):251-60. doi: 10.1101/gad.206458.112. Epub 2013 Jan
25.

Bookmarking by specific and nonspecific binding of FoxA1 pioneer factor to
mitotic chromosomes.

Caravaca JM(1), Donahue G, Becker JS, He X, Vinson C, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Program, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University 
of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of Medicine, Smilow Center for Translation
Research, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Feb 25;24(4):342-4.

While most transcription factors exit the chromatin during mitosis and the genome
becomes silent, a subset of factors remains and "bookmarks" genes for rapid
reactivation as cells progress through the cell cycle. However, it is unknown
whether such bookmarking factors bind to chromatin similarly in mitosis and how
different binding capacities among them relate to function. We compared a diverse
set of transcription factors involved in liver differentiation and found markedly
different extents of mitotic chromosome binding. Among them, the pioneer factor
FoxA1 exhibits the greatest extent of mitotic chromosome binding. Genomically,
~15% of the FoxA1 interphase target sites are bound in mitosis, including at
genes that are important for liver differentiation. Biophysical, genome mapping, 
and mutagenesis studies of FoxA1 reveals two different modes of binding to
mitotic chromatin. Specific binding in mitosis occurs at sites that continue to
be bound from interphase. Nonspecific binding in mitosis occurs across the
chromosome due to the intrinsic chromatin affinity of FoxA1. Both specific and
nonspecific binding contribute to timely reactivation of target genes
post-mitosis. These studies reveal an unexpected diversity in the mechanisms by
which transcription factors help retain cell identity during mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3576511
PMID: 23355396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nihon Rinsho. 2012 Sep;70 Suppl 7:438-42.

[FOXA1 expression in luminal-type breast cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Tokunaga E(1), Hisamatsu Y, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Kyushu University.

PMID: 23350438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Mar 1;41(5):2857-68. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1462. Epub 2013 
Jan 15.

Nucleosome mapping across the CFTR locus identifies novel regulatory factors.

Yigit E(1), Bischof JM, Zhang Z, Ott CJ, Kerschner JL, Leir SH, Buitrago-Delgado 
E, Zhang Q, Wang JP, Widom J, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Nucleosome positioning on the chromatin strand plays a critical role in
regulating accessibility of DNA to transcription factors and chromatin modifying 
enzymes. Hence, detailed information on nucleosome depletion or movement at
cis-acting regulatory elements has the potential to identify predicted binding
sites for trans-acting factors. Using a novel method based on enrichment of
mononucleosomal DNA by bacterial artificial chromosome hybridization, we mapped
nucleosome positions by deep sequencing across 250 kb, encompassing the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CFTR shows tight
tissue-specific regulation of expression, which is largely determined by
cis-regulatory elements that lie outside the gene promoter. Although multiple
elements are known, the repertoire of transcription factors that interact with
these sites to activate or repress CFTR expression remains incomplete. Here, we
show that specific nucleosome depletion corresponds to well-characterized binding
sites for known trans-acting factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 1,
Forkhead box A1 and CCCTC-binding factor. Moreover, the cell-type selective
nucleosome positioning is effective in predicting binding sites for novel
interacting factors, such as BAF155. Finally, we identify transcription factor
binding sites that are overrepresented in regions where nucleosomes are depleted 
in a cell-specific manner. This approach recognizes the glucocorticoid receptor
as a novel trans-acting factor that regulates CFTR expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3597660
PMID: 23325854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-4.

Comprehensive meta-analysis of Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
(STAT) genomic binding patterns discerns cell-specific cis-regulatory modules.

Kang K(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA. kangk2@niddk.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-activated transcription factors from the STAT (Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription) family control common and
context-specific genetic programs. It is not clear to what extent cell-specific
features determine the binding capacity of seven STAT members and to what degree 
they share genetic targets. Molecular insight into the biology of STATs was
gained from a meta-analysis of 29 available ChIP-seq data sets covering
genome-wide occupancy of STATs 1, 3, 4, 5A, 5B and 6 in several cell types.
RESULTS: We determined that the genomic binding capacity of STATs is primarily
defined by the cell type and to a lesser extent by individual family members. For
example, the overlap of shared binding sites between STATs 3 and 5 in T cells is 
greater than that between STAT5 in T cells and non-T cells. Even for the top
1,000 highly enriched STAT binding sites, ~15% of STAT5 binding sites in mouse
female liver are shared by other STATs in different cell types while in T cells
~90% of STAT5 binding sites are co-occupied by STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6. In
addition, we identified 116 cis-regulatory modules (CRM), which are recognized by
all STAT members across cell types defining a common JAK-STAT signature. Lastly, 
in liver STAT5 binding significantly coincides with binding of the cell-specific 
transcription factors HNF4A, FOXA1 and FOXA2 and is associated with cell-type
specific gene transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genomic binding of STATs is primarily
determined by the cell type and further specificity is achieved in part by
juxtaposed binding of cell-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3564941
PMID: 23324445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Genes Dev. 2013 Jan 15;27(2):197-210. doi: 10.1101/gad.203208.112. Epub 2013 Jan 
15.

Integrated cistromic and expression analysis of amplified NKX2-1 in lung
adenocarcinoma identifies LMO3 as a functional transcriptional target.

Watanabe H(1), Francis JM, Woo MS, Etemad B, Lin W, Fries DF, Peng S, Snyder EL, 
Tata PR, Izzo F, Schinzel AC, Cho J, Hammerman PS, Verhaak RG, Hahn WC, Rajagopal
J, Jacks T, Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The NKX2-1 transcription factor, a regulator of normal lung development, is the
most significantly amplified gene in human lung adenocarcinoma. To study the
transcriptional impact of NKX2-1 amplification, we generated an expression
signature associated with NKX2-1 amplification in human lung adenocarcinoma and
analyzed DNA-binding sites of NKX2-1 by genome-wide chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Integration of these expression and cistromic analyses
identified LMO3, itself encoding a transcription regulator, as a candidate direct
transcriptional target of NKX2-1. Further cistromic and overexpression analyses
indicated that NKX2-1 can cooperate with the forkhead box transcription factor
FOXA1 to regulate LMO3 gene expression. RNAi analysis of NKX2-1-amplified cells
compared with nonamplified cells demonstrated that LMO3 mediates cell survival
downstream from NKX2-1. Our findings provide new insight into the transcriptional
regulatory network of NKX2-1 and suggest that LMO3 is a transcriptional signal
transducer in NKX2-1-amplified lung adenocarcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3566312
PMID: 23322301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1831(4):803-18. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2012.12.014.
Epub 2013 Jan 12.

The human liver fatty acid binding protein (FABP1) gene is activated by FOXA1 and
PPARa; and repressed by C/EBPa: Implications in FABP1 down-regulation in
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Guzmán C(1), Benet M, Pisonero-Vaquero S, Moya M, García-Mediavilla MV,
Martínez-Chantar ML, González-Gallego J, Castell JV, Sánchez-Campos S, Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Hepatology Unit, IIS Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Liver fatty acid binding protein (FABP1) prevents lipotoxicity of free fatty
acids and regulates fatty acid trafficking and partition. Our objective is to
investigate the transcription factors controlling the human FABP1 gene and their 
regulation in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Adenovirus-mediated
expression of multiple transcription factors in HepG2 cells and cultured human
hepatocytes demonstrated that FOXA1 and PPARa are among the most effective
activators of human FABP1, whereas C/EBPa is a major dominant repressor.
Moreover, FOXA1 and PPARa induced re-distribution of FABP1 protein and increased 
cytoplasmic expression. Reporter assays demonstrated that the major basal
activity of the human FABP1 promoter locates between -96 and -229bp, where C/EBPa
binds to a composite DR1-C/EBP element. Mutation of this element at -123bp
diminished basal reporter activity, abolished repression by C/EBPa and reduced
transactivation by HNF4a. Moreover, HNF4a gene silencing by shRNA in HepG2 cells 
caused a significant down-regulation of FABP1 mRNA expression. FOXA1 activated
the FABP1 promoter through binding to a cluster of elements between -229 and
-592bp, whereas PPARa operated through a conserved proximal element at -59bp.
Finally, FABP1, FOXA1 and PPARa were concomitantly repressed in animal models of 
NAFLD and in human nonalcoholic fatty livers, whereas C/EBPa was induced or did
not change. We conclude that human FABP1 has a complex mechanism of regulation
where C/EBPa displaces HNF4a and hampers activation by FOXA1 and PPARa.
Alteration of expression of these transcription factors in NAFLD leads to FABP1
gen repression and could exacerbate lipotoxicity and disease progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23318274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(12):e1001461. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001461. Epub 2012 Dec
27.

ELF5 suppresses estrogen sensitivity and underpins the acquisition of
antiestrogen resistance in luminal breast cancer.

Kalyuga M(1), Gallego-Ortega D, Lee HJ, Roden DL, Cowley MJ, Caldon CE, Stone A, 
Allerdice SL, Valdes-Mora F, Launchbury R, Statham AL, Armstrong N, Alles MC,
Young A, Egger A, Au W, Piggin CL, Evans CJ, Ledger A, Brummer T, Oakes SR,
Kaplan W, Gee JM, Nicholson RI, Sutherland RL, Swarbrick A, Naylor MJ, Clark SJ, 
Carroll JS, Ormandy CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program and The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Garvan Institute of
Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW, Australia.

We have previously shown that during pregnancy the E-twenty-six (ETS)
transcription factor ELF5 directs the differentiation of mammary progenitor cells
toward the estrogen receptor (ER)-negative and milk producing cell lineage,
raising the possibility that ELF5 may suppress the estrogen sensitivity of breast
cancers. To test this we constructed inducible models of ELF5 expression in ER
positive luminal breast cancer cells and interrogated them using transcript
profiling and chromatin immunoprecipitation of DNA followed by DNA sequencing
(ChIP-Seq). ELF5 suppressed ER and FOXA1 expression and broadly suppressed
ER-driven patterns of gene expression including sets of genes distinguishing the 
luminal molecular subtype. Direct transcriptional targets of ELF5, which included
FOXA1, EGFR, and MYC, accurately classified a large cohort of breast cancers into
their intrinsic molecular subtypes, predicted ER status with high precision, and 
defined groups with differential prognosis. Knockdown of ELF5 in basal breast
cancer cell lines suppressed basal patterns of gene expression and produced a
shift in molecular subtype toward the claudin-low and normal-like groups. Luminal
breast cancer cells that acquired resistance to the antiestrogen Tamoxifen showed
greatly elevated levels of ELF5 and its transcriptional signature, and became
dependent on ELF5 for proliferation, compared to the parental cells. Thus ELF5
provides a key transcriptional determinant of breast cancer molecular subtype by 
suppression of estrogen sensitivity in luminal breast cancer cells and promotion 
of basal characteristics in basal breast cancer cells, an action that may be
utilised to acquire antiestrogen resistance.

PMCID: PMC3531499
PMID: 23300383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biology (Basel). 2013 Jan 29;2(1):284-303. doi: 10.3390/biology2010284.

Transcriptional Regulation of the Mitochondrial Citrate and
Carnitine/Acylcarnitine Transporters: Two Genes Involved in Fatty Acid
Biosynthesis and ß-oxidation.

Iacobazzi V(1), Infantino V(2), Palmieri F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Pharmacological Sciences,
University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy. vito.iacobazzi@uniba.it.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Pharmacological Sciences,
University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
vittoria.infantino@unibas.it. (3)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and
Pharmacological Sciences, University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
ferdpalmieri@gmail.com.

Transcriptional regulation of genes involved in fatty acid metabolism is
considered the major long-term regulatory mechanism controlling lipid
homeostasis. By means of this mechanism, transcription factors, nutrients,
hormones and epigenetics control not only fatty acid metabolism, but also many
metabolic pathways and cellular functions at the molecular level. The regulation 
of the expression of many genes at the level of their transcription has already
been analyzed. This review focuses on the transcriptional control of two genes
involved in fatty acid biosynthesis and oxidation: the citrate carrier (CIC) and 
the carnitine/ acylcarnitine/carrier (CAC), which are members of the
mitochondrial carrier gene family, SLC25. The contribution of tissue-specific and
less tissue-specific transcription factors in activating or repressing CIC and
CAC gene expression is discussed. The interaction with drugs of some
transcription factors, such as PPAR and FOXA1, and how this interaction can be an
attractive therapeutic approach, has also been evaluated. Moreover, the mechanism
by which the expression of the CIC and CAC genes is modulated by coordinated
responses to hormonal and nutritional changes and to epigenetics is highlighted.

PMCID: PMC4009865
PMID: 24832661  [PubMed]


252. Cancer Res. 2013 Mar 1;73(5):1570-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2350. Epub
2012 Dec 26.

FoxA1 specifies unique androgen and glucocorticoid receptor binding events in
prostate cancer cells.

Sahu B(1), Laakso M, Pihlajamaa P, Ovaska K, Sinielnikov I, Hautaniemi S, Jänne
OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine and Research Programs Unit, Genome-Scale Biology,
Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Finland.

The forkhead protein FoxA1 has functions other than a pioneer factor, in that its
depletion brings about a significant redistribution in the androgen receptor (AR)
and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) cistromes. In this study, we found a novel
function for FoxA1 in defining the cell-type specificity of AR- and GR-binding
events in a distinct fashion, namely, for AR in LNCaP-1F5 cells and for GR in
VCaP cells. We also found different, cell-type and receptor-specific compilations
of cis-elements enriched adjacent to the AR- and GR-binding sites. The AR pathway
is central in prostate cancer biology, but the role of GR is poorly known. We
find that AR and GR cistromes and transcription programs exhibit significant
overlap, and GR regulates a large number of genes considered to be AR
pathway-specific. This raises questions about the role of GR in maintaining the
AR pathway under androgen-deprived conditions in castration-resistant prostate
cancer patients. However, in the presence of androgen, ligand-occupied GR acts as
a partial antiandrogen and attenuates the AR-dependent transcription program. .

©2012 AACR

PMID: 23269278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 15;375(2):128-39. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.010. Epub 2012 
Dec 22.

Kruppel-like factor 5 controls villus formation and initiation of
cytodifferentiation in the embryonic intestinal epithelium.

Bell SM(1), Zhang L, Xu Y, Besnard V, Wert SE, Shroyer N, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology-Perinatal-Pulmonary Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College
of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Kruppel-like factor 5 (Klf5) is a transcription factor expressed by embryonic
endodermal progenitors that form the lining of the gastrointestinal tract. A Klf5
floxed allele was efficiently deleted from the intestinal epithelium by a Cre
transgene under control of the Shh promoter resulting in the inhibition of villus
morphogenesis and epithelial differentiation. Although proliferation of the
intestinal epithelium was maintained, the expression of Elf3, Ppar<U+03B3>, Atoh1,
Ascl2, Neurog3, Hnf4a, Cdx1, and other genes associated with epithelial cell
differentiation was inhibited in the Klf5-deficient intestines. At E18.5,
Klf5(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) fetuses lacked the apical brush border characteristic of enterocytes,
and a loss of goblet and enteroendocrine cells was observed. The failure to form 
villi was not attributable to the absence of HH or PDGF signaling, known
mediators of this developmental process. Klf5-deletion blocked the decrease in
FoxA1 and Sox9 expression that accompanies normal villus morphogenesis. KLF5
directly inhibited activity of the FoxA1 promoter, and in turn FOXA1 inhibited
Elf3 gene expression in vitro, linking the observed loss of Elf3 with the
persistent expression of FoxA1 observed in Klf5-deficient mice. Genetic network
analysis identified KLF5 as a key transcription factor regulating intestinal cell
differentiation and cell adhesion. These studies indicate a novel requirement for
KLF5 to initiate morphogenesis of the early endoderm into a compartmentalized
intestinal epithelium comprised of villi and terminally differentiated cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3582784
PMID: 23266329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 15;12(2):379-80. doi: 10.4161/cc.23201. Epub 2012 Jan 15.

A rare variant, which destroys a FoxA1 site at 8q24, is associated with prostate 
cancer risk.

Hazelett DJ, Coetzee SG, Coetzee GA.

PMCID: PMC3575466
PMID: 23255135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2013 Feb 18;20(1):91-102. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0207. Print
2013 Feb.

miR-1290 and its potential targets are associated with characteristics of
estrogen receptor a-positive breast cancer.

Endo Y(1), Toyama T, Takahashi S, Yoshimoto N, Iwasa M, Asano T, Fujii Y,
Yamashita H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Oncology, Immunology and Surgery Experimental Pathology and
Tumor Biology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1
Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Recent analyses have identified heterogeneity in estrogen receptor a
(ERa)-positive breast cancer. Subtypes called luminal A and luminal B have been
identified, and the tumor characteristics, such as response to endocrine therapy 
and prognosis, are different in these subtypes. However, little is known about
how the biological characteristics of ER-positive breast cancer are determined.
In this study, expression profiles of microRNAs (miRNAs) and mRNAs in ER-positive
breast cancer tissue were compared between ER(high) Ki67(low) tumors and ER(low) 
Ki67(high) tumors by miRNA and mRNA microarrays. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering analyses revealed distinct expression patterns of miRNAs and mRNAs in 
these groups. We identified a downregulation of miR-1290 in ER(high) Ki67(low)
tumors. Among 11 miRNAs that were upregulated in ER(high) Ki67(low) tumors,
quantitative RT-PCR detection analysis using 64 samples of frozen breast cancer
tissue identified six miRNAs (let-7a, miR-15a, miR-26a, miR-34a, miR-193b, and
miR-342-3p). We picked up 11 genes that were potential target genes of the
selected miRNAs and that were differentially expressed in ER(high) Ki67(low)
tumors and ER(low) Ki67(high) tumors. Protein expression patterns of the selected
target genes were analyzed in 256 ER-positive breast cancer samples by
immunohistochemistry: miR-1290 and its putative targets, BCL2, FOXA1, MAPT, and
NAT1, were identified. Transfection experiments revealed that introduction of
miR-1290 into ER-positive breast cancer cells decreased expression of NAT1 and
FOXA1. Our results suggest that miR-1290 and its potential targets might be
associated with characteristics of ER-positive breast cancer.

PMID: 23183268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Genome Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):12-22. doi: 10.1101/gr.139469.112. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

GATA3 acts upstream of FOXA1 in mediating ESR1 binding by shaping enhancer
accessibility.

Theodorou V(1), Stark R, Menon S, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Nuclear Receptor Transcription Lab, Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research
Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.

Estrogen receptor (ESR1) drives growth in the majority of human breast cancers by
binding to regulatory elements and inducing transcription events that promote
tumor growth. Differences in enhancer occupancy by ESR1 contribute to the diverse
expression profiles and clinical outcome observed in breast cancer patients.
GATA3 is an ESR1-cooperating transcription factor mutated in breast tumors;
however, its genomic properties are not fully defined. In order to investigate
the composition of enhancers involved in estrogen-induced transcription and the
potential role of GATA3, we performed extensive ChIP-sequencing in unstimulated
breast cancer cells and following estrogen treatment. We find that GATA3 is
pivotal in mediating enhancer accessibility at regulatory regions involved in
ESR1-mediated transcription. GATA3 silencing resulted in a global redistribution 
of cofactors and active histone marks prior to estrogen stimulation. These global
genomic changes altered the ESR1-binding profile that subsequently occurred
following estrogen, with events exhibiting both loss and gain in binding
affinity, implying a GATA3-mediated redistribution of ESR1 binding. The
GATA3-mediated redistributed ESR1 profile correlated with changes in gene
expression, suggestive of its functionality. Chromatin loops at the TFF locus
involving ESR1-bound enhancers occurred independently of ESR1 when GATA3 was
silenced, indicating that GATA3, when present on the chromatin, may serve as a
licensing factor for estrogen-ESR1-mediated interactions between cis-regulatory
elements. Together, these experiments suggest that GATA3 directly impacts ESR1
enhancer accessibility, and may potentially explain the contribution of
mutant-GATA3 in the heterogeneity of ESR1+ breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3530671
PMID: 23172872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1176-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.2449.

FOXA1 and breast cancer risk.

Meyer KB(1), Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge, UK.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1191-8.

Many SNPs associated with human disease are located in non-coding regions of the 
genome. A new study shows that SNPs associated with breast cancer risk are
located in enhancer regions and alter binding affinity for the pioneer factor
FOXA1.

PMID: 23104063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Feb 15;85(4):449-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.10.018. Epub
2012 Oct 24.

Estrogen receptor signaling as a target for novel breast cancer therapeutics.

Renoir JM(1), Marsaud V, Lazennec G.

Author information: 
(1)U749 INSERM, Institut Gustave Roussy, 94805 Villejuif cedex, France;
University Paris-Sud, Orsay, Cedex, France. jack-michel.renoir@igr.fr

In breast cancer (BC) epithelial cells, the mitogenic action of estradiol is
transduced through binding to two receptors, ERa and ERß, which act as
transcription factors. Anti-estrogens (AEs) and aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are
used clinically to arrest the estrogen-dependent growth of BC. In the case of AE 
or AI resistance, Herceptin or lapatinib may be used to inhibit growth factors.
Estrogen effects are mediated not only through nuclear ERs but also through
cytoplasmic/membrane ERs and G-protein-coupled ERs. These estrogen-binding
systems associate with various proteins that direct cell cycle signaling,
proliferation and survival. The partners of nuclear ER include SRC1-3, HDACs and 
ERß itself as well as newly identified proteins, such as E6-AP, LKB1, PELP1,
PAX-2 and FOXA1. The partners of extra-nuclear ERa include PI3K and the tyrosine 
kinase Src. These various factors are all potential targets for therapeutic
intervention. In addition, BC proliferation is enhanced by insulin and EGF, which
stimulate signaling through the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways by activation of the
IGF-1R and EGFR axes, respectively. These pathways are tightly interconnected
with ER-activated signaling, and membrane ERa forms complexes with Src and PI3K. 
Chemokine-mediated signaling also modulates the estrogen response. Inhibiting
these pathways with specific inhibitors or activating some of the pathways by
gene manipulation may be therapeutically valuable for arresting BC cell cycle
progression and for inducing apoptosis to antagonize hormone-resistance. Here, we
review some newly identified putatively targetable ER partners and highlight the 
need to develop tumor-targeting drug carrier systems affecting both the tumor
cells and the tumor environment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23103568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 5;365(1):95-107. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.10.002.
Epub 2012 Oct 11.

FoxA1 corrupts the antiandrogenic effect of bicalutamide but only weakly
attenuates the effect of MDV3100 (Enzalutamide).

Belikov S(1), Öberg C, Jääskeläinen T, Rahkama V, Palvimo JJ, Wrange Ö.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177
Stockholm, Sweden.

Prostate cancer growth depends on androgens. Synthetic antiandrogens are used in 
the cancer treatment. However, antiandrogens, such as bicalutamide (BIC), have a 
mixed agonist/antagonist activity. Here we compare the antiandrogenic capacity of
BIC to a new antiandrogen, MDV3100 (MDV) or Enzalutamide. By reconstitution of a
hormone-regulated enhancer in Xenopus oocytes we show that both antagonists
trigger the androgen receptor (AR) translocation to the nucleus, albeit with a
reduced efficiency for MDV. Once in the nucleus, both AR-antagonist complexes can
bind sequence specifically to DNA in vivo. The forkhead box transcription factor 
A (FoxA1) is a negative prognostic indicator for prostate cancer disease. FoxA1
expression presets the enhancer chromatin and makes the DNA more accessible for
AR binding. In this context the BIC-AR antiandrogenic effect is seriously
compromised as demonstrated by a significant chromatin remodeling and induction
of a robust MMTV transcription whereas the MDV-AR complex displays a more
persistent antagonistic character.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jan 28;328(2):198-206. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.017. Epub 
2012 Sep 27.

Cancer genetics and genomics of human FOX family genes.

Katoh M(1), Igarashi M, Fukuda H, Nakagama H, Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Forkhead-box (FOX) family proteins, involved in cell growth and differentiation
as well as embryogenesis and longevity, are DNA-binding proteins regulating
transcription and DNA repair. The focus of this review is on the mechanisms of
FOX-related human carcinogenesis. FOXA1 is overexpressed as a result of gene
amplification in lung cancer, esophageal cancer, ER-positive breast cancer and
anaplastic thyroid cancer and is point-mutated in prostate cancer. FOXA1
overexpression in breast cancer and prostate cancer is associated with good or
poor prognosis, respectively. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the
5'-UTR of the FOXE1 (TTF2) gene is associated with thyroid cancer risk. FOXF1
overexpression in breast cancer is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). FOXM1 is overexpressed owing to gene amplification in
basal-type breast cancer and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and it is
transcriptionally upregulated owing to Hedgehog-GLI, hypoxia-HIF1a or YAP-TEAD
signaling activation. FOXM1 overexpression leads to malignant phenotypes by
directly upregulating CCNB1, AURKB, MYC and SKP2 and indirectly upregulating ZEB1
and ZEB2 via miR-200b downregulation. Tumor suppressor functions of FOXO
transcription factors are lost in cancer cells as a result of chromosomal
translocation, deletion, miRNA-mediated repression, AKT-mediated cytoplasmic
sequestration or ubiquitination-mediated proteasomal degradation. FOXP1 is
upregulated as a result of gene fusion or amplification in DLBCL and MALT
lymphoma and also repression of miRNAs, such as miR-1, miR-34a and miR-504. FOXP1
overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in DLBCL, gastric MALT lymphoma 
and hepatocellular carcinoma but with good prognosis in breast cancer. In
neuroblastoma, the entire coding region of the FOXR1 (FOXN5) gene is fused to the
MLL or the PAFAH1B gene owing to interstitial deletions. FOXR1 fusion genes
function as oncogenes that repress transcription of FOXO target genes.
Whole-genome sequencing data from tens of thousands of human cancers will uncover
the mutational landscape of FOX family genes themselves as well as FOX-binding
sites, which will be ultimately applied for cancer diagnostics, prognostics, and 
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Nov;40(21):10765-79. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks888. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

Persistent androgen receptor-mediated transcription in castration-resistant
prostate cancer under androgen-deprived conditions.

Decker KF(1), Zheng D, He Y, Bowman T, Edwards JR, Jia L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Center for Pharmacogenomics, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-inducible transcription factor that
mediates androgen action in target tissues. Upon ligand binding, the AR binds to 
thousands of genomic loci and activates a cell-type specific gene program.
Prostate cancer growth and progression depend on androgen-induced AR signaling.
Treatment of advanced prostate cancer through medical or surgical castration
leads to initial response and durable remission, but resistance inevitably
develops. In castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC), AR activity remains
critical for tumor growth despite androgen deprivation. Although previous studies
have focused on ligand-dependent AR signaling, in this study we explore AR
function under the androgen-deprived conditions characteristic of CRPC. Our data 
demonstrate that AR persistently occupies a distinct set of genomic loci after
androgen deprivation in CRPC. These androgen-independent AR occupied regions have
constitutively open chromatin structures that lack the canonical androgen
response element and are independent of FoxA1, a transcription factor involved in
ligand-dependent AR targeting. Many AR binding events occur at proximal
promoters, which can act as enhancers to augment transcriptional activities of
other promoters through DNA looping. We further show that androgen-independent AR
binding directs a gene expression program in CRPC, which is necessary for the
growth of CRPC after androgen withdrawal.

PMCID: PMC3510497
PMID: 23019221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Seikagaku. 2012 Aug;84(8):675-9.

[Identification of master regulators for induction of hepatocyte
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.

PMID: 23012878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1191-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.2416. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Breast cancer risk-associated SNPs modulate the affinity of chromatin for FOXA1
and alter gene expression.

Cowper-Sal lari R(1), Zhang X, Wright JB, Bailey SD, Cole MD, Eeckhoute J, Moore 
JH, Lupien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School,
Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1176-7.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of SNPs that are
associated with human traits and diseases. But, because the vast majority of
these SNPs are located in non-coding regions of the genome, the mechanisms by
which they promote disease risk have remained elusive. Employing a new
methodology that combines cistromics, epigenomics and genotype imputation, we
annotate the non-coding regions of the genome in breast cancer cells and
systematically identify the functional nature of SNPs associated with breast
cancer risk. Our results show that breast cancer risk-associated SNPs are
enriched in the cistromes of FOXA1 and ESR1 and the epigenome of histone H3
lysine 4 monomethylation (H3K4me1) in a cancer- and cell type-specific manner.
Furthermore, the majority of the risk-associated SNPs modulate the affinity of
chromatin for FOXA1 at distal regulatory elements, thereby resulting in
allele-specific gene expression, which is exemplified by the effect of the
rs4784227 SNP on the TOX3 gene within the 16q12.1 risk locus.

PMCID: PMC3483423
PMID: 23001124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;132(1):79-90. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1219-6. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

Genome-wide study identifies two loci associated with lung function decline in
mild to moderate COPD.

Hansel NN(1), Ruczinski I, Rafaels N, Sin DD, Daley D, Malinina A, Huang L,
Sandford A, Murray T, Kim Y, Vergara C, Heckbert SR, Psaty BM, Li G, Elliott WM, 
Aminuddin F, Dupuis J, O'Connor GT, Doheny K, Scott AF, Boezen HM, Postma DS,
Smolonska J, Zanen P, Mohamed Hoesein FA, de Koning HJ, Crystal RG, Tanaka T,
Ferrucci L, Silverman E, Wan E, Vestbo J, Lomas DA, Connett J, Wise RA, Neptune
ER, Mathias RA, Paré PD, Beaty TH, Barnes KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Accelerated lung function decline is a key COPD phenotype; however, its genetic
control remains largely unknown. We performed a genome-wide association study
using the Illumina Human660W-Quad v.1_A BeadChip. Generalized estimation
equations were used to assess genetic contributions to lung function decline over
a 5-year period in 4,048 European American Lung Health Study participants with
largely mild COPD. Genotype imputation was performed using reference HapMap II
data. To validate regions meeting genome-wide significance, replication of top
SNPs was attempted in independent cohorts. Three genes (TMEM26, ANK3 and FOXA1)
within the regions of interest were selected for tissue expression studies using 
immunohistochemistry. Two intergenic SNPs (rs10761570, rs7911302) on chromosome
10 and one SNP on chromosome 14 (rs177852) met genome-wide significance after
Bonferroni. Further support for the chromosome 10 region was obtained by
imputation, the most significantly associated imputed SNPs (rs10761571,
rs7896712) being flanked by observed markers rs10761570 and rs7911302. Results
were not replicated in four general population cohorts or a smaller cohort of
subjects with moderate to severe COPD; however, we show novel expression of genes
near regions of significantly associated SNPS, including TMEM26 and FOXA1 in
airway epithelium and lung parenchyma, and ANK3 in alveolar macrophages. Levels
of expression were associated with lung function and COPD status. We identified
two novel regions associated with lung function decline in mild COPD. Genes
within these regions were expressed in relevant lung cells and their expression
related to airflow limitation suggesting they may represent novel candidate genes
for COPD susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3536920
PMID: 22986903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Aug;23(8):978-87. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.08.015. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Insight into mechanism of in vitro insulin secretion increase induced by
antipsychotic clozapine: role of FOXA1 and mitochondrial citrate carrier.

Menga A(1), Infantino V, Iacobazzi F, Convertini P, Palmieri F, Iacobazzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Pharmacological Sciences,
University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

The use of clozapine and other antipsychotic drugs is known to be associated with
a number of adverse metabolic side effects, including diabetes mellitus. These
side effects could be, at least in part, the result of impaired islet cell
function and abnormal insulin secretion, although the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. The aim of this study is the identification of targets for clozapine
related to the abnormal insulin secretion. We identify a specific activation of
the transcriptional factor FOXA1, but not FOXA2 and FOXA3, by clozapine in HepG2 
cells. Clozapine enhances FOXA1 DNA-binding and its transcriptional activity,
increasing mitochondrial citrate carrier gene expression, which contains a FOXA1 
site in its promoter. Haloperidol, a conventional antipsychotic drug, does not
determine any increase of FOXA1 gene expression. We also demonstrate that
clozapine upregulates FOXA1 and CIC gene expression in INS-1 cells only at basal 
glucose concentration. In addition, we find that abnormal insulin secretion in
basal glucose conditions could be completely abolished by FOXA1 silencing in
INS-1 cells treated with clozapine. The identification of FOXA1 as a novel target
for clozapine may shed more light to understand molecular mechanism of abnormal
insulin secretion during clozapine treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22959654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jan 7;41(1):e5. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks821. Epub 2012 Aug
31.

Deciphering the transcriptional regulation of microRNA genes in humans with
ACTLocater.

Xiao ZD(1), Diao LT, Yang JH, Xu H, Huang MB, Deng YJ, Zhou H, Qu LH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, People's
Republic of China.

Understanding the transcriptional regulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) is extremely
important for determining the specific roles they play in signaling cascades.
However, precise identification of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs)
orchestrating the expressions of miRNAs remains a challenge. By combining
accessible chromatin sequences of 12 cell types released by the ENCODE Project,
we found that a significant fraction (~80%) of such integrated sequences,
evolutionary conserved and in regions upstream of human miRNA genes that are
independently transcribed, were preserved across cell types. Accordingly, we
developed a computational method, Accessible and Conserved TFBSs Locater
(ACTLocater), incorporating this chromatin feature and evolutionary conservation 
to identify the TFBSs associated with human miRNA genes. ACTLocater achieved high
positive predictive values, as revealed by the experimental validation of FOXA1
predictions and by the comparison of its predictions of some other transcription 
factors (TFs) to empirical ChIP-seq data. Most notably, ACTLocater was widely
applicable as indicated by the successful prediction of TF <U+2192> miRNA interactions
in cell types whose chromatin accessibility profiles were not incorporated. By
applying ACTLocater to TFs with characterized binding specificities, we compiled 
a novel repository of putative TF <U+2192> miRNA interactions and displayed it in
ACTViewer, providing a promising foundation for future investigations to
elucidate the regulatory mechanisms of miRNA transcription in humans.

PMCID: PMC3592406
PMID: 22941648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nat Protoc. 2012 Sep;7(9):1728-40. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2012.101. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Identifying ChIP-seq enrichment using MACS.

Feng J(1), Liu T, Qin B, Zhang Y, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China.

Model-based analysis of ChIP-seq (MACS) is a computational algorithm that
identifies genome-wide locations of transcription/chromatin factor binding or
histone modification from ChIP-seq data. MACS consists of four steps: removing
redundant reads, adjusting read position, calculating peak enrichment and
estimating the empirical false discovery rate (FDR). In this protocol, we provide
a detailed demonstration of how to install MACS and how to use it to analyze
three common types of ChIP-seq data sets with different characteristics: the
sequence-specific transcription factor FoxA1, the histone modification mark
H3K4me3 with sharp enrichment and the H3K36me3 mark with broad enrichment. We
also explain how to interpret and visualize the results of MACS analyses. The
algorithm requires ~3 GB of RAM and 1.5 h of computing time to analyze a ChIP-seq
data set containing 30 million reads, an estimate that increases with sequence
coverage. MACS is open source and is available from
http://liulab.dfci.harvard.edu/MACS/.

PMCID: PMC3868217
PMID: 22936215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(8):e1002638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002638. Epub
2012 Aug 9.

High resolution genome wide binding event finding and motif discovery reveals
transcription factor spatial binding constraints.

Guo Y(1), Mahony S, Gifford DK.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

An essential component of genome function is the syntax of genomic regulatory
elements that determine how diverse transcription factors interact to orchestrate
a program of regulatory control. A precise characterization of in vivo spacing
constraints between key transcription factors would reveal key aspects of this
genomic regulatory language. To discover novel transcription factor spatial
binding constraints in vivo, we developed a new integrative computational method,
genome wide event finding and motif discovery (GEM). GEM resolves ChIP data into 
explanatory motifs and binding events at high spatial resolution by linking
binding event discovery and motif discovery with positional priors in the context
of a generative probabilistic model of ChIP data and genome sequence. GEM
analysis of 63 transcription factors in 214 ENCODE human ChIP-Seq experiments
recovers more known factor motifs than other contemporary methods, and discovers 
six new motifs for factors with unknown binding specificity. GEM's adaptive
learning of binding-event read distributions allows it to further improve upon
previous methods for processing ChIP-Seq and ChIP-exo data to yield unsurpassed
spatial resolution and discovery of closely spaced binding events of the same
factor. In a systematic analysis of in vivo sequence-specific transcription
factor binding using GEM, we have found hundreds of spatial binding constraints
between factors. GEM found 37 examples of factor binding constraints in mouse ES 
cells, including strong distance-specific constraints between Klf4 and other key 
regulatory factors. In human ENCODE data, GEM found 390 examples of spatially
constrained pair-wise binding, including such novel pairs as c-Fos:c-Jun/USF1,
CTCF/Egr1, and HNF4A/FOXA1. The discovery of new factor-factor spatial
constraints in ChIP data is significant because it proposes testable models for
regulatory factor interactions that will help elucidate genome function and the
implementation of combinatorial control.

PMCID: PMC3415389
PMID: 22912568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Dec;130(2):349-61. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs253. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

High-resolution genome-wide mapping of AHR and ARNT binding sites by ChIP-Seq.

Lo R(1), Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and AHR nuclear translocator (ARNT) activated
complex regulates genes in response to the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). AHR has also emerged as a potential
therapeutic target for the treatment of human diseases and different cancers,
including breast cancer. To better understand AHR and ARNT signaling in breast
cancer cells, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to high-throughput
sequencing to identify AHR- and ARNT-binding sites across the genome in
TCDD-treated MCF-7 cells. We identified 2594 AHR-bound, 1352 ARNT-bound, and 882 
AHR/ARNT cobound regions. No significant differences in the genomic distribution 
of AHR and ARNT were observed. Approximately 60% of the cobound regions contained
at least one core an aryl hydrocarbon response element (AHRE), 5'-GCGTG-3'.
AHR/ARNT peak density was the highest within 1 kb of transcription start sites
(TSS); however, a number of AHR/ARNT cobound regions were located as far as 100
kb from TSS. De novo motif discovery identified a symmetrical variation of the
AHRE (5'-GTGCGTG-3'), as well as FOXA1 and SP1 binding motifs. Microarray
analysis identified 104 TCDD-responsive genes where 98 genes were upregulated by 
TCDD. Of the 104 regulated genes, 69 (66.3%) were associated with an AHR- or
ARNT-bound region within 100 kb of their TSS. Overall our study identified
AHR/ARNT cobound regions across the genome, revealed the importance but not
absolute requirement for an AHRE in AHR/ARNT interactions with DNA, and
identified a modified AHRE motif, thereby increasing our understanding of
AHR/ARNT signaling pathway.

PMID: 22903824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42456. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042456. Epub 2012 Aug 3.

FOXA1 promotes tumor progression in prostate cancer via the insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 3 pathway.

Imamura Y(1), Sakamoto S, Endo T, Utsumi T, Fuse M, Suyama T, Kawamura K, Imamoto
T, Yano K, Uzawa K, Nihei N, Suzuki H, Mizokami A, Ueda T, Seki N, Tanzawa H,
Ichikawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba,
Japan.

Fork-head box protein A1 (FOXA1) is a "pioneer factor" that is known to bind to
the androgen receptor (AR) and regulate the transcription of AR-specific genes.
However, the precise role of FOXA1 in prostate cancer (PC) remains unknown. In
this study, we report that FOXA1 plays a critical role in PC cell proliferation. 
The expression of FOXA1 was higher in PC than in normal prostate tissues (P =
0.0002), and, using immunohistochemical analysis, we found that FOXA1 was
localized in the nucleus. FOXA1 expression levels were significantly correlated
with both PSA and Gleason scores (P = 0.016 and P = 0.031, respectively).
Moreover, FOXA1 up-regulation was a significant factor in PSA failure (P =
0.011). Depletion of FOXA1 in a prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) using small
interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly inhibited AR activity, led to cell-growth
suppression, and induced G0/G1 arrest. The anti-proliferative effect of FOXA1
siRNA was mediated through insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3
(IGFBP-3). An increase in IGFBP-3, mediated by depletion of FOXA1, inhibited
phosphorylation of MAPK and Akt, and increased expression of the cell cycle
regulators p21 and p27. We also found that the anti-proliferative effect of FOXA1
depletion was significantly reversed by simultaneous siRNA depletion of IGFBP-3. 
These findings provide direct physiological and molecular evidence for a role of 
FOXA1 in controlling cell proliferation through the regulation of IGFBP-3
expression in PC.

PMCID: PMC3411739
PMID: 22879989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):799-800. doi: 10.1038/aja.2012.73. Epub 2012 Jul
30.

A picture with more details is painted for prostate cancer.

Liu W(1), Feng J, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Comment on
    Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):239-43.
    Nat Genet. 2012 Jun;44(6):685-9.

PMCID: PMC3720117
PMID: 22842705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Gene Expr. 2012;15(4):153-62.

Stable expression of FoxA1 promotes pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma cells to 
be neural stem-like cells.

Dong D(1), Meng L, Yu Q, Tan G, Ding M, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

FoxA1 belongs to the fork head/winged-helix transcription factor family and
participates in stimulating neuronal differentiation of pluripotent stem cells at
early stages. To explore the biological roles of FoxA1 during this process, the
stable expression of a GFP-FoxA1 fusion protein was established in P19
pluripotent embryonal carcinoma cells. Although they still express
pluripotency-related transcription factors such as Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2, the
generated P19 GFPFoxA1 cells exhibited a decreased activity of alkaline
phosphatase and an increased expression of SSEA-3 compared with P19 cells.
Elevated levels of nestin expression and prominin-1+ populations were observed in
P19 GFPFoxA1 cells, implicating that the stable expression of FoxA1 promoted P19 
cells to gain partial characteristics of neural stem cells. Furthermore, the
promoter of nestin was confirmed to be bound and activated by FoxA1 directly. The
expression of neuron-specific marker tubulin betaIII also existed in P19 GFPFoxA1
cells. P19 GFPFoxA1 cells showed an earlier onset of differentiation during
RA-induced neuronal differentiation, evidenced by a more rapid change on the
Nanog decrease and the tubulin betaIII increase. Thus, overexpression of FoxA1
alone may promote pluripotent P19 cells to become neural stem-like cells.

PMID: 22783724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Ann Oncol. 2012 Dec;23(12):3051-7. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds120. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Clinicopathological analysis of GATA3-positive breast cancers with special
reference to response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Tominaga N(1), Naoi Y, Shimazu K, Nakayama T, Maruyama N, Shimomura A, Kim SJ,
Tamaki Y, Noguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate the clinicopathological
characteristics of GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3)-positive breast cancers as well
as the association of GATA3 expression with response to chemotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Tumor specimens obtained before neoadjuvant chemotherapy
[paclitaxel followed by 5-fluorouracil/epirubicin/cyclophosphamide)] from breast 
cancer patients (n = 130) were subjected to immunohistochemical and mutational
analysis of GATA3 and DNA microarray gene expression analysis for intrinsic
subtyping.
RESULTS: Seventy-four tumors (57%) were immunohistochemically positive for GATA3.
GATA3-positive tumors were significantly more likely to be lobular cancer,
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive, progesterone receptor (PgR)-positive,
Ki67-negative, and luminal A tumors. Somatic mutations were found in only three
tumors. Pathological complete response (pCR) was observed in 8 (11%)
GATA3-positive tumors and in 22 (39%) GATA3-negative tumors. multivariate
analysis showed that tumor size, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (her2),
and gata3 were independent predictors of pcr.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA3-positive breast cancers showed luminal differentiation
characterized by high ER expression and were mostly classified as luminal-type
tumors following intrinsic subtyping. Interestingly, GATA3 was an independent
predictor of response to chemotherapy, suggesting that GATA3 might be clinically 
useful as a predictor of a poor response to chemotherapy.

PMID: 22767585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Infect Dis. 2012 Sep 15;206(6):867-74. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis430. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Identification of novel cellular transcription factors that regulate early
promoters of human papillomavirus types 18 and 16.

Sichero L(1), Sobrinho JS, Villa LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. lsichero@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The long control region (LCR) of human papillomavirus (HPV) regulates
early gene transcription by interaction with several viral and cellular
transcription factors (TFs).
METHODS: To identify novel TFs that could influence early expression of HPV type 
18 (HPV-18) and HPV type 16 (HPV-16), a high-throughput transfection array was
used.
RESULTS: Among the 704 TFs tested, 28 activated and 36 inhibited the LCR of
HPV-18 by more than 2-fold. For validation, C33 cells were cotransfected with
increasing amounts of selected TF expression plasmids in addition to
LCR-luciferase vectors of different molecular variants of HPV-18 and HPV-16.
Among the TFs identified, only GATA3, FOXA1, and MYC have putative binding sites 
within the LCR sequence, as indicated using the TRANSFAC database. Furthermore,
we demonstrated FOXA1 and MYC in vivo binding to the LCR of both HPV types using 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified new TFs implicated in the regulation of the LCR of
HPV-18 and HPV-16. Many of these factors are mutated in cancer or are putative
cancer biomarkers and could potentially be involved in the regulation of HPV
early gene expression.

PMID: 22740717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002770. Epub 2012 Jun 
21.

Genome-wide location analysis reveals distinct transcriptional circuitry by
paralogous regulators Foxa1 and Foxa2.

Bochkis IM(1), Schug J, Ye DZ, Kurinna S, Stratton SA, Barton MC, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

Gene duplication is a powerful driver of evolution. Newly duplicated genes
acquire new roles that are relevant to fitness, or they will be lost over time. A
potential path to functional relevance is mutation of the coding sequence leading
to the acquisition of novel biochemical properties, as analyzed here for the
highly homologous paralogs Foxa1 and Foxa2 transcriptional regulators. We
determine by genome-wide location analysis (ChIP-Seq) that, although Foxa1 and
Foxa2 share a large fraction of binding sites in the liver, each protein also
occupies distinct regulatory elements in vivo. Foxa1-only sites are enriched for 
p53 binding sites and are frequently found near genes important to cell cycle
regulation, while Foxa2-restricted sites show only a limited match to the
forkhead consensus and are found in genes involved in steroid and lipid
metabolism. Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2, while redundant during development, have
evolved divergent roles in the adult liver, ensuring the maintenance of both
genes during evolution.

PMCID: PMC3380847
PMID: 22737085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nature. 2012 Jul 12;487(7406):239-43. doi: 10.1038/nature11125.

The mutational landscape of lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Grasso CS(1), Wu YM, Robinson DR, Cao X, Dhanasekaran SM, Khan AP, Quist MJ, Jing
X, Lonigro RJ, Brenner JC, Asangani IA, Ateeq B, Chun SY, Siddiqui J, Sam L,
Anstett M, Mehra R, Prensner JR, Palanisamy N, Ryslik GA, Vandin F, Raphael BJ,
Kunju LP, Rhodes DR, Pienta KJ, Chinnaiyan AM, Tomlins SA.

Author information: 
(1)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Biol Ther. 2013 May;14(5):399-400.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Jul;9(7):367.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Jul;9(7):352.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):801-2.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):799-800.

Characterization of the prostate cancer transcriptome and genome has identified
chromosomal rearrangements and copy number gains and losses, including ETS gene
family fusions, PTEN loss and androgen receptor (AR) amplification, which drive
prostate cancer development and progression to lethal, metastatic
castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). However, less is known about the
role of mutations. Here we sequenced the exomes of 50 lethal, heavily pre-treated
metastatic CRPCs obtained at rapid autopsy (including three different foci from
the same patient) and 11 treatment-naive, high-grade localized prostate cancers. 
We identified low overall mutation rates even in heavily treated CRPCs (2.00 per 
megabase) and confirmed the monoclonal origin of lethal CRPC. Integrating exome
copy number analysis identified disruptions of CHD1 that define a subtype of ETS 
gene family fusion-negative prostate cancer. Similarly, we demonstrate that ETS2,
which is deleted in approximately one-third of CRPCs (commonly through
TMPRSS2:ERG fusions), is also deregulated through mutation. Furthermore, we
identified recurrent mutations in multiple chromatin- and histone-modifying
genes, including MLL2 (mutated in 8.6% of prostate cancers), and demonstrate
interaction of the MLL complex with the AR, which is required for AR-mediated
signalling. We also identified novel recurrent mutations in the AR collaborating 
factor FOXA1, which is mutated in 5 of 147 (3.4%) prostate cancers (both
untreated localized prostate cancer and CRPC), and showed that mutated FOXA1
represses androgen signalling and increases tumour growth. Proteins that
physically interact with the AR, such as the ERG gene fusion product, FOXA1,
MLL2, UTX (also known as KDM6A) and ASXL1 were found to be mutated in CRPC. In
summary, we describe the mutational landscape of a heavily treated metastatic
cancer, identify novel mechanisms of AR signalling deregulated in prostate
cancer, and prioritize candidates for future study.

PMCID: PMC3396711
PMID: 22722839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Breast Cancer Res. 2012 Jun 19;14(3):312.

To bind or not to bind--FoxA1 determines estrogen receptor action in breast
cancer progression.

Watters RJ(1), Benos PV, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Magee Women's Research Institute,
204 Craft Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. oesterreichs@upmc.edu

Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-seq) is rapidly enabling the comprehensive characterization of genome-wide 
transcription factor-binding sites, thus defining the cistrome (cis-acting DNA
targets of a trans-acting factor). Estrogen receptor (ER) ChIP-seq studies have
been performed mainly in cell lines, but Ross-Innes and colleagues have now
completed the first such study in clinical breast cancer samples. The study aimed
at determining the dynamics of ER binding and differences between more and less
aggressive primary breast tumors and metastases. The authors found that ER bound 
to DNA in both aggressive and drug-resistant tumors but to different sites and
with different affinities. Given previous findings from cell lines, FoxA1 appears
to play a critical role in this reprogramming of ER binding.

PMCID: PMC3446328
PMID: 22713214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2625-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.081034. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Genome-wide characterization of Foxa2 targets reveals upregulation of floor plate
genes and repression of ventrolateral genes in midbrain dopaminergic progenitors.

Metzakopian E(1), Lin W, Salmon-Divon M, Dvinge H, Andersson E, Ericson J,
Perlmann T, Whitsett JA, Bertone P, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA,
UK.

The transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 promote the specification of midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons and the floor plate. Whether their role is direct has 
remained unclear as they also regulate the expression of Shh, which has similar
roles. We characterized the Foxa2 cis-regulatory network by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing of mDA progenitors.
This identified 9160 high-quality Foxa2 binding sites associated with 5409 genes,
providing mechanistic insights into Foxa2-mediated positive and negative
regulatory events. Foxa2 regulates directly and positively key determinants of
mDA neurons, including Lmx1a, Lmx1b, Msx1 and Ferd3l, while negatively inhibiting
transcription factors expressed in ventrolateral midbrain such as Helt, Tle4,
Otx1, Sox1 and Tal2. Furthermore, Foxa2 negatively regulates extrinsic and
intrinsic components of the Shh signaling pathway, possibly by binding to the
same enhancer regions of co-regulated genes as Gli1. Foxa2 also regulates the
expression of floor plate factors that control axon trajectories around the
midline of the embryo, thereby contributing to the axon guidance function of the 
floor plate. Finally, this study identified multiple Foxa2-regulated enhancers
that are active in the floor plate of the midbrain or along the length of the
embryo in mouse and chick. This work represents the first comprehensive
characterization of Foxa2 targets in mDA progenitors and provides a framework for
elaborating gene regulatory networks in a functionally important progenitor
population.

PMCID: PMC3383233
PMID: 22696295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Biochem J. 2012 Sep 1;446(2):203-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120693.

Transcriptional networks driving enhancer function in the CFTR gene.

Kerschner JL(1), Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

A critical cis-regulatory element for the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator) gene is located in intron 11, 100 kb distal to the
promoter, with which it interacts. This sequence contains an intestine-selective 
enhancer and associates with enhancer signature proteins, such as p300, in
addition to tissue-specific TFs (transcription factors). In the present study we 
identify critical TFs that are recruited to this element and demonstrate their
importance in regulating CFTR expression. In vitro DNase I footprinting and EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) identified four cell-type-selective
regions that bound TFs in vitro. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) identified 
FOXA1/A2 (forkhead box A1/A2), HNF1 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1) and CDX2
(caudal-type homeobox 2) as in vivo trans-interacting factors. Mutation of their 
binding sites in the intron 11 core compromised its enhancer activity when
measured by reporter gene assay. Moreover, siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated
knockdown of CDX2 caused a significant reduction in endogenous CFTR transcription
in intestinal cells, suggesting that this factor is critical for the maintenance 
of high levels of CFTR expression in these cells. The ChIP data also demonstrate 
that these TFs interact with multiple cis-regulatory elements across the CFTR
locus, implicating a more global role in intestinal expression of the gene.

PMCID: PMC3419791
PMID: 22671145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Genome Res. 2012 Aug;22(8):1437-46. doi: 10.1101/gr.135665.111. Epub 2012 Jun 4.

Integrative functional genomics identifies an enhancer looping to the SOX9 gene
disrupted by the 17q24.3 prostate cancer risk locus.

Zhang X(1), Cowper-Sal lari R, Bailey SD, Moore JH, Lupien M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences,
Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire
03756, USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are identifying genetic predisposition to 
various diseases. The 17q24.3 locus harbors the single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) rs1859962 that is statistically associated with prostate cancer (PCa). It
defines a 130-kb linkage disequilibrium (LD) block that lies in an ~2-Mb gene
desert area. The functional biology driving the risk associated with this LD
block is unknown. Here, we integrate genome-wide chromatin landscape data sets,
namely, epigenomes and chromatin openness from diverse cell types. This
identifies a PCa-specific enhancer within the rs1859962 risk LD block that
establishes a 1-Mb chromatin loop with the SOX9 gene. The rs8072254 and rs1859961
SNPs mapping to this enhancer impose allele-specific gene expression. The variant
allele of rs8072254 facilitates androgen receptor (AR) binding driving increased 
enhancer activity. The variant allele of rs1859961 decreases FOXA1 binding while 
increasing AP-1 binding. The latter is key to imposing allele-specific gene
expression. The rs8072254 variant in strong LD with the rs1859962 risk SNP can
account for the risk associated with this locus, while rs1859961 is a rare
variant less likely to contribute to the risk associated with this LD block.
Together, our results demonstrate that multiple genetic variants mapping to a
unique enhancer looping to the SOX9 oncogene can account for the risk associated 
with the PCa 17q24.3 locus. Allele-specific recruitment of the transcription
factors androgen receptor (AR) and activating protein-1 (AP-1) account for the
increased enhancer activity ascribed to this PCa-risk LD block. This further
supports the notion that an integrative genomics approach can identify the
functional biology disrupted by genetic risk variants.

PMCID: PMC3409257
PMID: 22665440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2012 May 18;3:68. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2012.00068.
eCollection 2012.

FoxA1 is a key mediator of hormonal response in breast and prostate cancer.

Robinson JL(1), Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way Cambridge, UK.

Hormonally regulated breast and prostate cancers are the most common cause of
cancer in females and males respectively. FoxA1 acts as a pioneer factor for both
androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor-a (ER), dictating the binding
location, and therefore function of these transcription factors. It is an
essential protein for the transcriptional activity of both ER and AR, yet it has 
distinct roles with the two different nuclear receptors. In both malignancies,
FoxA1 plays a pivotal role from early stage cancer through to drug resistant and 
metastatic disease. Due to this key role in mediating ER and AR function, FoxA1
is not only an attractive therapeutic target but could potentially function as a 
novel biomarker.

PMCID: PMC3355944
PMID: 22649425  [PubMed]


282. J Oral Pathol Med. 2013 Jan;42(1):37-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2012.01170.x.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Organotypic culture of normal, dysplastic and squamous cell carcinoma-derived
oral cell lines reveals loss of spatial regulation of CD44 and p75 NTR in
malignancy.

Dalley AJ(1), AbdulMajeed AA, Upton Z, Farah CS.

Author information: 
(1)UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Herston, Qld,
Australia.

Oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) often arise from dysplastic lesions. The
role of cancer stem cells in tumour initiation is widely accepted, yet the
potential existence of pre-cancerous stem cells in dysplastic tissue has received
little attention. Cell lines from oral diseases ranging in severity from
dysplasia to malignancy provide opportunity to investigate the involvement of
stem cells in malignant progression from dysplasia. Stem cells are functionally
defined by their ability to generate hierarchical tissue structures in consortium
with spatial regulation. Organotypic cultures readily display tissue hierarchy in
vitro; hence, in this study, we compared hierarchical expression of stem
cell-associated markers in dermis-based organotypic cultures of oral epithelial
cells from normal tissue (OKF6-TERT2), mild dysplasia (DOK), severe dysplasia
(POE-9n) and OSCC (PE/CA P J15). Expression of CD44, p75(NTR), CD24 and ALDH was 
studied in monolayers by flow cytometry and in organotypic cultures by
immunohistochemistry. Spatial regulation of CD44 and p75(NTR) was evident for
organotypic cultures of normal (OKF6-TERT2) and dysplasia (DOK and POE-9n) but
was lacking for OSCC (PE/CA PJ15)-derived cells. Spatial regulation of CD24 was
not evident. All monolayer cultures exhibited CD44, p75(NTR), CD24 antigens and
ALDH activity (ALDEFLUOR(®) assay), with a trend towards loss of population
heterogeneity that mirrored disease severity. In monolayer, increased FOXA1 and
decreased FOXA2 expression correlated with disease severity, but OCT3/4, Sox2 and
NANOG did not. We conclude that dermis-based organotypic cultures give
opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that underlie loss of spatial
regulation of stem cell markers seen with OSCC-derived cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22643025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Genet. 2012 May 29;44(6):613-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.2301.

Traversing the genomic landscape of prostate cancer from diagnosis to death.

Hieronymus H, Sawyers CL.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2012 Jun;44(6):685-9.

The clinical spectrum of prostate cancer ranges from curable, local disease to
widely metastatic, lethal cancer. Two new prostate cancer genome studies provide 
the first glimpse at both ends of this spectrum.

PMID: 22641202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nat Genet. 2012 May 20;44(6):685-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.2279.

Exome sequencing identifies recurrent SPOP, FOXA1 and MED12 mutations in prostate
cancer.

Barbieri CE(1), Baca SC, Lawrence MS, Demichelis F, Blattner M, Theurillat JP,
White TA, Stojanov P, Van Allen E, Stransky N, Nickerson E, Chae SS, Boysen G,
Auclair D, Onofrio RC, Park K, Kitabayashi N, MacDonald TY, Sheikh K, Vuong T,
Guiducci C, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A, Carter SL, Saksena G, Voet D, Hussain WM, 
Ramos AH, Winckler W, Redman MC, Ardlie K, Tewari AK, Mosquera JM, Rupp N, Wild
PJ, Moch H, Morrissey C, Nelson PS, Kantoff PW, Gabriel SB, Golub TR, Meyerson M,
Lander ES, Getz G, Rubin MA, Garraway LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2012 Jun;44(6):613-4.
    Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Jul;9(7):352.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jul;12(7):450-1.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012 Jul;9(7):367.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):799-800.
    Asian J Androl. 2012 Nov;14(6):801-2.

Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer in men worldwide and causes over
250,000 deaths each year. Overtreatment of indolent disease also results in
significant morbidity. Common genetic alterations in prostate cancer include
losses of NKX3.1 (8p21) and PTEN (10q23), gains of AR (the androgen receptor
gene) and fusion of ETS family transcription factor genes with
androgen-responsive promoters. Recurrent somatic base-pair substitutions are
believed to be less contributory in prostate tumorigenesis but have not been
systematically analyzed in large cohorts. Here, we sequenced the exomes of 112
prostate tumor and normal tissue pairs. New recurrent mutations were identified
in multiple genes, including MED12 and FOXA1. SPOP was the most frequently
mutated gene, with mutations involving the SPOP substrate-binding cleft in 6-15% 
of tumors across multiple independent cohorts. Prostate cancers with mutant SPOP 
lacked ETS family gene rearrangements and showed a distinct pattern of genomic
alterations. Thus, SPOP mutations may define a new molecular subtype of prostate 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3673022
PMID: 22610119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 May;10(5):636-48. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0502.

FOXA1 is essential for aryl hydrocarbon receptor-dependent regulation of cyclin
G2.

Ahmed S(1), Al-Saigh S, Matthews J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Toronto, Medical
Sciences Building, Room 4336, 1 King's College Circle, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
M5S 1A8.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the effects of the environmental contaminant
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Recently, AHR has emerged as a
potential therapeutic target for breast cancer by virtue of its ability to
modulate estrogen receptor-a (ERa) signalling and/or its ability to block cell
proliferation. Our previous studies identified cyclin G2 (CCNG2), an inhibitor of
cell-cycle progression, as an AHR target gene; however, the mechanism of this
regulation is unknown. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in T-47D human breast
cancer cells revealed a TCDD-dependent recruitment of AHR, nuclear co-activator 3
(NCoA3) and the transcription factor forkhead box A1 (FOXA1), a key regulator of 
breast cancer cell signaling, to CCNG2 resulting in increases in CCNG2 mRNA and
protein levels. Mutation of the AHR response element (AHRE) and forkhead-binding 
sites abolished TCDD-induced CCNG2-regulated reporter gene activity. RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of FOXA1 prevented the TCDD-dependent recruitment
of AHR and NCoA3 to CCNG2 and reduced CCNG2 mRNA levels. Interestingly, knockdown
of FOXA1 also caused a marked decrease in ERa, but not AHR protein levels.
However, RNA interference-mediated knockdown of ERa, a negative regulator of
CCNG2, had no effect on TCDD-dependent AHR or NCoA3 recruitment to or expression 
of CCNG2. These findings show that FOXA1, but not ERa, is essential for
AHR-dependent regulation of CCNG2, assigning a role for FOXA1 in AHR action.

PMID: 22596188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36669. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036669. Epub 2012 May 10.

Loss of the urothelial differentiation marker FOXA1 is associated with high
grade, late stage bladder cancer and increased tumor proliferation.

DeGraff DJ(1), Clark PE, Cates JM, Yamashita H, Robinson VL, Yu X, Smolkin ME,
Chang SS, Cookson MS, Herrick MK, Shariat SF, Steinberg GD, Frierson HF, Wu XR,
Theodorescu D, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America. david.degraff@vanderbilt.edu

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Apr;189(4):1597.

Approximately 50% of patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) develop 
metastatic disease, which is almost invariably lethal. However, our understanding
of pathways that drive aggressive behavior of MIBC is incomplete. Members of the 
FOXA subfamily of transcription factors are implicated in normal urogenital
development and urologic malignancies. FOXA proteins are implicated in normal
urothelial differentiation, but their role in bladder cancer is unknown. We
examined FOXA expression in commonly used in vitro models of bladder cancer and
in human bladder cancer specimens, and used a novel in vivo tissue recombination 
system to determine the functional significance of FOXA1 expression in bladder
cancer. Logistic regression analysis showed decreased FOXA1 expression is
associated with increasing tumor stage (p<0.001), and loss of FOXA1 is associated
with high histologic grade (p<0.001). Also, we found that bladder urothelium that
has undergone keratinizing squamous metaplasia, a precursor to the development of
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) exhibited loss of FOXA1 expression. Furthermore,
81% of cases of SCC of the bladder were negative for FOXA1 staining compared to
only 40% of urothelial cell carcinomas. In addition, we showed that a
subpopulation of FOXA1 negative urothelial tumor cells are highly proliferative. 
Knockdown of FOXA1 in RT4 bladder cancer cells resulted in increased expression
of UPK1B, UPK2, UPK3A, and UPK3B, decreased E-cadherin expression and
significantly increased cell proliferation, while overexpression of FOXA1 in T24 
cells increased E-cadherin expression and significantly decreased cell growth and
invasion. In vivo recombination of bladder cancer cells engineered to exhibit
reduced FOXA1 expression with embryonic rat bladder mesenchyme and subsequent
renal capsule engraftment resulted in enhanced tumor proliferation. These
findings provide the first evidence linking loss of FOXA1 expression with
histological subtypes of MIBC and urothelial cell proliferation, and suggest an
important role for FOXA1 in the malignant phenotype of MIBC.

PMCID: PMC3349679
PMID: 22590586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Neoplasia. 2012 Apr;14(4):283-96.

Cross-regulation between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling in estrogen receptor-negative 
breast cancer.

Naderi A(1), Meyer M, Dowhan DH.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. a.naderi@uq.edu.au

Molecular apocrine is a subtype of estrogen receptor-negative (ER.) breast
cancer, which is characterized by a steroid-response gene signature that includes
androgen receptor, FOXA1, and a high frequency of ErbB2 overexpression. In this
study, we demonstrate that there is a strong association between the
overexpression of FOXA1 and ErbB2 in ER- breast tumors. This has led us to
identify a cross-regulation network between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling in ER-
breast cancer. We present two mechanisms to explain the association between FOXA1
and ErbB2 overexpression in molecular apocrine cells. In one process, ErbB2
signaling genes CREB1 and c-Fos regulate FOXA1 transcription, and in another
process, AP2a regulates the expression of both FOXA1 and ErbB2. Moreover, we
demonstrate that FOXA1, in turn, regulates the transcription of ErbB2 signaling
genes. This includes a core gene signature that is shared across two molecular
apocrine cell lines. Importantly, the most upregulated (RELB) and downregulated
(PAK1) genes in this signature are direct FOXA1 targets. Our data suggest that
FOXA1 acts as a dual-function transcription factor and the repressive function of
FOXA1 on RELB can be explained by the recruitment of its binding partner
corepressor TLE3. It is notable that a group of FOXA1-regulated genes vary across
molecular apocrine cell lines leading to the differences in the functional
effects of FOXA1 on extracellular signal-regulated kinase phosphorylation and
cell viability between these lines. This study demonstrates that there is a
cross-regulation network between FOXA1 and ErbB2 signaling that connects FOXA1 to
some of the key signaling pathways in ER-breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3349255
PMID: 22577344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 May 4;12(6):381-5. doi: 10.1038/nrc3263.

Pioneer factors in hormone-dependent cancers.

Jozwik KM(1), Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Pioneer factors are a special class of transcription factor that can associate
with compacted chromatin to facilitate the binding of additional transcription
factors. The function of pioneer factors was originally described during
development; more recently, they have been implicated in hormone-dependent
cancers, such as oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer and androgen
receptor-positive prostate cancer. We discuss the importance of pioneer factors
in these specific cancers, the discovery of new putative pioneer factors and the 
interplay between these proteins in mediating nuclear receptor function in
cancer.

PMID: 22555282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035859. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Non-overlapping progesterone receptor cistromes contribute to cell-specific
transcriptional outcomes.

Clarke CL(1), Graham JD.

Author information: 
(1)Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, Sydney Medical School-Westmead,
University of Sydney at the Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead Hospital,
Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.

The transcriptional effects of the ovarian hormone progesterone are pleiotropic, 
and binding to DNA of the nuclear progesterone receptor (PR), a ligand-activated 
transcription factor, results in diverse outcomes in a range of target tissues.
To determine whether distinct patterns of genomic interaction of PR contribute to
the cell specificity of the PR transcriptome, we have compared the genomic
binding sites for PR in breast cancer cells and immortalized normal breast cells.
PR binding was correlated with transcriptional outcome in both cell lines, with
60% of progestin-regulated genes associated with one or more PR binding regions. 
There was a remarkably low overlap between the PR cistromes of the two cell
lines, and a similarly low overlap in transcriptional targets. A conserved PR
binding element was identified in PR binding regions from both cell lines, but
there were distinct patterns of enrichment of known cofactor binding motifs, with
FOXA1 sites over-represented in breast cancer cell binding regions and NF1 and
AP-1 motifs uniquely enriched in the immortalized normal line. Downstream
analyses suggested that differential cofactor availability may generate these
distinct PR cistromes, indicating that cofactor levels may modulate PR
specificity. Taken together these data suggest that cell-specificity of PR
binding is determined by the coordinated effects of key binding cofactors.

PMCID: PMC3335806
PMID: 22545144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Gland Surg. 2012 May;1(1):9-11. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2227-684X.2012.04.06.

Paradoxical roles for FOXA1 in anti-estrogen resistance and as a luminal
differentiation factor in breast cancer.

Pratt MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa Ottawa ON 
Canada K1H 8M5, Canada.

PMCID: PMC4115716
PMID: 25083421  [PubMed]


291. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35147. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035147. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

MicroRNAs up-regulated by CagA of Helicobacter pylori induce intestinal
metaplasia of gastric epithelial cells.

Zhu Y(1), Jiang Q, Lou X, Ji X, Wen Z, Wu J, Tao H, Jiang T, He W, Wang C, Du Q, 
Zheng S, Mao J, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
zhuyongliangch@yahoo.com.cn

CagA of Helicobacter pylori is a bacterium-derived oncogenic protein closely
associated with the development of gastric cancers. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a
class of widespread non-coding RNAs, many of which are involved in cell growth,
cell differentiation and tumorigenesis. The relationship between CagA protein and
miRNAs is unclear. Using mammalian miRNA profile microarrays, we found that
miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290 expression was up-regulated in CagA-transformed cells,
miRNA-1290 was up-regulated in an Erk1/2-dependent manner, and miRNA-584 was
activated by NF-<U+03BA>B. miRNA-584 sustained Erk1/2 activities through inhibition of
PPP2a activities, and miRNA-1290 activated NF-<U+03BA>B by knockdown of NKRF. Foxa1 was 
revealed to be an important target of miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290. Knockdown of
Foxa1 promoted the epithelial-mesenchymal transition significantly.
Overexpression of miRNA-584 and miRNA-1290 induced intestinal metaplasia of
gastric epithelial cells in knock-in mice. These results indicate that miRNA-584 
and miRNA-1290 interfere with cell differentiation and remodel the tissues. Thus,
the miRNA pathway is a new pathogenic mechanism of CagA.

PMCID: PMC3335061
PMID: 22536353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Comput Biol. 2012 Jun;19(6):826-38. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2012.0023. Epub 2012 Apr
25.

A generalized linear model for peak calling in ChIP-Seq data.

Xu J(1), Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
PA 16802, USA.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing
(ChIP-Seq) has become a routine for detecting genome-wide protein-DNA
interaction. The success of ChIP-Seq data analysis highly depends on the quality 
of peak calling (i.e., to detect peaks of tag counts at a genomic location and
evaluate if the peak corresponds to a real protein-DNA interaction event). The
challenges in peak calling include (1) how to combine the forward and the reverse
strand tag data to improve the power of peak calling and (2) how to account for
the variation of tag data observed across different genomic locations. We
introduce a new peak calling method based on the generalized linear model (GLMNB)
that utilizes negative binomial distribution to model the tag count data and
account for the variation of background tags that may randomly bind to the DNA
sequence at varying levels due to local genomic structures and sequence contents.
We allow local shifting of peaks observed on the forward and the reverse stands, 
such that at each potential binding site, a binding profile representing the
pattern of a real peak signal is fitted to best explain the observed tag data
with maximum likelihood. Our method can also detect multiple peaks within a local
region if there are multiple binding sites in the region.

PMCID: PMC3375645
PMID: 22533622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1015-25. doi: 10.1101/gr.133280.111. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Differential DNase I hypersensitivity reveals factor-dependent chromatin
dynamics.

He HH(1), Meyer CA, Chen MW, Jordan VC, Brown M, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;

Transcription factor cistromes are highly cell-type specific. Chromatin
accessibility, histone modifications, and nucleosome occupancy have all been
found to play a role in defining these binding locations. Here, we show that
hormone-induced DNase I hypersensitivity changes (<U+0394>DHS) are highly predictive of 
androgen receptor (AR) and estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) binding in prostate cancer 
and breast cancer cells, respectively. While chromatin structure prior to
receptor binding and nucleosome occupancy after binding are strikingly different 
for ESR1 and AR, <U+0394>DHS is highly predictive for both. AR binding is associated
with changes in both local nucleosome occupancy and DNase I hypersensitivity. In 
contrast, while global ESR1 binding is unrelated to changes in nucleosome
occupancy, DNase I hypersensitivity dynamics are also predictive of the ESR1
cistrome. These findings suggest that AR and ESR1 have distinct modes of
interaction with chromatin and that DNase I hypersensitivity dynamics provides a 
general approach for predicting cell-type specific cistromes.

PMCID: PMC3371710
PMID: 22508765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Horm Cancer. 2012 Aug;3(4):147-59. doi: 10.1007/s12672-012-0111-0. Epub 2012 Apr 
3.

Association of double-positive FOXA1 and FOXP1 immunoreactivities with favorable 
prognosis of tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients.

Ijichi N(1), Shigekawa T, Ikeda K, Horie-Inoue K, Shimizu C, Saji S, Aogi K,
Tsuda H, Osaki A, Saeki T, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

Breast cancer is primarily a hormone-dependent tumor that can be regulated by the
status of the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone. Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1)
is a member of the forkhead box transcription factor family and functions as a
pioneer factor of the estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer. In the present
study, we demonstrate that FOXA1 mRNA was upregulated by estrogen and that
estrogen receptor-a (ERa) recruitment to ER-binding sites in the vicinity of the 
FOXA1 gene was increased by estrogen in ERa-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
The estrogen-induced FOXA1 upregulation was repressed by 4-hydroxytamoxifen
treatment. We also demonstrated that the proliferation and the migration of MCF-7
cells were decreased by FOXA1-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA; siFOXA1).
Furthermore, siFOXA1 decreased the estrogen response element-driven transcription
and the estrogen-dependent upregulation of ERa target genes in MCF-7 cells. Next,
the immunohistochemical analyses of FOXA1 were performed using two groups of
breast cancer specimens. The nuclear immunoreactivity of FOXA1 was detected in 80
(74%) of 108 human invasive breast cancers and was negatively correlated with
tumor grade and positively correlated with hormone receptor status, including ERa
and progesterone receptor, pathological tumor size, and immunoreactivity of
FOXP1, another FOX family transcription factor. FOXA1 immunoreactivity was
significantly elevated in the relapse-free breast cancer patients treated with
tamoxifen. Notably, the double-positive immunoreactivities of FOXA1 and FOXP1
were significantly associated with a favorable prognosis for the relapse-free and
overall survival of patients with tamoxifen-treated breast cancer, with lower P
values compared with FOXA1 or FOXP1 immunoreactivity alone. These results suggest
that FOXA1 plays an important role in the proliferation and migration of breast
cancer cells by modulating estrogen signaling and that the double-positive
immunoreactivities of FOXA1 and FOXP1 are associated with a favorable prognosis
of tamoxifen-treated breast cancer.

PMID: 22476979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(4):2606-12. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0218-8. Epub 2012 Apr 
1.

P-cadherin expression and basal-like subtype in breast cancers.

Liu N(1), Yu Q, Liu TJ, Gebreamlak EP, Wang SL, Zhang RJ, Zhang J, Niu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Research Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry, Ministry
of Education and Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Therapy, Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin Medical University, Huan Hu Xi Road, Ti Yuan Bei,
He Xi District, Tianjin, 300060, China.

Breast cancer is considered as one of the multifactorial diseases. The aim of the
current study is to investigate the association between P-cadherin and molecular 
subtypes of breast cancer, especially the basal-like subtype. Two hundred and
thirteen breast-invasive ductal carcinomas were involved in this study. The
expressions of P-cadherin were detected via immunohistochemistry. The 213 cases
were divided into luminal A, luminal B, HER2 overexpression subtype, and normal
breast-like and basal-like subtypes according to the standard of molecular breast
cancer subtypes. In addition, the expressions of CK5/6 and CK14 were detected to 
distinguish between the normal breast-like and the basal-like subtypes.
P-cadherin expression was found in 91 cases of 213 breast-invasive ductal
carcinomas, with a positive rate of 42.7%. P-cadherin correlated negatively with 
estrogen receptor (ER) (p=0.001) and progesterone receptor (p=0.001), whereas it 
positively correlated with histologic grade (p=0.003), NPI (p=0.005), p53
(p=0.038), and Ki67 (p=0.022). P-cadherin expression showed a strong correlation 
with recurrence and distant metastasis (p=0.009), and invasion of the vascular
and soft tissues (p=0.004). Moreover, P-cadherin expression existed in the
basal-like and non-basal-like subtypes. During prognosis, P-cadherin expression
was associated with decreased disease-free survival in patients (p=0.009) and
overall survival (OS) (p=0.005). In addition, multivariate analysis showed that
tumor grade (p=0.021), ER (p=0.015), clinical stage (p=0.001), and P-cadherin
(p=0.033) were significant predictors of OS. The current data suggest that
P-cadherin may be used to distinguish the basal-like subtype and to predict the
outcome in view of the relationship with DFS and OS. Furthermore, P-cadherin
expression may be useful in making treatment decisions.

PMID: 22467076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e31904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031904. Epub 2012 Mar 16.

Identification and pathway analysis of microRNAs with no previous involvement in 
breast cancer.

Romero-Cordoba S(1), Rodriguez-Cuevas S, Rebollar-Vega R, Quintanar-Jurado V,
Maffuz-Aziz A, Jimenez-Sanchez G, Bautista-Piña V, Arellano-Llamas R,
Hidalgo-Miranda A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genómica del Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica.
Mexico City, Mexico.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0137738.

microRNA expression signatures can differentiate normal and breast cancer tissues
and can define specific clinico-pathological phenotypes in breast tumors. In
order to further evaluate the microRNA expression profile in breast cancer, we
analyzed the expression of 667 microRNAs in 29 tumors and 21 adjacent normal
tissues using TaqMan Low-density arrays. 130 miRNAs showed significant
differential expression (adjusted P value = 0.05, Fold Change = 2) in breast
tumors compared to the normal adjacent tissue. Importantly, the role of 43 of
these microRNAs has not been previously reported in breast cancer, including
several evolutionary conserved microRNA*, showing similar expression rates to
that of their corresponding leading strand. The expression of 14 microRNAs was
replicated in an independent set of 55 tumors. Bioinformatic analysis of mRNA
targets of the altered miRNAs, identified oncogenes like ERBB2, YY1, several MAP 
kinases, and known tumor-suppressors like FOXA1 and SMAD4. Pathway analysis
identified that some biological process which are important in breast
carcinogenesis are affected by the altered microRNA expression, including
signaling through MAP kinases and TP53 pathways, as well as biological processes 
like cell death and communication, focal adhesion and ERBB2-ERBB3 signaling. Our 
data identified the altered expression of several microRNAs whose aberrant
expression might have an important impact on cancer-related cellular pathways and
whose role in breast cancer has not been previously described.

PMCID: PMC3306365
PMID: 22438871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 31;32(5):554-63. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.62. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

FOXA1 represses the molecular phenotype of basal breast cancer cells.

Bernardo GM(1), Bebek G, Ginther CL, Sizemore ST, Lozada KL, Miedler JD, Anderson
LA, Godwin AK, Abdul-Karim FW, Slamon DJ, Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University, School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that comprises multiple subtypes.
Luminal subtype tumors confer a more favorable patient prognosis, which is, in
part, attributed to estrogen receptor (ER)-a positivity and antihormone
responsiveness. Expression of the forkhead box transcription factor, FOXA1,
similarly correlates with the luminal subtype and patient survival, but is also
present in a subset of ER-negative tumors. FOXA1 is also consistently expressed
in luminal breast cancer cell lines even in the absence of ER. In contrast,
breast cancer cell lines representing the basal subtype do not express FOXA1. To 
delineate an ER-independent role for FOXA1 in maintaining the luminal phenotype, 
and hence a more favorable prognosis, we performed expression microarray analyses
on FOXA1-positive and ER-positive (MCF7, T47D), or FOXA1-positive and ER-negative
(MDA-MB-453, SKBR3) luminal cell lines in the presence or absence of transient
FOXA1 silencing. This resulted in three FOXA1 transcriptomes: (1) a luminal
signature (consistent across cell lines), (2) an ER-positive signature
(restricted to MCF7 and T47D) and (3) an ER-negative signature (restricted to
MDA-MB-453 and SKBR3). Gene set enrichment analyses revealed FOXA1 silencing
causes a partial transcriptome shift from luminal to basal gene expression
signatures. FOXA1 binds to a subset of both luminal and basal genes within
luminal breast cancer cells, and loss of FOXA1 increases enhancer RNA
transcription for a representative basal gene (CD58). These data suggest FOXA1
directly represses a subset of basal signature genes. Functionally, FOXA1
silencing increases migration and invasion of luminal cancer cells, both of which
are characteristics of basal subtype cells. We conclude FOXA1 controls plasticity
between basal and luminal breast cancer cells, not only by inducing luminal genes
but also by repressing the basal phenotype, and thus aggressiveness. Although it 
has been proposed that FOXA1-targeting agents may be useful for treating luminal 
tumors, these data suggest that this approach may promote transitions toward more
aggressive cancers.

PMCID: PMC3371315
PMID: 22391567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Oncotarget. 2012 Feb;3(2):183-94.

Inhibition of p53 expression modifies the specificity of chromatin binding by the
androgen receptor.

Guseva NV(1), Rokhlin OW, Bair TB, Glover RB, Cohen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, 
Iowa, USA. natalya-guseva@uiowa.edu

The androgen receptor (AR) is known to play a critical role in prostate cancer
(PC). p53 likely also plays a role given that p53 mutations are commonly found in
advanced PC, and loss of wild-type protein function contributes to the phenotype 
of castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). Nevertheless, the extent of the
contribution of p53 dysfunction to PC remains unclear. Here we analyze the
effects of p53 inhibition in PC cells and show that it has significant
consequences for both the interaction between AR, and chromatin and the
proliferative capacity of these cells. Inhibition of p53 expression enabled LNCaP
cells to proliferate independently of androgens. Moreover, it modified the
genome-wide binding pattern of AR. ChIP-sequnce analyis (ChIP-seq) revealed that 
fewer AR-binding sites were present in the context of p53 inhibition, suggesting 
that wild-type p53 is required for stable binding of AR to certain chromatin
regions. Further analysis revealed that a lower AR occupancy was accompanied by a
reduction in FoxA1 binding at regulatory regions of AR-dependent genes. Our study
also identifies a pool of genes that may be transcriptionally regulated by AR
only in the absence of p53, and that may contribute to the CRPC phenotype.
Overall, our results point to p53 playing an important role in regulating AR
activity across the genome.

PMCID: PMC3326648
PMID: 22383394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2012 Jun;51(6):618-29. doi: 10.1002/gcc.21950. Epub
2012 Mar 2.

Opposite roles of FOXA1 and NKX2-1 in lung cancer progression.

Deutsch L(1), Wrage M, Koops S, Glatzel M, Uzunoglu FG, Kutup A, Hinsch A, Sauter
G, Izbicki JR, Pantel K, Wikman H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General-, Visceral- and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany.

Gene copy number profiles of primary lung tumors were screened for high-level
amplifications. We detected 22 high-level amplifications in various loci,
including 14q13. This locus is known to harbor the adenocarcinoma (AC)
lineage-specific target gene NKX2-1, which is not expressed in squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). As the 14q amplification was also found in SCC, we investigated 
whether or not FOXA1 might be the corresponding target gene for SCC. Focusing on 
these two target genes, we assessed gene amplifications and protein expression of
NKX2-1 and FOXA1 in primary lung tumors (n = 554) and brain metastases (n = 68). 
Primary AC (n = 194) showed positive protein expression of NKX2-1 in 58.2% of the
samples compared with 4.2% of primary SCC samples (n = 212). Positive staining
for FOXA1 was seen in 34.7% of the SCC samples, which was comparable with 39.6%
in the AC samples. For brain metastases, FOXA1 expression was slightly higher in 
the SCC samples (55.6%) compared with the non-matched primary SCC tumor samples
(43.4%), whereas NKX2-1 expression was comparable in both primary tumors and
brain metastases. Positive FOXA1 and NKX2-1 expression was associated with a gain
or amplification in 34.6% and 28.6% of cases, respectively. The expression of
NKX2-1 was associated with early stage and grade among the AC cases. In contrast,
FOXA1 expression in SCC was associated with distant metastases as well as an
unfavorable survival rate (P = 0.039). These results suggest that both FOXA1 and 
NKX2-1 may act as lineage-specific target genes within the 14q amplicon with
opposite functions in lung cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22383183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Pathol. 2012 Nov;228(3):351-65. doi: 10.1002/path.4015. Epub 2012 May 2.

Activation of protein kinase Cd leads to increased pancreatic acinar cell
dedifferentiation in the absence of MIST1.

Johnson CL(1), Peat JM, Volante SN, Wang R, McLean CA, Pin CL.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, London, ON, Canada.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a 5 year survival rate post-diagnosis
of < 5%. Individuals with chronic pancreatitis (CP) are 20-fold more likely to
develop PDAC, making it a significant risk factor for PDAC. While the
relationship for the increased susceptibility to PDAC is unknown, loss of the
acinar cell phenotype is common to both pathologies. Pancreatic acinar cells can 
dedifferentiate or trans-differentiate into a number of cell types including duct
cells, ß cells, hepatocytes and adipocytes. Knowledge of the molecular pathways
that regulate this plasticity should provide insight into PDAC and CP. MIST1
(encoded by Bhlha15 in mice) is a transcription factor required for complete
acinar cell maturation. The goal of this study was to examine the plasticity of
acinar cells that do not express MIST1 (Mist1(-/-) ). The fate of acinar cells
from C57Bl6 or congenic Mist1(-/-) mice expressing an acinar specific,
tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase mated to Rosa26 reporter LacZ mice
(Mist1(CreERT/-) R26r) was determined following culture in a three-dimensional
collagen matrix. Mist1(CreERT/-) R26r acini showed increased acinar
dedifferentiation, formation of ductal cysts and transient increases in PDX1
expression compared to wild-type acinar cells. Other progenitor cell markers,
including Foxa1, Sox9, Sca1 and Hes1, were elevated only in Mist1(-/-) cultures. 
Analysis of protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms by western blot and
immunofluorescence identified increased PKCe accumulation and nuclear
localization of PKCd that correlated with increased duct formation. Treatment
with rottlerin, a PKCd-specific inhibitor, but not the PKCe-specific antagonist
eV1-2, reduced acinar dedifferentiation, progenitor gene expression and ductal
cyst formation. Immunocytochemistry on CP or PDAC tissue samples showed reduced
MIST1 expression combined with increased nuclear PKCd accumulation. These results
suggest that the loss of MIST1 is a common event during PDAC and CP and events
that affect MIST1 function and expression may increase susceptibility to these
pathologies.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22374815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jun;40(11):4754-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks139. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Integrated analysis identifies a class of androgen-responsive genes regulated by 
short combinatorial long-range mechanism facilitated by CTCF.

Taslim C(1), Chen Z, Huang K, Huang TH, Wang Q, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Recently, much attention has been given to elucidate how long-range gene
regulation comes into play and how histone modifications and distal transcription
factor binding contribute toward this mechanism. Androgen receptor (AR), a key
regulator of prostate cancer, has been shown to regulate its target genes via
distal enhancers, leading to the hypothesis of global long-range gene regulation.
However, despite numerous flows of newly generated data, the precise mechanism
with respect to AR-mediated long-range gene regulation is still largely unknown. 
In this study, we carried out an integrated analysis combining several types of
high-throughput data, including genome-wide distribution data of H3K4
di-methylation (H3K4me2), CCCTC binding factor (CTCF), AR and FoxA1 cistrome data
as well as androgen-regulated gene expression data. We found that a subset of
androgen-responsive genes was significantly enriched near AR/H3K4me2 overlapping 
regions and FoxA1 binding sites within the same CTCF block. Importantly, genes in
this class were enriched in cancer-related pathways and were downregulated in
clinical metastatic versus localized prostate cancer. Our results suggest a
relatively short combinatorial long-range regulation mechanism facilitated by
CTCF blocking. Under such a mechanism, H3K4me2, AR and FoxA1 within the same CTCF
block combinatorially regulate a subset of distally located androgen-responsive
genes involved in prostate carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3367180
PMID: 22344698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Cancer Sci. 2012 Apr;103(4):806-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02201.x. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

Forkhead box transcription factor, forkhead box A1, shows negative association
with lymph node status in endometrial cancer, and represses cell proliferation
and migration of endometrial cancer cells.

Abe Y(1), Ijichi N, Ikeda K, Kayano H, Horie-Inoue K, Takeda S, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

Endometrial cancer is the most common malignancy of the female genital tract and 
is associated with poor prognosis. It is primarily a hormone-dependent cancer
that is regulated by steroid hormones, including estrogen and progesterone.
Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is a member of the forkhead box transcription factor
family and functions as a pioneer factor in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive
breast cancer. In the present study, we investigated the expression of FOXA1 in
endometrial cancers by immunohistochemical analysis. Nuclear immunoreactivity for
FOXA1 was detected in 40 of 109 cases (37%), and was found to be negatively
associated with lymph node status (P = 0.033). In ER-positive Ishikawa
endometrial cancer cells, small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of FOXA1 
promoted cell proliferation and migration. Furthermore, exogenously introduced
FOXA1 suppressed both proliferation and migration of Ishikawa cells. These
results suggest that FOXA1 functions as a tumor suppressor through modulation of 
proliferation and migration of endometrial cancer cells.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22313737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2012 Mar;49(3):333-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 Jan 16.

Comparative genomics identification of a novel set of temporally regulated
hedgehog target genes in the retina.

McNeill B(1), Perez-Iratxeta C, Mazerolle C, Furimsky M, Mishina Y,
Andrade-Navarro MA, Wallace VA.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501 Smyth Road, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is involved in numerous developmental and
adult processes with many links to cancer. In vertebrates, the activity of the Hh
pathway is mediated primarily through three Gli transcription factors (Gli1, 2
and 3) that can serve as transcriptional activators or repressors. The
identification of Gli target genes is essential for the understanding of the
Hh-mediated processes. We used a comparative genomics approach using the mouse
and human genomes to identify 390 genes that contained conserved Gli binding
sites. RT-qPCR validation of 46 target genes in E14.5 and P0.5 retinal explants
revealed that Hh pathway activation resulted in the modulation of 30 of these
targets, 25 of which demonstrated a temporal regulation. Further validation
revealed that the expression of Bok, FoxA1, Sox8 and Wnt7a was dependent upon
Sonic Hh (Shh) signaling in the retina and their regulation is under positive and
negative controls by Gli2 and Gli3, respectively. We also show using chromatin
immunoprecipitation that Gli2 binds to the Sox8 promoter, suggesting that Sox8 is
an Hh-dependent direct target of Gli2. Finally, we demonstrate that the Hh
pathway also modulates the expression of Sox9 and Sox10, which together with Sox8
make up the SoxE group. Previously, it has been shown that Hh and SoxE group
genes promote Müller glial cell development in the retina. Our data are
consistent with the possibility for a role of SoxE group genes downstream of Hh
signaling on Müller cell development.

Crown Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029021. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Genome-wide progesterone receptor binding: cell type-specific and shared
mechanisms in T47D breast cancer cells and primary leiomyoma cells.

Yin P(1), Roqueiro D, Huang L, Owen JK, Xie A, Navarro A, Monsivais D, Coon JS
5th, Kim JJ, Dai Y, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Progesterone, via its nuclear receptor (PR), exerts an overall
tumorigenic effect on both uterine fibroid (leiomyoma) and breast cancer tissues,
whereas the antiprogestin RU486 inhibits growth of these tissues through an
unknown mechanism. Here, we determined the interaction between common or
cell-specific genome-wide binding sites of PR and mRNA expression in
RU486-treated uterine leiomyoma and breast cancer cells.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: ChIP-sequencing revealed 31,457 and 7,034 PR-binding sites in
breast cancer and uterine leiomyoma cells, respectively; 1,035 sites overlapped
in both cell types. Based on the chromatin-PR interaction in both cell types, we 
statistically refined the consensus progesterone response element to GACA 
TGTC. We identified two striking differences between uterine leiomyoma and
breast cancer cells. First, the cis-regulatory elements for HSF, TEF-1, and
C/EBPa and ß were statistically enriched at genomic RU486/PR-targets in uterine
leiomyoma, whereas E2F, FOXO1, FOXA1, and FOXF sites were preferentially enriched
in breast cancer cells. Second, 51.5% of RU486-regulated genes in breast cancer
cells but only 6.6% of RU486-regulated genes in uterine leiomyoma cells contained
a PR-binding site within 5 kb from their transcription start sites (TSSs),
whereas 75.4% of RU486-regulated genes contained a PR-binding site farther than
50 kb from their TSSs in uterine leiomyoma cells. RU486 regulated only seven
mRNAs in both cell types. Among these, adipophilin (PLIN2), a pro-differentiation
gene, was induced via RU486 and PR via the same regulatory region in both cell
types.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies have identified molecular components in a
RU486/PR-controlled gene network involved in the regulation of cell growth, cell 
migration, and extracellular matrix function. Tissue-specific and common patterns
of genome-wide PR binding and gene regulation may determine the therapeutic
effects of antiprogestins in uterine fibroids and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3260146
PMID: 22272226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Cell. 2012 Jan 20;148(1-2):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.026.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential for sexual dimorphism in liver cancer.

Li Z(1), Tuteja G, Schug J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2012 Aug;57(2):453-4.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is sexually dimorphic in both rodents and humans, 
with significantly higher incidence in males, an effect that is dependent on sex 
hormones. The molecular mechanisms by which estrogens prevent and androgens
promote liver cancer remain unclear. Here, we discover that sexually dimorphic
HCC is completely reversed in Foxa1- and Foxa2-deficient mice after
diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. Coregulation of target genes by 
Foxa1/a2 and either the estrogen receptor (ERa) or the androgen receptor (AR) was
increased during hepatocarcinogenesis in normal female or male mice,
respectively, but was lost in Foxa1/2-deficient mice. Thus, both
estrogen-dependent resistance to and androgen-mediated facilitation of HCC depend
on Foxa1/2. Strikingly, single nucleotide polymorphisms at FOXA2 binding sites
reduce binding of both FOXA2 and ERa to their targets in human liver and
correlate with HCC development in women. Thus, Foxa factors and their targets are
central for the sexual dimorphism of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3266536
PMID: 22265403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Res. 2012 Mar 1;72(5):1248-59. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0943. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

Targeting pioneering factor and hormone receptor cooperative pathways to suppress
tumor progression.

Shah S(1), Prasad S, Knudsen KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Nuclear receptors and pioneer factors drive the development and progression of
prostate cancer. In this disease, aggressive disease phenotypes and hormone
therapy failures result from resurgent activity of androgen receptor (AR) and the
upregulation of coactivator protein p300 and pioneer factors (e.g., GATA2 and
FOXA1). Thus, a major emphasis in the field is to identify mechanisms by which
castrate-resistant AR activity and pioneer factor function can be combinatorially
suppressed. Here we show that the turmeric spice isoflavone curcumin suppresses
p300 and CBP occupancy at sites of AR function. Curcumin reduced the association 
of histone acetylation and pioneer factors, thereby suppressing AR residence and 
downstream target gene expression. Histone deacetylase inhibitors reversed the
effects of curcumin on AR activity, further underscoring the impact of curcumin
on altering the chromatin landscape. These functions precluded pioneer factor
occupancy, leading ultimately to a suppression of ligand-dependent and
ligand-independent AR residence on chromatin. Moreover, these functions were
conserved even in cells with heightened pioneer factor activity, thus identifying
a potential strategy to manage this subclass of tumors. Biological relevance was 
further identified using in vivo xenograft models mimicking disease progression. 
Curcumin cooperated in vivo with androgen deprivation as indicated by a reduction
in tumor growth and delay to the onset of castrate-resistant disease. Together,
our results show the combinatorial impact of targeting AR and histone
modification in prostate cancer, thus setting the stage for further development
of curcumin as a novel agent to target AR signaling.

PMCID: PMC3294022
PMID: 22258452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Algorithms Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 16;7(1):2. doi: 10.1186/1748-7188-7-2.

A strand specific high resolution normalization method for chip-sequencing data
employing multiple experimental control measurements.

Enroth S(1), Andersson CR, Andersson R, Wadelius C, Gustafsson MG, Komorowski J.

Author information: 
(1)The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Department of Cell and Molecular
Biology, Science for Life Laboratory, Biomedical Center, Uppsala University, Box 
598, SE-75124 Uppsala, Sweden. jan.komorowski@icm.uu.se.

BACKGROUND: High-throughput sequencing is becoming the standard tool for
investigating protein-DNA interactions or epigenetic modifications. However, the 
data generated will always contain noise due to e.g. repetitive regions or
non-specific antibody interactions. The noise will appear in the form of a
background distribution of reads that must be taken into account in the
downstream analysis, for example when detecting enriched regions (peak-calling). 
Several reported peak-callers can take experimental measurements of background
tag distribution into account when analysing a data set. Unfortunately, the
background is only used to adjust peak calling and not as a pre-processing step
that aims at discerning the signal from the background noise. A normalization
procedure that extracts the signal of interest would be of universal use when
investigating genomic patterns.
RESULTS: We formulated such a normalization method based on linear regression and
made a proof-of-concept implementation in R and C++. It was tested on simulated
as well as on publicly available ChIP-seq data on binding sites for two
transcription factors, MAX and FOXA1 and two control samples, Input and IgG. We
applied three different peak-callers to (i) raw (un-normalized) data using
statistical background models and (ii) raw data with control samples as
background and (iii) normalized data without additional control samples as
background. The fraction of called regions containing the expected transcription 
factor binding motif was largest for the normalized data and evaluation with qPCR
data for FOXA1 suggested higher sensitivity and specificity using normalized data
over raw data with experimental background.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed method can handle several control samples allowing for 
correction of multiple sources of bias simultaneously. Our evaluation on both
synthetic and experimental data suggests that the method is successful in
removing background noise.

PMCID: PMC3371767
PMID: 22248020  [PubMed]


308. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30014. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030014. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Foxa1 reduces lipid accumulation in human hepatocytes and is down-regulated in
nonalcoholic fatty liver.

Moya M(1), Benet M, Guzmán C, Tolosa L, García-Monzón C, Pareja E, Castell JV,
Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Hepatology Unit, University Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Triglyceride accumulation in nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) results from
unbalanced lipid metabolism which, in the liver, is controlled by several
transcription factors. The Foxa subfamily of winged helix/forkhead box (Fox)
transcription factors comprises three members which play important roles in
controlling both metabolism and homeostasis through the regulation of multiple
target genes in the liver, pancreas and adipose tissue. In the mouse liver, Foxa2
is repressed by insulin and mediates fasting responses. Unlike Foxa2 however, the
role of Foxa1 in the liver has not yet been investigated in detail. In this
study, we evaluate the role of Foxa1 in two human liver cell models, primary
cultured hepatocytes and HepG2 cells, by adenoviral infection. Moreover, human
and rat livers were analyzed to determine Foxa1 regulation in NAFL. Results
demonstrate that Foxa1 is a potent inhibitor of hepatic triglyceride synthesis,
accumulation and secretion by repressing the expression of multiple target genes 
of these pathways (e.g., GPAM, DGAT2, MTP, APOB). Moreover, Foxa1 represses the
fatty acid transporter protein FATP2 and lowers fatty acid uptake. Foxa1 also
increases the breakdown of fatty acids by inducing peroxisomal fatty acid
ß-oxidation and ketone body synthesis. Finally, Foxa1 is able to largely
up-regulate UCP1, thereby dissipating energy and consistently decreasing the
mitochondria membrane potential. We also report that human and rat NAFL have a
reduced Foxa1 expression, possibly through a protein kinase C-dependent pathway. 
We conclude that Foxa1 is an antisteatotic factor that coordinately tunes several
lipid metabolic pathways to block triglyceride accumulation in hepatocytes.
However, Foxa1 is down-regulated in human and rat NAFL and, therefore, increasing
Foxa1 levels could protect from steatosis. Altogether, we suggest that Foxa1
could be a novel therapeutic target for NAFL disease and insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3253125
PMID: 22238690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 24;109(4):1199-203. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1117213109. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Forkhead transcription factor FoxA1 regulates sweat secretion through Bestrophin 
2 anion channel and Na-K-Cl cotransporter 1.

Cui CY(1), Childress V, Piao Y, Michel M, Johnson AA, Kunisada M, Ko MS, Kaestner
KH, Marmorstein AD, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. cuic@mail.nih.gov

Body temperature is maintained in a narrow range in mammals, primarily controlled
by sweating. In humans, the dynamic thermoregulatory organ, comprised of 2-4
million sweat glands distributed over the body, can secrete up to 4 L of sweat
per day, thereby making it possible to withstand high temperatures and endure
prolonged physical stress (e.g., long-distance running). The genetic basis for
sweat gland function, however, is largely unknown. We find that the forkhead
transcription factor, FoxA1, is required to generate mouse sweating capacity.
Despite continued sweat gland morphogenesis, ablation of FoxA1 in mice results in
absolute anihidrosis (lack of sweating). This inability to sweat is accompanied
by down-regulation of the Na-K-Cl cotransporter 1 (Nkcc1) and the
Ca(2+)-activated anion channel Bestrophin 2 (Best2), as well as glycoprotein
accumulation in gland lumens and ducts. Furthermore, Best2-deficient mice display
comparable anhidrosis and glycoprotein accumulation. These findings link earlier 
observations that both sodium/potassium/chloride exchange and Ca(2+) are required
for sweat production. FoxA1 is inferred to regulate two corresponding features of
sweat secretion. One feature, via Best2, catalyzes a bicarbonate gradient that
could help to drive calcium-associated ionic transport; the other, requiring
Nkcc1, facilitates monovalent ion exchange into sweat. These mechanistic
components can be pharmaceutical targets to defend against hyperthermia and
alleviate defective thermoregulation in the elderly, and may provide a model
relevant to more complex secretory processes.

PMCID: PMC3268268
PMID: 22223659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Mar;159B(2):236-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32020. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Clinical improvement of the aggressive neurobehavioral phenotype in a patient
with a deletion of PITX3 and the absence of L-DOPA in the cerebrospinal fluid.

Derwinska K(1), Mierzewska H, Goszczanska A, Szczepanik E, Xia Z, Kusmierska K,
Tryfon J, Kutkowska-Kazmierczak A, Bocian E, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

The development of midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons is regulated by several
transcription factors, including Nurr1, Wnt1, Lmx1a/1b, En1, En2, Foxa1, Foxa2,
and Pitx3. PITX3 is an upstream co-activator of the TH (tyrosine hydroxylase)
promoter. Pitx3(-/-) mice have a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the
substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, leading to the significantly reduced
DA levels in the nigrostriatal pathway and in the dorsal striatum and manifest
anomalous striatum-dependent cognitive impairment and neurobehavioral activity.
Treatment with L-DOPA, dopamine, or dopamine receptor agonists in these mice
reversed several of their sensorimotor impairments. Heterozygous missense
mutations in PITX3 have been reported in patients with autosomal dominant
congenital cataract and anterior segment (ocular) mesenchymal dysgenesis (ASMD)
whereas homozygous missense mutations have been found in patients with
microphthalmia and neurological impairment. Using a clinical oligonucleotide
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we have identified an ~317 kb
hemizygous deletion in 10q24.32, involving PITX3 in a 17-year-old male with a
Smith-Magenis syndrome-like phenotype, including mild intellectual impairment,
sleep disturbance, hyperactivity, and aggressive and self-destructive behavior.
Interestingly, no eye anomalies were found in our patient. Analysis of
neurotransmitters in his cerebrospinal fluid revealed an absence of L-DOPA and
significantly decreased levels of catecholamine metabolites. Importantly, L-DOPA 
treatment of our patient has led to mild mitigation of his aggressive behavior
and mild improvement of his attention span, extended time periods of
concentration, and better sleep.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22223473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nature. 2012 Jan 4;481(7381):389-93. doi: 10.1038/nature10730.

Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with clinical outcome in
breast cancer.

Ross-Innes CS(1), Stark R, Teschendorff AE, Holmes KA, Ali HR, Dunning MJ, Brown 
GD, Gojis O, Ellis IO, Green AR, Ali S, Chin SF, Palmieri C, Caldas C, Carroll
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2012 Jan 19;481(7381):275-6.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Feb;12(2):79.

Oestrogen receptor-a (ER) is the defining and driving transcription factor in the
majority of breast cancers and its target genes dictate cell growth and endocrine
response, yet genomic understanding of ER function has been restricted to model
systems. Here we map genome-wide ER-binding events, by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), in primary
breast cancers from patients with different clinical outcomes and in distant
ER-positive metastases. We find that drug-resistant cancers still recruit ER to
the chromatin, but that ER binding is a dynamic process, with the acquisition of 
unique ER-binding regions in tumours from patients that are likely to relapse.
The acquired ER regulatory regions associated with poor clinical outcome observed
in primary tumours reveal gene signatures that predict clinical outcome in
ER-positive disease exclusively. We find that the differential ER-binding
programme observed in tumours from patients with poor outcome is not due to the
selection of a rare subpopulation of cells, but is due to the FOXA1-mediated
reprogramming of ER binding on a rapid timescale. The parallel redistribution of 
ER and FOXA1 binding events in drug-resistant cellular contexts is supported by
histological co-expression of ER and FOXA1 in metastatic samples. By establishing
transcription-factor mapping in primary tumour material, we show that there is
plasticity in ER-binding capacity, with distinct combinations of cis-regulatory
elements linked with the different clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3272464
PMID: 22217937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(5):941-53. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06306-11. Epub 2011 Dec
27.

Critical and reciprocal regulation of KLF4 and SLUG in transforming growth factor
ß-initiated prostate cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Liu YN(1), Abou-Kheir W, Yin JJ, Fang L, Hynes P, Casey O, Hu D, Wan Y, Seng V,
Sheppard-Tillman H, Martin P, Kelly K.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Cancer Biology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in various pathological
processes within the prostate, including benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and
prostate cancer progression. However, an ordered sequence of signaling events
initiating carcinoma-associated EMT has not been established. In a model of
transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)-induced prostatic EMT, SLUG is the dominant
regulator of EMT initiation in vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated by the
inhibition of EMT following Slug depletion. In contrast, SNAIL depletion was
significantly less rate limiting. TGFß-stimulated KLF4 degradation is required
for SLUG induction. Expression of a degradation-resistant KLF4 mutant inhibited
EMT, and furthermore, depletion of Klf4 was sufficient to initiate SLUG-dependent
EMT. We show that KLF4 and another epithelial determinant, FOXA1, are direct
transcriptional inhibitors of SLUG expression in mouse and human prostate cancer 
cells. Furthermore, self-reinforcing regulatory loops for SLUG-KLF4 and
SLUG-FOXA1 lead to SLUG-dependent binding of polycomb repressive complexes to the
Klf4 and Foxa1 promoters, silencing transcription and consolidating mesenchymal
commitment. Analysis of tissue arrays demonstrated decreased KLF4 and increased
SLUG expression in advanced-stage primary prostate cancer, substantiating the
involvement of the EMT signaling events described in model systems.

PMCID: PMC3295188
PMID: 22203039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. BMC Genomics. 2011 Dec 5;12:593. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-593.

A co-ordinated interaction between CTCF and ER in breast cancer cells.

Ross-Innes CS(1), Brown GD, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB20RE, UK.

BACKGROUND: CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is a conserved zinc finger transcription 
factor that is involved in both intra- and interchromasomal looping. Recent
research has shown a role for CTCF in estrogen receptor (ER) biology, at some
individual loci, but a multi-context global analysis of CTCF binding and
transcription activity is lacking.
RESULTS: We now map CTCF binding genome wide in breast cancer cells and find that
CTCF binding is unchanged in response to estrogen or tamoxifen treatment. We find
a small but reproducible set of CTCF binding events that overlap with both the
nuclear receptor, estrogen receptor, and the forkhead protein FOXA1. These
overlapping binding events are likely functional as they are biased towards
estrogen-regulated genes, compared to regions lacking either CTCF or ER binding. 
In addition we identify cell-line specific CTCF binding events. These binding
events are more likely to be associated with cell-line specific ER binding events
and are also more likely to be adjacent to genes that are expressed in that
particular cell line.
CONCLUSION: The evolving role for CTCF in ER biology is complex, but is likely to
be multifunctional and possibly influenced by the specific genomic locus. Our
data suggest a positive, pro-transcriptional role for CTCF in ER-mediated gene
expression in breast cancer cells. CTCF not only provides boundaries for
accessible and 'protected' transcriptional blocks, but may also influence the
actual binding of ER to the chromatin, thereby modulating the estrogen-mediated
gene expression changes observed in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3248577
PMID: 22142239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Am J Pathol. 2012 Feb;180(2):848-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.10.021. Epub 2011
Dec 2.

FOXA1 promotes tumor progression in prostate cancer and represents a novel
hallmark of castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Gerhardt J(1), Montani M, Wild P, Beer M, Huber F, Hermanns T, Müntener M,
Kristiansen G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) modulates the transactivation of steroid hormone 
receptors and thus may influence tumor growth and hormone responsiveness in
prostate cancer. We therefore investigated the correlation of FOXA1 expression
with clinical parameters, prostate-specific antigen (PSA) relapse-free survival, 
and hormone receptor expression in a large cohort of prostate cancer patients at 
different disease stages. FOXA1 expression did not differ significantly between
benign glands from the peripheral zone and primary peripheral zone prostate
carcinomas. However, FOXA1 was overexpressed in metastases and particularly in
castration-resistant cases, but was expressed at lower levels in both normal and 
neoplastic transitional zone tissues. FOXA1 levels correlated with higher pT
stages and Gleason scores, as well as with androgen (AR) and estrogen receptor
expression. Moreover, FOXA1 overexpression was associated with faster biochemical
disease progression, which was pronounced in patients with low AR levels.
Finally, siRNA-based knockdown of FOXA1 induced decreased cell proliferation and 
migration. Moreover, in vitro tumorigenicity was inducible by ARs only in the
presence of FOXA1, substantiating a functional cooperation between FOXA1 and AR. 
In conclusion, FOXA1 expression is associated with tumor progression,
dedifferentiation of prostate cancer cells, and poorer prognosis, as well as with
cellular proliferation and migration and with AR signaling. These findings
suggest FOXA1 overexpression as a novel mechanism inducing castration resistance 
in prostate cancer.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002368. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002368. Epub 2011
Nov 17.

PBX1 genomic pioneer function drives ERa signaling underlying progression in
breast cancer.

Magnani L(1), Ballantyne EB, Zhang X, Lupien M.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2012 Jan;12(1):4.

Altered transcriptional programs are a hallmark of diseases, yet how these are
established is still ill-defined. PBX1 is a TALE homeodomain protein involved in 
the development of different types of cancers. The estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) 
is central to the development of two-thirds of all breast cancers. Here we
demonstrate that PBX1 acts as a pioneer factor and is essential for the
ERa-mediated transcriptional response driving aggressive tumors in breast cancer.
Indeed, PBX1 expression correlates with ERa in primary breast tumors, and breast 
cancer cells depleted of PBX1 no longer proliferate following estrogen
stimulation. Profiling PBX1 recruitment and chromatin accessibility across the
genome of breast cancer cells through ChIP-seq and FAIRE-seq reveals that PBX1 is
loaded and promotes chromatin openness at specific genomic locations through its 
capacity to read specific epigenetic signatures. Accordingly, PBX1 guides ERa
recruitment to a specific subset of sites. Expression profiling studies
demonstrate that PBX1 controls over 70% of the estrogen response. More
importantly, the PBX1-dependent transcriptional program is associated with
poor-outcome in breast cancer patients. Correspondingly, PBX1 expression alone
can discriminate a priori the outcome in ERa-positive breast cancer patients.
These features are markedly different from the previously characterized
ERa-associated pioneer factor FoxA1. Indeed, PBX1 is the only pioneer factor
identified to date that discriminates outcome such as metastasis in ERa-positive 
breast cancer patients. Together our results reveal that PBX1 is a novel pioneer 
factor defining aggressive ERa-positive breast tumors, as it guides ERa genomic
activity to unique genomic regions promoting a transcriptional program favorable 
to breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3219601
PMID: 22125492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Biosci Rep. 2012 Apr 1;32(2):113-30. doi: 10.1042/BSR20110046.

FOXA1: a transcription factor with parallel functions in development and cancer.

Bernardo GM(1), Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

When aberrant, factors critical for organ morphogenesis are also commonly
involved in disease progression. FOXA1 (forkhead box A1), also known as HNF3a
(hepatocyte nuclear factor 3a), is required for postnatal survival due to its
essential role in controlling pancreatic and renal function. In addition to
regulating a variety of tissues during embryogenesis and early life, rescue
experiments have revealed a specific role for FOXA1 in the postnatal development 
of the mammary gland and prostate. Activity of the nuclear hormone receptors ERa 
(oestrogen receptor a) and AR (androgen receptor) is also required for proper
development of the mammary gland and prostate respectively. FOXA1 modulates ER
and AR function in breast and prostate cancer cells, supporting the postulate
that FOXA1 is involved in ER and AR signalling under normal conditions, and that 
some carcinogenic processes in these tissues stem from hormonally regulated
developmental pathways gone awry. In addition to broadly reviewing the function
of FOXA1 in various aspects of development and cancer, this review focuses on the
interplay of FOXA1/ER and FOXA1/AR, in normal and cancerous mammary and prostate 
epithelial cells. Given the hormone dependency of both breast and prostate
cancer, a thorough understanding of FOXA1's role in both cancer types is critical
for battling hormone receptor-positive disease and acquired anti-hormone
resistance.

PMID: 22115363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;32(2):399-414. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05958-11. Epub 2011 Nov
14.

Integration of regulatory networks by NKX3-1 promotes androgen-dependent prostate
cancer survival.

Tan PY(1), Chang CW, Chng KR, Wansa KD, Sung WK, Cheung E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Singapore.

The NKX3-1 gene is a homeobox gene required for prostate tumor progression, but
how it functions is unclear. Here, using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to
massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) we showed that NKX3-1 colocalizes with
the androgen receptor (AR) across the prostate cancer genome. We uncovered two
distinct mechanisms by which NKX3-1 controls the AR transcriptional network in
prostate cancer. First, NKX3-1 and AR directly regulate each other in a
feed-forward regulatory loop. Second, NKX3-1 collaborates with AR and FoxA1 to
mediate genes in advanced and recurrent prostate carcinoma. NKX3-1- and
AR-coregulated genes include those found in the "protein trafficking" process,
which integrates oncogenic signaling pathways. Moreover, we demonstrate that
NKX3-1, AR, and FoxA1 promote prostate cancer cell survival by directly
upregulating RAB3B, a member of the RAB GTPase family. Finally, we show that
RAB3B is overexpressed in prostate cancer patients, suggesting that RAB3B
together with AR, FoxA1, and NKX3-1 are important regulators of prostate cancer
progression. Collectively, our work highlights a novel hierarchical
transcriptional regulatory network between NKX3-1, AR, and the RAB GTPase
signaling pathway that is critical for the genetic-molecular-phenotypic paradigm 
in androgen-dependent prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3255774
PMID: 22083957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Endocrinology. 2012 Jan;153(1):492-500. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1310. Epub 2011 Nov 
8.

Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) oppositely regulate human type 1
iodothyronine deiodinase gene in liver.

Kanamoto N(1), Tagami T, Ueda-Sakane Y, Sone M, Miura M, Yasoda A, Tamura N, Arai
H, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
kyotetsu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase (D1), a selenoenzyme that catalyzes the
bioactivation of thyroid hormone, is expressed mainly in the liver. Its
expression and activity are modulated by several factors, but the precise
mechanism of its transcriptional regulation remains unclear. In the present
study, we have analyzed the promoter of human D1 gene (hDIO1) to identify factors
that prevalently increase D1 activity in the human liver. Deletion and mutation
analyses demonstrated that a forkhead box (FOX)A binding site and an E-box site
within the region between nucleotides -187 and -132 are important for hDIO1
promoter activity in the liver. EMSA demonstrated that FOXA1 and FOXA2
specifically bind to the FOXA binding site and that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) specifically binds to the E-box element. Overexpression of FOXA2 decreased 
hDIO1 promoter activity, and short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of FOXA2
increased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA. In contrast, overexpression of USF1/2
increased hDIO1 promoter activity. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
FOXA1 decreased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA, but knockdown of both FOXA1 and
FOXA2 restored it. The response of the hDIO1 promoter to USF was greatly
attenuated in the absence of FOXA1. Taken together, these results indicate that a
balance of FOXA1 and FOXA2 expression modulates hDIO1 expression in the liver.

PMID: 22067325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):617-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1811-9. 
Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Life stage differences in mammary gland gene expression profile in non-human
primates.

Stute P(1), Sielker S, Wood CE, Register TC, Lees CJ, Dewi FN, Williams JK,
Wagner JD, Stefenelli U, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy of women in the developed world.
To better understand its pathogenesis, knowledge of normal breast development is 
crucial, as BC is the result of disregulation of physiologic processes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the impact of reproductive life stages on the
transcriptional profile of the mammary gland in a primate model. Comparative
transcriptomic analyses were carried out using breast tissues from 28 female
cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) at the following life stages:
prepubertal (n = 5), adolescent (n = 4), adult luteal (n = 5), pregnant (n = 6), 
lactating (n = 3), and postmenopausal (n = 5). Mammary gland RNA was hybridized
to Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Rhesus Macaque Genome Arrays. Differential gene
expression was analyzed using ANOVA and cluster analysis. Hierarchical cluster
analysis revealed distinct separation of life stage groups. More than 2,225
differentially expressed mRNAs were identified. Gene families or pathways that
changed across life stages included those related to estrogen and androgen (ESR1,
PGR, TFF1, GREB1, AR, 17HSDB2, 17HSDB7, STS, HSD11B1, AKR1C4), prolactin (PRLR,
ELF5, STAT5, CSN1S1), insulin-like growth factor signaling (IGF1, IGFBP1,
IGFBP5), extracellular matrix (POSTN, TGFB1, COL5A2, COL12A1, FOXC1, LAMC1,
PDGFRA, TGFB2), and differentiation (CD24, CD29, CD44, CD61, ALDH1, BRCA1, FOXA1,
POSTN, DICER1, LIG4, KLF4, NOTCH2, RIF1, BMPR1A, TGFB2). Pregnancy and lactation 
displayed distinct patterns of gene expression. ESR1 and IGF1 were significantly 
higher in the adolescent compared to the adult animals, whereas differentiation
pathways were overrepresented in adult animals and pregnancy-associated life
stages. Few individual genes were distinctly different in postmenopausal animals.
Our data demonstrate characteristic patterns of gene expression during breast
development. Several of the pathways activated during pubertal development have
been implicated in cancer development and metastasis, supporting the idea that
other developmental markers may have application as biomarkers for BC.

PMCID: PMC3822905
PMID: 22037779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 20;11:63. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-63.

Conserved and non-conserved enhancers direct tissue specific transcription in
ancient germ layer specific developmental control genes.

Chatterjee S(1), Bourque G, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60
Biopolis Street, 138672, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Identifying DNA sequences (enhancers) that direct the precise spatial
and temporal expression of developmental control genes remains a significant
challenge in the annotation of vertebrate genomes. Locating these sequences,
which in many cases lie at a great distance from the transcription start site,
has been a major obstacle in deciphering gene regulation. Coupling of comparative
genomics with functional validation to locate such regulatory elements has been a
successful method in locating many such regulatory elements. But most of these
studies looked either at a single gene only or the whole genome without focusing 
on any particular process. The pressing need is to integrate the tools of
comparative genomics with knowledge of developmental biology to validate
enhancers for developmental transcription factors in greater detail
RESULTS: Our results show that near four different genes (nkx3.2, pax9, otx1b and
foxa2) in zebrafish, only 20-30% of highly conserved DNA sequences can act as
developmental enhancers irrespective of the tissue the gene expresses in. We find
that some genes also have multiple conserved enhancers expressing in the same
tissue at the same or different time points in development. We also located
non-conserved enhancers for two of the genes (pax9 and otx1b). Our modified
Bacterial artificial chromosome (BACs) studies for these 4 genes revealed that
many of these enhancers work in a synergistic fashion, which cannot be captured
by individual DNA constructs and are not conserved at the sequence level. Our
detailed biochemical and transgenic analysis revealed Foxa1 binds to the otx1b
non-conserved enhancer to direct its activity in forebrain and otic vesicle of
zebrafish at 24 hpf.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly indicate that high level of functional
conservation of genes is not necessarily associated with sequence conservation of
its regulatory elements. Moreover certain non conserved DNA elements might have
role in gene regulation. The need is to bring together multiple approaches to
bear upon individual genes to decipher all its regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3210094
PMID: 22011226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Jan 1;318(1):61-74. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.09.016. Epub
2011 Oct 6.

FoxA1 and glucocorticoid receptor crosstalk via histone H4K16 acetylation at a
hormone regulated enhancer.

Belikov S(1), Holmqvist PH, Astrand C, Wrange Ö.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177
Stockholm, Sweden.

The forkhead transcription factor FoxA1 participates in many gene regulatory
events with steroid hormone receptors, one example being the integrated mouse
mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter. Its enhancer harbors several FoxA1 binding
sites. FoxA1 promotes glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-DNA binding and transcription.
Here we analyze the regulatory capacity of GR, FoxA1 and hormone in quantitative 
terms when reconstituted with the MMTV enhancer in Xenopus oocytes. By titrating 
each component we demonstrate that FoxA1 is required for hormone induction at low
GR concentration and that FoxA1 is a potent enhancer of GR-induced transcription.
Conversely, specific DNA binding of FoxA1 at low intranuclear concentration is
highly responsive to minute levels of hormone-activated GR while increased FoxA1 
concentration results in constitutive binding. When bound to DNA, FoxA1 induces
DNase I hypersensitivity, this is accompanied by increased acetylation,
specifically at histone H4K16. Expression of FoxA1 deletion mutants demonstrated 
its DNA binding domain to be sufficient for DNA binding in vivo. The C-terminal
and N-terminal domains both contribute to chromatin remodeling while the latter
is more important for GR mediated transcription. Thus FoxA1 is primarily
responsible for the chromatin presetting while GR supports chromatin presetting
at low hormone concentration and transcriptional induction at high hormone
concentration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22001115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Apr;19(4):1145-52. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-2094-4. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

Impact of FOXA1 expression on the prognosis of patients with hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer.

Hisamatsu Y(1), Tokunaga E, Yamashita N, Akiyoshi S, Okada S, Nakashima Y,
Aishima S, Morita M, Kakeji Y, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Assessing indications for adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) in patients with
hormone receptor (HR)-positive/human epidermal receptor 2 (HER2)-negative breast 
cancer remains a challenge for oncologists. In this study, we evaluated whether
forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1) expression was a prognostic and predictive marker
for HR-positive breast cancer.
METHODS: FOXA1 expression was analyzed immunohistochemically in 239 primary
breast cancers. Associations between FOXA1 expression and clinicopathological
characteristics and prognosis were evaluated.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression was positively correlated with estrogen receptor (ER)
(P<0.0001) and progesterone receptor (PR) expression (P=0.0011), and inversely
correlated with nuclear grade (P=0.0048) and Ki67 index (P=0.0112). High FOXA1
was associated with longer recurrence-free survival (RFS) in all cases (P<0.0001)
and in ER-positive cases (P<0.0001), but not in ER-negative cases. In addition,
FOXA1 expression was associated with good prognosis, regardless of the Ki67
index, in HR-positive cases. FOXA1 was an independent prognostic factor on
multivariate analysis in all cases and in ER-positive cases. Among
HR-positive/HER2-negative cases with high FOXA1 expression, there was no
difference in RFS between those given hormone therapy (HT) alone and those given 
CT plus HT.
CONCLUSIONS: In HR-positive breast cancer, FOXA1 expression was significantly
associated with good prognosis. FOXA1 expression may be a useful marker for
HR-positive/HER2-negative breast cancer to identify patients with good prognosis 
who may not require CT.

PMID: 21984487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):487-500. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1775-9.
Epub 2011 Sep 24.

The rearranged during transfection/papillary thyroid carcinoma tyrosine kinase is
an estrogen-dependent gene required for the growth of estrogen receptor positive 
breast cancer cells.

Wang C(1), Mayer JA, Mazumdar A, Brown PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M D Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The rearranged during transfection/papillary thyroid carcinoma (RET/PTC) tyrosine
kinase is an oncogene implicated in the tumorigenesis of thyroid cancer. Recent
studies by us and others have shown that RET/PTC kinase expression is induced by 
estrogen in breast cancer cells. Due to the critical involvement of
estrogen-regulated genes in the pathogenesis of breast cancer, we investigated
the expression, regulation, and function of RET/PTC kinase in breast cancer
cells. We found that RET/PTC kinase expression correlates with estrogen receptor 
(ER) expression in breast cancer cells and tumor specimens, and that RET/PTC
kinase expression is associated with a poor prognosis in ER-positive breast
cancer patients. We found that estrogen rapidly induces RET/PTC kinase expression
in an ER-dependent manner in breast cancer cells and that this induction is
through a transcriptional regulatory mechanism. Using reporter assays, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, 
we demonstrated the necessity of crosstalk between ER and the forkhead box A1
(FOXA1) transcription factor in regulating RET/PTC kinase expression. In
functional studies, increased expression of RET/PTC kinase induced by estrogen
stimulation resulted in elevated phosphorylation of multiple downstream kinase
signaling pathways. Conversely, knockdown of RET/PTC expression was associated
with the inhibition of these same kinase signaling pathways, and, in fact,
decreased the stimulatory effect of estrogen on the proliferation of ER-positive 
breast cancer cells. These results demonstrate a novel pathway of ER and FOXA1
transcription factor crosstalk in regulating RET/PTC kinase expression, and
demonstrate that RET/PTC kinase is a critical regulator for the proliferation of 
ER-positive breast cancer cells. Taken together, our study suggests that RET/PTC 
kinase may serve as a novel prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for
prevention and treatment of ER-positive breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3424514
PMID: 21947652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):684-94. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.06.015. Epub 2011 
Sep 19.

Gene expression signatures differentiate adenocarcinoma of lung and breast origin
in effusions.

Davidson B(1), Stavnes HT, Risberg B, Nesland JM, Wohlschlaeger J, Yang Y, Shih
IeM, Wang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
N-0310 Oslo, Norway. bend@medisin.uio.no

Lung and breast adenocarcinoma at advanced stages commonly involve the serosal
cavities, giving rise to malignant effusions. The aim of the present study was to
compare the global gene expression patterns of metastases from these 2
malignancies, to expand and improve the diagnostic panel of biomarkers currently 
available for their differential diagnosis, as well as to define type-specific
biological targets. Gene expression profiles of 7 breast and 4 lung
adenocarcinoma effusions were analyzed using the HumanRef-8 BeadChip from
Illumina. Differentially expressed candidate genes were validated using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using all 54,675 genes in the array
separated lung from breast adenocarcinoma samples. We identified 289 unique
probes that were significantly differentially expressed in the 2 cancers by
greater than 2-fold using moderated t statistics, of which 65 and 224 were
overexpressed in breast and lung adenocarcinoma, respectively. Genes
overexpressed in breast adenocarcinoma included TFF1, TFF3, FOXA1, CA12, PITX1,
RARRES1, CITED4, MYC, TFAP2A, EFHD1, TOB1, SPDEF, FASN, and TH. Genes
overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma included TITF1, SFTPG, MMP7, EVA1, GPR116,
HOP, SCGB3A2, and MET. The differential expression of 15 genes was validated by
quantitative real-time PCR, and differences in 8 gene products were confirmed by 
immunohistochemistry. Expression profiling distinguishes breast adenocarcinoma
from lung adenocarcinoma and identifies genes that are differentially expressed
in these 2 tumor types. The molecular signatures unique to these cancers may
facilitate their differential diagnosis and may provide a molecular basis for
therapeutic target discovery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21937081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002277. Epub 2011 
Sep 15.

Study of FoxA pioneer factor at silent genes reveals Rfx-repressed enhancer at
Cdx2 and a potential indicator of esophageal adenocarcinoma development.

Watts JA(1), Zhang C, Klein-Szanto AJ, Kormish JD, Fu J, Zhang MQ, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Understanding how silent genes can be competent for activation provides insight
into development as well as cellular reprogramming and pathogenesis. We performed
genomic location analysis of the pioneer transcription factor FoxA in the adult
mouse liver and found that about one-third of the FoxA bound sites are near
silent genes, including genes without detectable RNA polymerase II. Virtually all
of the FoxA-bound silent sites are within conserved sequences, suggesting
possible function. Such sites are enriched in motifs for transcriptional
repressors, including for Rfx1 and type II nuclear hormone receptors. We found
one such target site at a cryptic "shadow" enhancer 7 kilobases (kb) downstream
of the Cdx2 gene, where Rfx1 restricts transcriptional activation by FoxA. The
Cdx2 shadow enhancer exhibits a subset of regulatory properties of the upstream
Cdx2 promoter region. While Cdx2 is ectopically induced in the early metaplastic 
condition of Barrett's esophagus, its expression is not necessarily present in
progressive Barrett's with dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. By contrast, we find that
Rfx1 expression in the esophageal epithelium becomes gradually extinguished
during progression to cancer, i.e, expression of Rfx1 decreased markedly in
dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. We propose that this decreased expression of Rfx1
could be an indicator of progression from Barrett's esophagus to adenocarcinoma
and that similar analyses of other transcription factors bound to silent genes
can reveal unanticipated regulatory insights into oncogenic progression and
cellular reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3174211
PMID: 21935353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 20;30(19):3885-94. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.340.

FOXA1: master of steroid receptor function in cancer.

Augello MA(1), Hickey TE, Knudsen KE.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

FOXA transcription factors are potent, context-specific mediators of development 
that hold specialized functions in hormone-dependent tissues. Over the last
several years, FOXA1 has emerged as a critical mediator of nuclear steroid
receptor signalling, manifest at least in part through regulation of androgen
receptor and oestrogen receptor activity. Recent findings point towards a major
role for FOXA1 in modulating nuclear steroid receptor activity in breast and
prostate cancer, and suggest that FOXA1 may significantly contribute to
pro-tumourigenic phenotypes. The present review article will focus on the
mechanisms, consequence, and clinical relevance of FOXA1-mediated steroid nuclear
receptor signalling in human malignancy.

PMCID: PMC3209791
PMID: 21934649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Urol Oncol. 2013 Aug;31(6):802-11. doi: 10.1016/j.urolonc.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 
Sep 15.

When urothelial differentiation pathways go wrong: implications for bladder
cancer development and progression.

DeGraff DJ(1), Cates JM, Mauney JR, Clark PE, Matusik RJ, Adam RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. david.degraff@vanderbilt.edu

Differentiation is defined as the ability of a cell to acquire full functional
behavior. For instance, the function of bladder urothelium is to act as a barrier
to the diffusion of solutes into or out of the urine after excretion by the
kidney. The urothelium also serves to protect the detrusor muscle from toxins
present in stored urine. A major event in the initiation and progression of
bladder cancer is loss of urothelial differentiation. This is important because
less differentiated urothelial tumors (higher histologic tumor grade) are
typically associated with increased biologic and clinical aggressiveness. The
differentiation status of urothelial carcinomas can be assessed by
histopathologic examination and is reflected in the assignment of a histologic
grade (low-grade or high-grade). Although typically limited to morphologic
evaluation in most routine diagnostic practices, tumor grade can also be assessed
using biochemical markers. Indeed, current pathological analysis of tumor
specimens is increasingly reliant on molecular phenotyping. Thus, high priorities
for bladder cancer research include identification of (1) biomarkers that will
enable the identification of high grade T1 tumors that pose the most threat and
require the most aggressive treatment; (2) biomarkers that predict the likelihood
that a low grade, American Joint Committee on Cancer stage pTa bladder tumor will
progress into an invasive carcinoma with metastatic potential; (3) biomarkers
that indicate which pTa tumors are most likely to recur, thus enabling clinicians
to prospectively identify patients who require aggressive treatment; and (4) how 
these markers might contribute to biological processes that underlie tumor
progression and metastasis, potentially through loss of terminal differentiation.
This review will discuss the proteins associated with urothelial cell
differentiation, with a focus on those implicated in bladder cancer, and other
proteins that may be involved in neoplastic progression. It is hoped that ongoing
discoveries associated with the study of these differentiation-promoting proteins
can be translated into the clinic to positively impact patient care.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 13;30(19):3962-76. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.328.

Dual role of FoxA1 in androgen receptor binding to chromatin, androgen signalling
and prostate cancer.

Sahu B(1), Laakso M, Ovaska K, Mirtti T, Lundin J, Rannikko A, Sankila A, Turunen
JP, Lundin M, Konsti J, Vesterinen T, Nordling S, Kallioniemi O, Hautaniemi S,
Jänne OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Physiology, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

High androgen receptor (AR) level in primary tumour predicts increased prostate
cancer-specific mortality. However, the mechanisms that regulate AR function in
prostate cancer are poorly known. We report here a new paradigm for the forkhead 
protein FoxA1 action in androgen signalling. Besides pioneering the AR pathway,
FoxA1 depletion elicited extensive redistribution of AR-binding sites (ARBs) on
LNCaP-1F5 cell chromatin that was commensurate with changes in androgen-dependent
gene expression signature. We identified three distinct classes of ARBs and
androgen-responsive genes: (i) independent of FoxA1, (ii) pioneered by FoxA1 and 
(iii) masked by FoxA1 and functional upon FoxA1 depletion. FoxA1 depletion also
reprogrammed AR binding in VCaP cells, and glucocorticoid receptor binding and
glucocorticoid-dependent signalling in LNCaP-1F5 cells. Importantly, FoxA1
protein level in primary prostate tumour had significant association to disease
outcome; high FoxA1 level was associated with poor prognosis, whereas low FoxA1
level, even in the presence of high AR expression, predicted good prognosis. The 
role of FoxA1 in androgen signalling and prostate cancer is distinctly different 
from that in oestrogen signalling and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3209787
PMID: 21915096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;71(21):6738-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1882. Epub
2011 Sep 7.

Definition of a FoxA1 Cistrome that is crucial for G1 to S-phase cell-cycle
transit in castration-resistant prostate cancer.

Zhang C(1), Wang L, Wu D, Chen H, Chen Z, Thomas-Ahner JM, Zynger DL, Eeckhoute
J, Yu J, Luo J, Brown M, Clinton SK, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Li W, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Dec 15;71(24):7718.

The enhancer pioneer transcription factor FoxA1 is a global mediator of steroid
receptor (SR) action in hormone-dependent cancers. In castration-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC), FoxA1 acts as an androgen receptor cofactor to drive G2
to M-phase cell-cycle transit. Here, we describe a mechanistically distinct
SR-independent role for FoxA1 in driving G1 to S-phase cell-cycle transit in
CRPC. By comparing FoxA1 binding sites in prostate cancer cell genomes, we
defined a codependent set of FoxA1-MYBL2 and FoxA1-CREB1 binding sites within the
regulatory regions of the Cyclin E2 and E2F1 genes that are critical for CRPC
growth. Binding at these sites upregulate the Cyclin E2 and Cyclin A2 genes in
CRPC but not in earlier stage androgen-dependent prostate cancer, establishing a 
stage-specific role for this pathway in CRPC growth. Mechanistic investigations
indicated that FoxA1, MYBL2, or CREB1 induction of histone H3 acetylation
facilitated nucleosome disruption as the basis for codependent transcriptional
activation and G1 to S-phase cell-cycle transit. Our findings establish FoxA1 as 
a pivotal driver of the cell-cycle in CRPC which promotes G1 to S-phase transit
as well as G2 to M-phase transit through two distinct mechanisms.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4081454
PMID: 21900400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Jan;113(1):110-21. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23333.

Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is a key mediator of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I)
activity.

Potter AS(1), Casa AJ, Lee AV.

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-IR) has been implicated in a number 
of human tumors, including breast cancer. Data from human breast tumors has
demonstrated that IGF-IR is over-expressed and hyper-phosphorylated.
Additionally, microarray analysis has shown that IGF-I treatment of MCF7 cells
leads to a gene signature comprised of induced and repressed genes, which
correlated with luminal B tumors. FOXA1, a forkhead family transcription factor, 
has been shown to be crucial for mammary ductal morphogenesis, similar to IGF-IR,
and expressed at high levels in luminal subtype B breast tumors. Here, we
investigated the relationship between FOXA1 and IGF-I action in breast cancer
cells. We show that genes regulated by IGF-I are enriched for FOXA1 binding
sites, and knock down of FOXA1 blocked the ability of IGF-I to regulate gene
expression. IGF-I treatment of MCF7 cells increased the half-life of FOXA1
protein and this increase in half-life appeared to be dependent on canonical
IGF-I signal transduction through both MAPK and AKT pathways. Finally, knock down
of FOXA1 led to a decreased ability of IGF-I to induce proliferation and protect 
against apoptosis. Together, these results demonstrate that IGF-I can increase
the stability of FOXA1 protein expression and place it as a critical mediator of 
IGF-I regulation of gene expression and IGF-I-mediated biological responses.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3867524
PMID: 21882221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Syst Biol. 2011 Aug 30;7:526. doi: 10.1038/msb.2011.59.

Cellular reprogramming by the conjoint action of ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3 to a
ligand-inducible growth state.

Kong SL(1), Li G, Loh SL, Sung WK, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology 2, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

Despite the role of the estrogen receptor a (ERa) pathway as a key growth driver 
for breast cells, the phenotypic consequence of exogenous introduction of ERa
into ERa-negative cells paradoxically has been growth inhibition. We mapped the
binding profiles of ERa and its interacting transcription factors (TFs), FOXA1
and GATA3 in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells, and observed that these three TFs form
a functional enhanceosome that regulates the genes driving core ERa function and 
cooperatively modulate the transcriptional networks previously ascribed to ERa
alone. We demonstrate that these enhanceosome occupied sites are associated with 
optimal enhancer characteristics with highest p300 co-activator recruitment, RNA 
Pol II occupancy, and chromatin opening. Most importantly, we show that the
transfection of all three TFs was necessary to reprogramme the ERa-negative
MDA-MB-231 and BT-549 cells to restore the estrogen-responsive growth resembling 
estrogen-treated ERa-positive MCF-7 cells. Cumulatively, these results suggest
that all the enhanceosome components comprising ERa, FOXA1, and GATA3 are
necessary for the full repertoire of cancer-associated effects of the ERa.

PMCID: PMC3202798
PMID: 21878914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Oct;13 Suppl 1:13-20. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01440.x.

Transcriptional regulation of a-cell differentiation.

Bramswig NC(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The development of the endocrine pancreas and the differentiation of its five
cell types, a, ß, d, e and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells, are a highly
complex and tightly regulated process. Proper differentiation and function of a- 
and ß-cells are critical for blood glucose homeostasis. These processes are
governed by multiple transcription factors and other signalling systems, and its 
dysregulation results in diabetes. The differentiation of a-cells and the
maintenance of a-cell function can be influenced at several stages during
development and in the maturing islet. Many transcription factors, such as
neurogenin 3 (Ngn3), pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1) and regulatory factor 
x6 (Rfx6), play a crucial role in the determination of the endocrine cell fate,
while other transcription factors, such as aristaless-related homeobox (Arx) and 
forkhead box A2 (Foxa2), are implicated in the initial or terminal
differentiation of a-cells. In vivo and in vitro studies have shown that
preproglucagon transcription, and therefore the maintenance of a-cell function,
is regulated by several factors, including forkhead box A1 (Foxa1), paired box 6 
(Pax6), brain4 (Brn4) and islet-1 (Isl-1). Detailed information about the
regulation of normal and abnormal a-cell differentiation gives insight into the
pathogenesis of diabetes, identifies further targets for diabetes treatment and
provides clues for the reprogramming of a- to ß-cells for replacement therapy.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21824252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Cell. 2011 Jul 12;20(1):119-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.05.026.

Targeting androgen receptor in estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer.

Ni M(1), Chen Y, Lim E, Wimberly H, Bailey ST, Imai Y, Rimm DL, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Endocrine therapies for breast cancer that target the estrogen receptor (ER) are 
ineffective in the 25%-30% of cases that are ER negative (ER-). Androgen receptor
(AR) is expressed in 60%-70% of breast tumors, independent of ER status. How
androgens and AR regulate breast cancer growth remains largely unknown. We find
that AR is enriched in ER- breast tumors that overexpress HER2. Through analysis 
of the AR cistrome and androgen-regulated gene expression in ER-/HER2+ breast
cancers we find that AR mediates ligand-dependent activation of Wnt and HER2
signaling pathways through direct transcriptional induction of WNT7B and HER3.
Specific targeting of AR, Wnt or HER2 signaling impairs androgen-stimulated tumor
cell growth suggesting potential therapeutic approaches for ER-/HER2+ breast
cancers.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3180861
PMID: 21741601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 1;20(19):3746-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr291. Epub 2011 Jul 
7.

Steroid hormone modulation of RET through two estrogen responsive enhancers in
breast cancer.

Stine ZE(1), McGaughey DM, Bessling SL, Li S, McCallion AS.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, 733 N. Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

RET, a gene causatively mutated in Hirschsprung disease and cancer, has recently 
been implicated in breast cancer estrogen (E2) independence and tamoxifen
resistance. RET displays both E2 and retinoic acid (RA)-dependent transcriptional
modulation in E2-responsive breast cancers. However, the regulatory elements
through which the steroid hormone transcriptional regulation of RET is mediated
are poorly defined. Recent genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-based
studies have identified 10 putative E2 receptor-alpha (ESR1) and RA receptor
alpha-binding sites at the RET locus, of which we demonstrate only two (RET -49.8
and RET +32.8) display significant E2 regulatory response when assayed
independently in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. We demonstrate that endogenous RET
expression and RET -49.8 regulatory activity are cooperatively regulated by E2
and RA in breast cancer cells. We identify key sequences that are required for
RET -49.8 and RET +32.8 E2 responsiveness, including motifs known to be bound by 
ESR1, FOXA1 and TFAP2C. We also report that both RET -49.8 regulatory activity
and endogenous RET expression are completely dependent on ESR1 for their
(E2)-induction and that ESR1 is sufficient to mediate the E2-induced enhancer
activity of RET -49.8 and RET +32.8. Finally, using zebrafish transgenesis, we
also demonstrate that RET -49.8 directs reporter expression in the central
nervous system and peripheral nervous system consistent with the endogenous ret
expression. Taken collectively, these data suggest that RET transcription in
breast cancer cells is modulated by E2 via ESR1 acting on multiple elements
collectively.

PMCID: PMC3168285
PMID: 21737465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Nature. 2011 Jun 29;475(7356):390-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10263.

Direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells by defined
factors.

Sekiya S(1), Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):316-8.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):89-91.
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Sep;8(9):474.

The location and timing of cellular differentiation must be stringently
controlled for proper organ formation. Normally, hepatocytes differentiate from
hepatic progenitor cells to form the liver during development. However, previous 
studies have shown that the hepatic program can also be activated in non-hepatic 
lineage cells after exposure to particular stimuli or fusion with hepatocytes.
These unexpected findings suggest that factors critical to hepatocyte
differentiation exist and become activated to induce hepatocyte-specific
properties in different cell types. Here, by screening the effects of twelve
candidate factors, we identify three specific combinations of two transcription
factors, comprising Hnf4a plus Foxa1, Foxa2 or Foxa3, that can convert mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblasts into cells that closely resemble hepatocytes in
vitro. The induced hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells have multiple hepatocyte-specific
features and reconstitute damaged hepatic tissues after transplantation. The
generation of iHep cells may provide insights into the molecular nature of
hepatocyte differentiation and potential therapies for liver diseases.

PMID: 21716291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. EMBO J. 2011 Jun 24;30(15):3019-27. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.216.

Androgen receptor driven transcription in molecular apocrine breast cancer is
mediated by FoxA1.

Robinson JL(1), Macarthur S, Ross-Innes CS, Tilley WD, Neal DE, Mills IG, Carroll
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge, UK.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2012 Mar 21;31(6):1617.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and several distinct subtypes exist
based on differential gene expression patterns. Molecular apocrine tumours were
recently identified as an additional subgroup, characterised as oestrogen
receptor negative and androgen receptor positive (ER- AR+), but with an
expression profile resembling ER+ luminal breast cancer. One possible explanation
for the apparent incongruity is that ER gene expression programmes could be
recapitulated by AR. Using a cell line model of ER- AR+ molecular apocrine
tumours (termed MDA-MB-453 cells), we map global AR binding events and find a
binding profile that is similar to ER binding in breast cancer cells. We find
that AR binding is a near-perfect subset of FoxA1 binding regions, a level of
concordance never previously seen with a nuclear receptor. AR functionality is
dependent on FoxA1, since silencing of FoxA1 inhibits AR binding, expression of
the majority of the molecular apocrine gene signature and growth cell growth.
These findings show that AR binds and regulates ER cis-regulatory elements in
molecular apocrine tumours, resulting in a transcriptional programme reminiscent 
of ER-mediated transcription in luminal breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3160190
PMID: 21701558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20901. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020901. Epub 2011 Jun 16.

Genome-wide analysis reveals a major role in cell fate maintenance and an
unexpected role in endoreduplication for the Drosophila FoxA gene Fork head.

Maruyama R(1), Grevengoed E, Stempniewicz P, Andrew DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Transcription factors drive organogenesis, from the initiation of cell fate
decisions to the maintenance and implementation of these decisions. The
Drosophila embryonic salivary gland provides an excellent platform for unraveling
the underlying transcriptional networks of organ development because Drosophila
is relatively unencumbered by significant genetic redundancy. The highly
conserved FoxA family transcription factors are essential for various aspects of 
organogenesis in all animals that have been studied. Here, we explore the role of
the single Drosophila FoxA protein Fork head (Fkh) in salivary gland
organogenesis using two genome-wide strategies. A large-scale in situ
hybridization analysis reveals a major role for Fkh in maintaining the salivary
gland fate decision and controlling salivary gland physiological activity, in
addition to its previously known roles in morphogenesis and survival. The
majority of salivary gland genes (59%) are affected by fkh loss, mainly at later 
stages of salivary gland development. We show that global expression of Fkh
cannot drive ectopic salivary gland formation. Thus, unlike the worm FoxA protein
PHA-4, Fkh does not function to specify cell fate. In addition, Fkh only
indirectly regulates many salivary gland genes, which is also distinct from the
role of PHA-4 in organogenesis. Our microarray analyses reveal unexpected roles
for Fkh in blocking terminal differentiation and in endoreduplication in the
salivary gland and in other Fkh-expressing embryonic tissues. Overall, this study
demonstrates an important role for Fkh in determining how an organ preserves its 
identity throughout development and provides an alternative paradigm for how FoxA
proteins function in organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3116861
PMID: 21698206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Metabolism. 2011 Dec;60(12):1790-6. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.05.005. Epub 2011
Jun 12.

Nicotinic acid induces apolipoprotein A-I gene expression in HepG2 and Caco-2
cell lines.

Haas MJ(1), Alamir AR, Sultan S, Chehade JM, Wong NC, Mooradian AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL 32209, USA.

The objective was to test the effect of nicotinic acid on apolipoprotein A-I (apo
A-I) gene expression in hepatic (HepG2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. HepG2
and Caco-2 cells were treated with 0.1, 0.3, 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mmol/L of nicotinic
acid; and apo A-I concentrations in conditioned media were measured with Western 
blots. Relative apo A-I messenger RNA (mRNA) levels, normalized to
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase mRNA, were measured with quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction method. The nicotinic acid response element
in the apo A-I promoter was identified using a series of apo A-I reporter
plasmids containing deletion constructs of the promoter. In other experiments,
HepG2 cells were also transfected with the apo A-I reporter plasmid and the
hepatocyte nuclear factors 3a and ß expression plasmids. The apo A-I levels in
conditioned media from HepG2 cells, apo A-I mRNA levels, and apo A-I promoter
activity increased significantly following treatment with 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mmol/L
nicotinic acid. Nicotinic acid-induced promoter activity required a region of the
apo A-I gene located between -170 and -186 base pairs. Exogenous overexpression
of the hepatocyte nuclear factors 3a and ß had no additive effect on apo A-I
promoter. Apolipoprotein A-I concentrations in conditioned media and the apo A-I 
promoter activity were also significantly increased in Caco-2 intestinal cells.
Nicotinic acid may increase apo A-I protein synthesis in the liver and small
intestine. Induction of apo A-I gene by nicotinic acid requires a nicotinic acid 
responsive element in the apo A-I promoter.

PMID: 21664629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Genes Dev. 2011 Jun 1;25(11):1185-92. doi: 10.1101/gad.2027811.

Foxl1-Cre-marked adult hepatic progenitors have clonogenic and bilineage
differentiation potential.

Shin S(1), Walton G, Aoki R, Brondell K, Schug J, Fox A, Smirnova O, Dorrell C,
Erker L, Chu AS, Wells RG, Grompe M, Greenbaum LE, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):319-21.

Isolation of hepatic progenitor cells is a promising approach for cell
replacement therapy of chronic liver disease. The winged helix transcription
factor Foxl1 is a marker for progenitor cells and their descendants in the mouse 
liver in vivo. Here, we purify progenitor cells from Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP mice and 
evaluate their proliferative and differentiation potential in vitro. Treatment of
Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP mice with a 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine diet led
to an increase of the percentage of YFP-labeled Foxl1(+) cells. Clonogenic assays
demonstrated that up to 3.6% of Foxl1(+) cells had proliferative potential.
Foxl1(+) cells differentiated into cholangiocytes and hepatocytes in vitro,
depending on the culture condition employed. Microarray analyses indicated that
Foxl1(+) cells express stem cell markers such as Prom1 as well as differentiation
markers such as Ck19 and Hnf4a. Thus, the Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP model allows for
easy isolation of adult hepatic progenitor cells that can be expanded and
differentiated in culture.

PMCID: PMC3110956
PMID: 21632825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):742-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2060. Epub 2011 May 
29.

The nucleosome map of the mammalian liver.

Li Z(1), Schug J, Tuteja G, White P, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Binding to nucleosomal DNA is critical for 'pioneer' transcription factors such
as the winged-helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 to regulate chromatin
structure and gene activation. Here we report the genome-wide map of nucleosome
positions in the mouse liver, with emphasis on transcriptional start sites, CpG
islands, Foxa2 binding sites and their correlation with gene expression. Despite 
the heterogeneity of liver tissue, we could clearly discern the nucleosome
pattern of the predominant liver cell, the hepatocyte. By analyzing nucleosome
occupancy and the distributions of heterochromatin protein 1 (Hp1), CBP (also
known as Crebbp) and p300 (Ep300) in Foxa1- and Foxa2-deficient livers, we find
that the maintenance of nucleosome position and chromatin structure surrounding
Foxa2 binding sites is independent of Foxa1 and Foxa2.

PMCID: PMC3148658
PMID: 21623366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 20;13(2):307. doi: 10.1186/bcr2849.

More on FOX News: FOXA1 on the horizon of estrogen receptor function and
endocrine response.

Fu X(1), Huang C, Schiff R.

Author information: 
(1)Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor
Plaza, BCM600, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Estrogen receptor a (ER) is a major driver of breast cancer and the target of
endocrine therapy. Full disclosure of the cofactors regulating ER interactions
with chromatin and its transcriptional regulatory activity is still elusive.
Novel genome-wide profiling tools have mapped ER binding events in breast cancer 
cells and delineated cofactors important in ER activity. Among these, the
Forkhead protein FOXA1 is emerging as a key factor dictating global chromatin
structure and the transcriptional function of ER in breast and non-breast cancer 
cells. The significance of FOXA1 in the chromatin interactions and
transcriptional regulation of both estrogen- and tamoxifen-bound ER, and in
supporting tamoxifen-resistant cell growth, may impact current endocrine
therapies.

PMCID: PMC3219191
PMID: 21575280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Nature. 2011 May 15;474(7351):390-4. doi: 10.1038/nature10006.

Reprogramming transcription by distinct classes of enhancers functionally defined
by eRNA.

Wang D(1), Garcia-Bassets I, Benner C, Li W, Su X, Zhou Y, Qiu J, Liu W,
Kaikkonen MU, Ohgi KA, Glass CK, Rosenfeld MG, Fu XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0651,
USA.

Mammalian genomes are populated with thousands of transcriptional enhancers that 
orchestrate cell-type-specific gene expression programs, but how those enhancers 
are exploited to institute alternative, signal-dependent transcriptional
responses remains poorly understood. Here we present evidence that
cell-lineage-specific factors, such as FoxA1, can simultaneously facilitate and
restrict key regulated transcription factors, exemplified by the androgen
receptor (AR), to act on structurally and functionally distinct classes of
enhancer. Consequently, FoxA1 downregulation, an unfavourable prognostic sign in 
certain advanced prostate tumours, triggers dramatic reprogramming of the
hormonal response by causing a massive switch in AR binding to a distinct cohort 
of pre-established enhancers. These enhancers are functional, as evidenced by the
production of enhancer-templated non-coding RNA (eRNA) based on global nuclear
run-on sequencing (GRO-seq) analysis, with a unique class apparently requiring no
nucleosome remodelling to induce specific enhancer-promoter looping and gene
activation. GRO-seq data also suggest that liganded AR induces both transcription
initiation and elongation. Together, these findings reveal a large repository of 
active enhancers that can be dynamically tuned to elicit alternative gene
expression programs, which may underlie many sequential gene expression events in
development, cell differentiation and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3117022
PMID: 21572438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. EMBO J. 2011 May 13;30(13):2569-81. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.151.

AP-2<U+03B3> regulates oestrogen receptor-mediated long-range chromatin interaction and 
gene transcription.

Tan SK(1), Lin ZH, Chang CW, Varang V, Chng KR, Pan YF, Yong EL, Sung WK, Cheung 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A STAR (Agency
for Science, Technology and Research), Singapore.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2011;30(13):2750. Sung, Win King [corrected to Sung, Wing Kin].

Oestrogen receptor a (ERa) is key player in the progression of breast cancer.
Recently, the cistrome and interactome of ERa were mapped in breast cancer cells,
revealing the importance of spatial organization in oestrogen-mediated
transcription. However, the underlying mechanism of this process is unclear.
Here, we show that ERa binding sites (ERBS) identified from the Chromatin
Interaction Analysis-Paired End DiTag of ERa are enriched for AP-2 motifs. We
demonstrate the transcription factor, AP-2<U+03B3>, which has been implicated in breast 
cancer oncogenesis, binds to ERBS in a ligand-independent manner. Furthermore,
perturbation of AP-2<U+03B3> expression impaired ERa DNA binding, long-range chromatin
interactions, and gene transcription. In genome-wide analyses, we show that a
large number of AP-2<U+03B3> and ERa binding events converge together across the genome.
The majority of these shared regions are also occupied by the pioneer factor,
FoxA1. Molecular studies indicate there is functional interplay between AP-2<U+03B3> and
FoxA1. Finally, we show that most ERBS associated with long-range chromatin
interactions are colocalized with AP-2<U+03B3> and FoxA1. Together, our results suggest 
AP-2<U+03B3> is a novel collaborative factor in ERa-mediated transcription.

PMCID: PMC3155293
PMID: 21572391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. EMBO J. 2011 May 10;30(12):2405-19. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.154.

Phospho-MED1-enhanced UBE2C locus looping drives castration-resistant prostate
cancer growth.

Chen Z(1), Zhang C, Wu D, Chen H, Rorick A, Zhang X, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and the Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA.

The UBE2C oncogene is overexpressed in many types of solid tumours including the 
lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). The underlying mechanisms
causing UBE2C gene overexpression in CRPC are not fully understood. Here, we show
that CRPC-specific enhancers drive UBE2C overexpression in both AR-negative and
-positive CRPC cells. We further show that co-activator MED1 recruitment to the
UBE2C enhancers is required for long-range UBE2C enhancer/promoter interactions. 
Importantly, we find that the molecular mechanism underlying MED1-mediated
chromatin looping involves PI3K/AKT phosphorylated MED1-mediated recruitment of
FoxA1, RNA polymerase II and TATA binding protein and their subsequent
interactions at the UBE2C locus. MED1 phosphorylation leads to UBE2C locus
looping, UBE2C gene expression and cell growth. Our results not only define a
causal role of a post-translational modification (phosphorylation) of a
co-activator (MED1) in forming or sustaining an active chromatin structure, but
also suggest that development of specific therapies for CRPC should take account 
of targeting phosphorylated MED1.

PMCID: PMC3116285
PMID: 21556051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Prostate. 2011 Jun 15;71(9):955-63. doi: 10.1002/pros.21311. Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Functional annotation of risk loci identified through genome-wide association
studies for prostate cancer.

Lu Y(1), Zhang Z, Yu H, Zheng SL, Isaacs WB, Xu J, Sun J.

Author information: 
(1)James D. Watson Institute of Genome Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China; T-Life Research Center Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: The majority of established prostate cancer (PCa) risk-associated
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified from genome-wide association
studies do not fall into protein coding regions. Therefore, the mechanisms by
which these SNPs affect PCa risk remain unclear. Here, we used a series of
bioinformatic tools and databases to provide possible molecular insights into the
actions of risk SNPs.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed a comprehensive assessment of the
potential functional impact of 33 SNPs that were identified and confirmed as
associated with PCa risk in previous studies. For these 33 SNPs and additional
SNPs in linkage disequilibrium (LD) (r(2) <U+2009>=<U+2009>0.5), we first mapped them to
genomic functional annotation databases, including the encyclopedia of DNA
elements (ENCODE), 11 genomic regulatory elements databases defined by the
University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) table browser, and androgen receptor
(AR)-binding sites defined by a ChIP-chip technique. Enrichment analysis was then
carried out to assess whether the risk SNP blocks were enriched in the various
annotation sets. Risk SNP blocks were significantly enriched over that expected
by chance in two annotation sets, including AR-binding sites (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), and
FoxA1-binding sites (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05). About one-third of the 33 risk SNP blocks are
located within AR-binding regions.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The significant enrichment of risk SNPs in AR-binding
sites may suggest a potential molecular mechanism for these SNPs in PCa
initiation, and provide guidance for future functional studies.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3070182
PMID: 21541972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2748-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018863108. Epub 2011 May 2.

Transducin-like enhancer protein 1 mediates estrogen receptor binding and
transcriptional activity in breast cancer cells.

Holmes KA(1), Hurtado A, Brown GD, Launchbury R, Ross-Innes CS, Hadfield J, Odom 
DT, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson
Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, United Kingdom.

Estrogen receptor (ER) binds to distal enhancers within the genome and requires
additional factors, such as the Forkhead protein FoxA1, for mediating chromatin
interactions. We now show that the human Groucho protein, Transducin-like
enhancer protein 1 (TLE1), positively assists some ER-chromatin interactions, a
role that is distinct from its general role as a transcriptional repressor. We
show that specific silencing of TLE1 inhibits the ability of ER to bind to a
subset of ER binding sites within the genome, a phenomenon that results in
perturbations in phospho-RNA Pol II recruitment. Furthermore, TLE1 is essential
for effective ER-mediated cell division. We have discovered a distinct role for
TLE1, as a necessary transcriptional component of the ER complex, where it
facilitates ER-chromatin interactions.

PMCID: PMC3286936
PMID: 21536917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Feb;131(3):881-90. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1482-6. 
Epub 2011 Apr 19.

FOXA1 is an independent prognostic marker for ER-positive breast cancer.

Mehta RJ(1), Jain RK, Leung S, Choo J, Nielsen T, Huntsman D, Nakshatri H, Badve 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS-A128, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) is a "pioneer factor" that plays a role in
controlling nearly 50% of estrogen receptor target genes. FOXA1 expression
correlates with estrogen receptor (ER)-positivity especially in luminal subtype A
breast cancers. The aim of this study was to investigate the precise role of
FOXA1 in breast cancer using a large population-based cohort. Nuclear expression 
of FOXA1 was analyzed in a tissue microarray of 4,444 invasive breast cancer
cases using immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinicopathologic variables 
using previously described methods and cutoff points. The entire cohort was
equally divided into a training and validation set. All survival analyses were
performed using a previously defined cutoff (3) for validation. Additional X-tile
analysis performed to analyze prognostic effects of low and high FOXA1 levels
identified 24 as a cutoff. Bonferroni-Holmes test was used as appropriate. FOXA1 
expression significantly correlated positively with markers of good prognosis or 
ER-positivity, and negatively with tumor size, tumor grade, nodal status, Ki67,
HER2 expression, and basal subtype (each P value <0.0001). In both survival
analyses, FOXA1 was a significant predictor of breast cancer-specific survival
(P < 0.0001) and relapse-free survival (P < 0.0001). FOXA1 was also an
independent predictor of breast cancer-specific survival at 10 years using both
cutoffs. Among the ER-positive subgroup treated with tamoxifen, FOXA1 was an
independent prognostic marker using the 24 cutoff (P = 0.030). FOXA1 is a
significant marker of good prognosis in breast cancer; it also identifies a
subset of ER-positive tamoxifen treated patients at low risk of recurrence.

PMID: 21503684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2010;75:219-26. doi: 10.1101/sqb.2010.75.061.
Epub 2011 Apr 18.

Nuclear mobility and mitotic chromosome binding: similarities between pioneer
transcription factor FoxA and linker histone H1.

Zaret KS(1), Caravaca JM, Tulin A, Sekiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics Program and Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA. zaret@upenn.edu

There exists a hierarchy by which transcription factors can engage their target
sites in chromatin, in that a subset of factors can bind transcriptionally
silent, nucleosomal DNA, whereas most factors cannot, and this hierarchy is
reflected, at least in part, in the developmental function of the factors. For
example, transcription factors possessing the Forkhead box (Fox) DNA-binding
domain contain an overall fold resembling that of linker histone and thus are
structured to bind DNA, site specifically, in a nucleosomal context. Where
tested, Fox factors bind early in the developmental or physiological activation
of target genes, thereby enabling the binding of other factors that cannot engage
chromatin on their own. To investigate the basis for early chromatin binding, we 
have used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) to analyze the
mobility, in the live cell nucleus, of FoxA factors in comparison to linker
histone and other transcription factors. We have further analyzed the factors for
their ability to bind to chromatin in mitosis and thereby serve as epigenetic
marks. The results indicate that the "pioneer" features of FoxA factors involve
various chromatin-binding parameters seen in linker histones and that distinguish
the factors with respect to their regulatory and mechanistic functions.

PMID: 21502411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Histopathology. 2011 Apr;58(5):766-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03796.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 14.

High-level expression of forkhead-box protein A1 in metastatic prostate cancer.

Jain RK(1), Mehta RJ, Nakshatri H, Idrees MT, Badve SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

AIMS: Expression of forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1), a transcription factor
important for normal development of the prostate gland, is thought to be
controlled by steroid hormones and GATA3. The aim of this study was to
investigate the expression and potential role of FOXA1 and GATA3 transcription
factors as prognostic factors in prostate cancer.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Expression of FOXA1, GATA3 and androgen receptor (AR) was
retrospectively analysed by immunohistochemistry in a series of 80 primary
tumours and 28 metastatic prostate cancers, including 15 matched paired samples. 
Nuclear AR expression did not significantly differ between primary and metastatic
tumours. High-level nuclear FOXA1 expression was seen in 19% of primary and 89%
of metastatic tumours (P < 0.0001). FOXA1 expression correlated positively with
tumour size, extraprostatic extension, angiolymphatic invasion, AR and lymph node
metastases at diagnosis, but did not correlate with age, T stage, Gleason score, 
presence of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia or multifocality, seminal vesicle
or perineural invasion, or surgical excision margin status. Expression of GATA3
was not seen in either normal epithelium or tumour.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary analyses suggest that high-level FOXA1 expression is
associated with the development of metastatic prostate cancer. If these data are 
confirmed, FOXA1 expression could be used to classify patients at higher risk for
metastases.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21401706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jul 1;52(8):4951-62. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-7068.

Mouse conjunctival forniceal gene expression during postnatal development and its
regulation by Kruppel-like factor 4.

Gupta D(1), Harvey SA, Kaminski N, Swamynathan SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Eye 
and Ear Institute, 203 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh PA 15213, USA.

PURPOSE: To identify the changes in postnatal mouse conjunctival forniceal gene
expression and their regulation by Klf4 during the eye-opening stage when the
goblet cells first appear.
METHODS: Laser microdissection (LMD) was used to collect conjunctival forniceal
cells from postnatal (PN) day 9, PN14 and PN20 wild-type (WT), and PN14
Klf4-conditional null (Klf4CN) mice, in which goblet cells are absent,
developing, present, and missing, respectively. Microarrays were used to compare 
gene expression among these groups. Expression of selected genes was validated by
quantitative RT-PCR, and spatiotemporal expression was assessed by in situ
hybridization.
RESULTS: This study identified 668, 251, 1160, and 139 transcripts that were
increased and 492, 377, 1419, and 57 transcripts that were decreased between PN9 
and PN14, PN14 and PN20, PN9 and PN20, and PN14 WT and Klf4CN conjunctiva,
respectively. Transcripts encoding transcription factors Spdef, FoxA1, and FoxA3 
that regulate goblet cell development in other mucosal epithelia, and
epithelium-specific Ets (ESE) transcription factor family members were increased 
during conjunctival development. Components of pathways related to the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition, glycoprotein biosynthesis, mucosal immunity,
signaling, and endocytic and neural regulation were increased during conjunctival
development. Conjunctival Klf4 target genes differed significantly from the
previously identified corneal Klf4 target genes, implying tissue-dependent
regulatory targets for Klf4.
CONCLUSIONS: The changes in gene expression accompanying mouse conjunctival
development were identified, and the role of Klf4 in this process was determined.
This study provides new probes for examining conjunctival development and
function and reveals that the gene regulatory network necessary for goblet cell
development is conserved across different mucosal epithelia.

PMCID: PMC3176043
PMID: 21398290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 16;6(2):e16432. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016432.

An integrated pipeline for the genome-wide analysis of transcription factor
binding sites from ChIP-Seq.

Mercier E(1), Droit A, Li L, Robertson G, Zhang X, Gottardo R.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Unit, Institut de Recherche Clinique de Montreal,
Montreal, Canada.

ChIP-Seq has become the standard method for genome-wide profiling DNA association
of transcription factors. To simplify analyzing and interpreting ChIP-Seq data,
which typically involves using multiple applications, we describe an integrated, 
open source, R-based analysis pipeline. The pipeline addresses data input, peak
detection, sequence and motif analysis, visualization, and data export, and can
readily be extended via other R and Bioconductor packages. Using a standard
multicore computer, it can be used with datasets consisting of tens of thousands 
of enriched regions. We demonstrate its effectiveness on published human ChIP-Seq
datasets for FOXA1, ER, CTCF and STAT1, where it detected co-occurring motifs
that were consistent with the literature but not detected by other methods. Our
pipeline provides the first complete set of Bioconductor tools for sequence and
motif analysis of ChIP-Seq and ChIP-chip data.

PMCID: PMC3040171
PMID: 21358819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Aug;129(1):11-21. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1161-z.
Epub 2011 Feb 19.

FOXO3a nuclear localisation is associated with good prognosis in luminal-like
breast cancer.

Habashy HO(1), Rakha EA, Aleskandarany M, Ahmed MA, Green AR, Ellis IO, Powe DG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Medical Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham,
NG7 2UH, UK.

Oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancer (BC) constitutes a heterogeneous
group of tumours with regard to outcome and response to therapy. Accurate
stratification of ER-positive BC according to risk of relapse and response to
therapy will be achieved through an improved understanding of ER and ER-related
biological pathways. Recent studies have identified Forkhead box O3a (FOXO3a)
transcription factor as an intracellular mediator of ERa expression and as an
important downstream target of the Akt/PI3K pathway indicating a biological and
potential clinical role for FOXO3a in ER-positive BC. In this study, we
investigated the clinical relevance and biological associations of FOXO3a protein
expression, using tissue microarrays and immunohistochemistry, in a large series 
of patients with invasive breast cancer. FOXO3a protein expression showed both
nuclear and/or cytoplasmic staining patterns. FOXO3a predominant nuclear
expression was positively associated with biomarkers of good prognosis including 
PgR, FOXA1 and p27 expression. There was an inverse association with mitotic
counts, MIB1 growth fraction, C-MYC and PIK3CA expression. With respect to
patient outcome, FOXO3a nuclear localisation was associated with longer BC
specific survival (P < 0.001) and longer distant metastasis free interval
(P = 0.001), independently of the well-established breast cancer prognostic
factors. In conclusion, our results demonstrate the biological and prognostic
role of FOXO3a protein expression and its subcellular localisation in
ER-positive/luminal-like BC possibly through its involvement in controlling cell 
proliferation.

PMID: 21336599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Chem Biol Interact. 2011 Mar 15;190(1):62-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2011.01.009.
Epub 2011 Jan 15.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells along a hepatic lineage.

Zamule SM(1), Coslo DM, Chen F, Omiecinski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, Department of Veterinary
and Biomedical Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
16802, USA.

The limited availability of hepatic tissue suitable for the treatment of liver
disease and drug discovery research advances the generation of hepatic-like cells
from alternative sources as a valuable approach. In this investigation we
exploited a unique hepatic differentiation approach to generate hepatocyte-like
cells from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). hESCs were cultured for 10-20 days
on collagen substrate in highly defined and serum free hepatocyte media. The
resulting cell populations exhibited hepatic cell-like morphology and were
characterized with a variety of biological endpoint analyses. Real-time PCR
analysis demonstrated that mRNA expression of the 'stemness' marker genes NANOG
and alkaline phosphatase in the differentiated cells was significantly reduced,
findings that were functionally validated using alkaline phosphatase activity
detection measures. Immunofluorescence studies revealed attenuated levels of the 
'stemness' markers OCT4, SOX2, SSEA-3, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81 in the hepatic-like
cell population. The hepatic character of the cells was evaluated additionally by
real-time PCR analyses that demonstrated increased mRNA expression of the hepatic
transcription factors FOXA1, C/EBPa, and HNF1a, the nuclear receptors CAR, RXRa, 
PPARa, and HNF4a, the liver-generated plasma proteins a-fetoprotein,
transthyretin, transferrin, and albumin, the protease inhibitor a-1-antitrypsin, 
metabolic enzymes HMGCS2, PEPCK, and biotransformation enzymes CYP3A7, CYP3A4,
CYP3A5, and CYP2E1. Indocyanine green uptake albumin secretion and glycogen
storage capacity further confirmed acquisition of hepatic function. These studies
define an expeditious methodology that facilitates the differentiation of hESCs
along a hepatic lineage and provide a framework for their subsequent use in
pharmacological and toxicological research applications requiring a renewable
supply of human hepatocytes.

2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073319
PMID: 21241686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Genome Res. 2011 Apr;21(4):555-65. doi: 10.1101/gr.111534.110. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Epigenetic switch involved in activation of pioneer factor FOXA1-dependent
enhancers.

Sérandour AA(1), Avner S, Percevault F, Demay F, Bizot M, Lucchetti-Miganeh C,
Barloy-Hubler F, Brown M, Lupien M, Métivier R, Salbert G, Eeckhoute J.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France.

Transcription factors (TFs) bind specifically to discrete regions of mammalian
genomes called cis-regulatory elements. Among those are enhancers, which play key
roles in regulation of gene expression during development and differentiation.
Despite the recognized central regulatory role exerted by chromatin in control of
TF functions, much remains to be learned regarding the chromatin structure of
enhancers and how it is established. Here, we have analyzed on a genomic-scale
enhancers that recruit FOXA1, a pioneer transcription factor that triggers
transcriptional competency of these cis-regulatory sites. Importantly, we found
that FOXA1 binds to genomic regions showing local DNA hypomethylation and that
its cell-type-specific recruitment to chromatin is linked to differential DNA
methylation levels of its binding sites. Using neural differentiation as a model,
we showed that induction of FOXA1 expression and its subsequent recruitment to
enhancers is associated with DNA demethylation. Concomitantly, histone H3 lysine 
4 methylation is induced at these enhancers. These epigenetic changes may both
stabilize FOXA1 binding and allow for subsequent recruitment of transcriptional
regulatory effectors. Interestingly, when cloned into reporter constructs,
FOXA1-dependent enhancers were able to recapitulate their cell type specificity. 
However, their activities were inhibited by DNA methylation. Hence, these
enhancers are intrinsic cell-type-specific regulatory regions of which activities
have to be potentiated by FOXA1 through induction of an epigenetic switch that
includes notably DNA demethylation.

PMCID: PMC3065703
PMID: 21233399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Mar;300(3):L441-52. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00435.2009. Epub 2010 Dec 17.

FOXA1 plays a role in regulating secretoglobin 1a1 expression in the absence of
CCAAT/enhancer binding protein activities in lung in vivo.

Kido T(1), Tomita T, Okamoto M, Cai Y, Matsumoto Y, Vinson C, Maru Y, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory or Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Secretoglobin (SCGB) 1A1, also called Clara cell secretor protein (CCSP) or Clara
cell-specific 10-kDa protein (CC10), is a small molecular weight secreted protein
mainly expressed in lung, with anti-inflammatory/immunomodulatory properties.
Previous in vitro studies demonstrated that CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins
(C/EBPs) are the major transcription factors for the regulation of Scbg1a1 gene
expression, whereas FOXA1 had a minimum effect on the transcription. To determine
the in vivo role of C/EBPs in the regulation of SCGB1A1 expression, experiments
were performed in which A-C/EBP, a dominant-negative form of C/EBP that
interferes with DNA binding activities of all C/EBPs, was specifically expressed 
in lung. Surprisingly, despite the in vitro findings, expression of SCGB1A1 mRNA 
was not decreased in vivo in the absence of C/EBPs. This may be due to a
compensatory role assumed by FOXA1 in the regulation of Scgb1a1 gene expression
in lung in the absence of active C/EBPs. This disconnect between in vitro and in 
vivo results underscores the importance of studies using animal models to
determine the role of specific transcription factors in the regulation of gene
expression in intact multicellular complex organs such as lung.

PMCID: PMC3064285
PMID: 21224212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 31;5(12):e15171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015171.

The Drosophila FoxA ortholog Fork head regulates growth and gene expression
downstream of Target of rapamycin.

Bülow MH(1), Aebersold R, Pankratz MJ, Jünger MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology 
(ETH) Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Forkhead transcription factors of the FoxO subfamily regulate gene expression
programs downstream of the insulin signaling network. It is less clear which
proteins mediate transcriptional control exerted by Target of rapamycin (TOR)
signaling, but recent studies in nematodes suggest a role for FoxA transcription 
factors downstream of TOR. In this study we present evidence that outlines a
similar connection in Drosophila, in which the FoxA protein Fork head (FKH)
regulates cellular and organismal size downstream of TOR. We find that ectopic
expression and targeted knockdown of FKH in larval tissues elicits different size
phenotypes depending on nutrient state and TOR signaling levels. FKH
overexpression has a negative effect on growth under fed conditions, and this
phenotype is not further exacerbated by inhibition of TOR via rapamycin feeding. 
Under conditions of starvation or low TOR signaling levels, knockdown of FKH
attenuates the size reduction associated with these conditions. Subcellular
localization of endogenous FKH protein is shifted from predominantly cytoplasmic 
on a high-protein diet to a pronounced nuclear accumulation in animals with
reduced levels of TOR or fed with rapamycin. Two putative FKH target genes,
CG6770 and cabut, are transcriptionally induced by rapamycin or FKH expression,
and silenced by FKH knockdown. Induction of both target genes in heterozygous TOR
mutant animals is suppressed by mutations in fkh. Furthermore, TOR signaling
levels and FKH impact on transcription of the dFOXO target gene d4E-BP, implying 
a point of crosstalk with the insulin pathway. In summary, our observations show 
that an alteration of FKH levels has an effect on cellular and organismal size,
and that FKH function is required for the growth inhibition and target gene
induction caused by low TOR signaling levels.

PMCID: PMC3013099
PMID: 21217822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):11-2. doi: 10.1038/ng0111-11.

Determination of transcription factor binding.

Cheung E, Ruan Y.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):27-33.

PMID: 21217639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 21;6:456. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.109.

Integrative model of genomic factors for determining binding site selection by
estrogen receptor-a.

Joseph R(1), Orlov YL, Huss M, Sun W, Kong SL, Ukil L, Pan YF, Li G, Lim M,
Thomsen JS, Ruan Y, Clarke ND, Prabhakar S, Cheung E, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore.

A major question in transcription factor (TF) biology is why a TF binds to only a
small fraction of motif eligible binding sites in the genome. Using the estrogen 
receptor-a as a model system, we sought to explicitly define parameters that
determine TF-binding site selection. By examining 12 genetic and epigenetic
parameters, we find that an energetically favorable estrogen response element
(ERE) motif sequence, co-occupancy by the TF FOXA1, the presence of the H3K4me1
mark and an open chromatin configuration in the pre-ligand state provide
specificity for ER binding. These factors can model estrogen-induced ER binding
with high accuracy (ROC-AUC=0.95 and 0.88 using different genomic backgrounds).
Moreover, when assessed in another estrogen-responsive cell line, this model was 
highly predictive for ERa binding (ROC-AUC=0.86). Variance in binding site
selection between MCF-7 and T47D resides in sites with suboptimal ERE motifs, but
modulated by the chromatin configuration. These results suggest a definable
interplay between sequence motifs and local chromatin in selecting TF binding.

PMCID: PMC3018168
PMID: 21179027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Gene. 2011 Mar 1;473(2):150-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.12.002. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Forkhead transcription factor Foxa1 is a novel target gene of C/EBPß and
suppresses the early phase of adipogenesis.

Fujimori K(1), Amano F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biodefense and Regulation, Osaka University of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, 4-20-1 Nasahara, Takatsuki, Osaka, Japan. fujimori@gly.oups.ac.jp

Forkhead/winged helix transcription factors (Foxs) regulate differentiation,
metabolism, and development. Although Foxa1 is expressed in adipocytes, the roles
and regulation of Foxa1 in them remain unclear. Here, we found that under the
control of C/EBPß, Foxa1 suppressed lipid accumulation and concomitantly caused a
decrease in adipogenic gene expression in adipocytes. Foxa1 was expressed in
undifferentiated mouse 3T3-L1 cells and in the early phase of adipogenesis, with 
its highest expression at 3h after the initiation of adipogenesis, which was
followed by a subsequent decrease. SiRNA-mediated suppression of Foxa1 expression
activated the expression of adipogenic genes such as PPAR<U+03B3>. Moreover, siRNAs for 
C/EBPß, but not those for C/EBPd, reduced Foxa1 mRNA and protein levels. The
results of a promoter-reporter assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that C/EBPß bound to the C/EBP binding element at -529 of the mouse 
Foxa1 promoter. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of C/EBPß decreased the
promoter activity of mouse Foxa1 gene. These results suggest that Foxa1 plays a
suppressive role in the early phase of adipogenesis, acting under the control of 
C/EBPß, and might be involved in the regulation of the rate of progression of the
early phase of adipogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. BMC Syst Biol. 2010 Dec 17;4:170. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-4-170.

Inference of hierarchical regulatory network of estrogen-dependent breast cancer 
through ChIP-based data.

Gu F(1), Hsu HK, Hsu PY, Wu J, Ma Y, Parvin J, Huang TH, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Global profiling of in vivo protein-DNA interactions using ChIP-based
technologies has evolved rapidly in recent years. Although many genome-wide
studies have identified thousands of ERa binding sites and have revealed the
associated transcription factor (TF) partners, such as AP1, FOXA1 and CEBP,
little is known about ERa associated hierarchical transcriptional regulatory
networks.
RESULTS: In this study, we applied computational approaches to analyze three
public available ChIP-based datasets: ChIP-seq, ChIP-PET and ChIP-chip, and to
investigate the hierarchical regulatory network for ERa and ERa partner TFs
regulation in estrogen-dependent breast cancer MCF7 cells. 16 common TFs and two 
common new TF partners (RORA and PITX2) were found among ChIP-seq, ChIP-chip and 
ChIP-PET datasets. The regulatory networks were constructed by scanning the
ChIP-peak region with TF specific position weight matrix (PWM). A permutation
test was performed to test the reliability of each connection of the network. We 
then used DREM software to perform gene ontology function analysis on the common 
genes. We found that FOS, PITX2, RORA and FOXA1 were involved in the up-regulated
genes.We also conducted the ERa and Pol-II ChIP-seq experiments in tamoxifen
resistance MCF7 cells (denoted as MCF7-T in this study) and compared the
difference between MCF7 and MCF7-T cells. The result showed very little overlap
between these two cells in terms of targeted genes (21.2% of common genes) and
targeted TFs (25% of common TFs). The significant dissimilarity may indicate
totally different transcriptional regulatory mechanisms between these two cancer 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study uncovers new estrogen-mediated regulatory networks by
mining three ChIP-based data in MCF7 cells and ChIP-seq data in MCF7-T cells. We 
compared the different ChIP-based technologies as well as different breast cancer
cells. Our computational analytical approach may guide biologists to further
study the underlying mechanisms in breast cancer cells or other human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3012048
PMID: 21167036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):27-33. doi: 10.1038/ng.730. Epub 2010 Dec 12.

FOXA1 is a key determinant of estrogen receptor function and endocrine response.

Hurtado A(1), Holmes KA, Ross-Innes CS, Schmidt D, Carroll JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):11-2.

Estrogen receptor-a (ER) is the key feature of most breast cancers and binding of
ER to the genome correlates with expression of the Forkhead protein FOXA1 (also
called HNF3a). Here we show that FOXA1 is a key determinant that can influence
differential interactions between ER and chromatin. Almost all ER-chromatin
interactions and gene expression changes depended on the presence of FOXA1 and
FOXA1 influenced genome-wide chromatin accessibility. Furthermore, we found that 
CTCF was an upstream negative regulator of FOXA1-chromatin interactions. In
estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells, the dependency on FOXA1 for tamoxifen-ER
activity was absolute; in tamoxifen-resistant cells, ER binding was independent
of ligand but depended on FOXA1. Expression of FOXA1 in non-breast cancer cells
can alter ER binding and function. As such, FOXA1 is a major determinant of
estrogen-ER activity and endocrine response in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3024537
PMID: 21151129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Genome Res. 2011 Jan;21(1):47-55. doi: 10.1101/gr.107961.110. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Copy number and targeted mutational analysis reveals novel somatic events in
metastatic prostate tumors.

Robbins CM(1), Tembe WA, Baker A, Sinari S, Moses TY, Beckstrom-Sternberg S,
Beckstrom-Sternberg J, Barrett M, Long J, Chinnaiyan A, Lowey J, Suh E, Pearson
JV, Craig DW, Agus DB, Pienta KJ, Carpten JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Integrated Cancer Genomics, Translational Genomics Research
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USA.

Advanced prostate cancer can progress to systemic metastatic tumors, which are
generally androgen insensitive and ultimately lethal. Here, we report a
comprehensive genomic survey for somatic events in systemic metastatic prostate
tumors using both high-resolution copy number analysis and targeted mutational
survey of 3508 exons from 577 cancer-related genes using next generation
sequencing. Focal homozygous deletions were detected at 8p22, 10q23.31, 13q13.1, 
13q14.11, and 13q14.12. Key genes mapping within these deleted regions include
PTEN, BRCA2, C13ORF15, and SIAH3. Focal high-level amplifications were detected
at 5p13.2-p12, 14q21.1, 7q22.1, and Xq12. Key amplified genes mapping within
these regions include SKP2, FOXA1, and AR. Furthermore, targeted mutational
analysis of normal-tumor pairs has identified somatic mutations in genes known to
be associated with prostate cancer including AR and TP53, but has also revealed
novel somatic point mutations in genes including MTOR, BRCA2, ARHGEF12, and CHD5.
Finally, in one patient where multiple independent metastatic tumors were
available, we show common and divergent somatic alterations that occur at both
the copy number and point mutation level, supporting a model for a common clonal 
progenitor with metastatic tumor-specific divergence. Our study represents a deep
genomic analysis of advanced metastatic prostate tumors and has revealed
candidate somatic alterations, possibly contributing to lethal prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3012925
PMID: 21147910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):376-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.126. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Role of FOXA and Sp1 in mitochondrial acylcarnitine carrier gene expression in
different cell lines.

Convertini P(1), Infantino V, Bisaccia F, Palmieri F, Iacobazzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

This study investigates the transcriptional role of the human mitochondrial
carnitine/acylcarnitine carrier (CAC) proximal promoter. Through deletion
analysis, an activation domain (-334/-80 bp) was identified which contains FOXA
and Sp1 active sites. The wild-type (but not mutated) -334/-80 bp region of the
CAC gene conferred 74% LUC transgene activity in HepG2 cells, 17% in HEK293 cells
and 14% in SK-N-SH cells as compared to that observed with the entire -1503/+3 bp
proximal promoter. Overexpression and silencing of FOXA2 or Sp1 in HepG2 cells
enhanced and diminished, respectively, LUC activity, CAC transcript and CAC
protein. In HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells, which do not contain FOXA1-3, LUC activity 
was increased by FOXA2 overexpression to a greater extent than in HepG2 cells.
Both FOXA2 and Sp1 in HepG2, and only Sp1 in HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells, were found
to be bound to the CAC proximal promoter. These results show that FOXA and Sp1
sites in HepG2 cells and only the Sp1 site in HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells have a
critical role in the transcriptional regulation of the CAC proximal promoter.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21130740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.11.002. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively and negatively regulate Shh signalling to specify
ventral midbrain progenitor identity.

Mavromatakis YE(1), Lin W, Metzakopian E, Ferri AL, Yan CH, Sasaki H, Whisett J, 
Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Foxa2, a member of the Foxa family of forkhead/winged helix family of
transcription factors, has previously been shown to be an upstream positive
regulator of Shh expression in many different tissues. Recent studies also
strongly suggest that Foxa2 specify cell fate by inhibiting the expression of
cell fate determinants such as Helt1 and Nkx2.2. In this paper, phenotypic
analyses of Wnt1cre; Foxa2flox/flox embryos in the midbrain have demonstrated a
novel role for Foxa2 and its related family member, Foxa1, to attenuate Shh
signalling by inhibiting the expression of its intracellular transducer, Gli2, at
the transcriptional level. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicate
that Foxa2 binds to genomic regions of Gli2 and likely regulates its expression
in a direct manner. Our studies, involving loss and gain of function studies in
mice, also provided further insights into the gene regulatory interactions among 
Foxa1, Foxa2 and Shh in ventral midbrain progenitors that contribute to midbrain 
patterning. Altogether, these data indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 contribute to
the specification of ventral midbrain progenitor identity by regulating Shh
signalling in a positive and negative manner.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):1649-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.106922. Epub 2010 
Nov 8.

Aberrant estrogen regulation of PEMT results in choline deficiency-associated
liver dysfunction.

Resseguie ME(1), da Costa KA, Galanko JA, Patel M, Davis IJ, Zeisel SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

When dietary choline is restricted, most men and postmenopausal women develop
multiorgan dysfunction marked by hepatic steatosis (choline deficiency syndrome
(CDS)). However, a significant subset of premenopausal women is protected from
CDS. Because hepatic PEMT (phosphatidylethanolamine N-methyltransferase)
catalyzes de novo biosynthesis of choline and this gene is under estrogenic
control, we hypothesized that there are SNPs in PEMT that disrupt the hormonal
regulation of PEMT and thereby put women at risk for CDS. In this study, we
performed transcript-specific gene expression analysis, which revealed that
estrogen regulates PEMT in an isoform-specific fashion. Locus-wide SNP analysis
identified a risk-associated haplotype that was selectively associated with loss 
of hormonal activation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation, analyzed by locus-wide
microarray studies, comprehensively identified regions of estrogen receptor
binding in PEMT. The polymorphism (rs12325817) most highly linked with the
development of CDS (p < 0.00006) was located within 1 kb of the critical estrogen
response element. The risk allele failed to bind either the estrogen receptor or 
the pioneer factor FOXA1. These data demonstrate that allele-specific ablation of
estrogen receptor-DNA interaction in the PEMT locus prevents hormone-inducible
PEMT expression, conferring risk of CDS in women.

PMCID: PMC3020773
PMID: 21059658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. BMC Cancer. 2010 Oct 8;10:539. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-539.

Genome profiling of ERBB2-amplified breast cancers.

Sircoulomb F(1), Bekhouche I, Finetti P, Adélaïde J, Ben Hamida A, Bonansea J,
Raynaud S, Innocenti C, Charafe-Jauffret E, Tarpin C, Ben Ayed F, Viens P,
Jacquemier J, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D, Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Marseille Cancer Research Center, UMR891 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes,
Department of Molecular Oncology, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Around 20% of breast cancers (BC) show ERBB2 gene amplification and
overexpression of the ERBB2 tyrosine kinase receptor. They are associated with a 
poor prognosis but can benefit from targeted therapy. A better knowledge of these
BCs, genomically and biologically heterogeneous, may help understand their
behavior and design new therapeutic strategies.
METHODS: We defined the high resolution genome and gene expression profiles of 54
ERBB2-amplified BCs using 244K oligonucleotide array-comparative genomic
hybridization and whole-genome DNA microarrays. Expression of ERBB2,
phosphorylated ERBB2, EGFR, IGF1R and FOXA1 proteins was assessed by
immunohistochemistry to evaluate the functional ERBB2 status and identify
co-expressions.
RESULTS: First, we identified the ERBB2-C17orf37-GRB7 genomic segment as the
minimal common 17q12-q21 amplicon, and CRKRS and IKZF3 as the most frequent
centromeric and telomeric amplicon borders, respectively. Second, GISTIC analysis
identified 17 other genome regions affected by copy number aberration (CNA)
(amplifications, gains, losses). The expression of 37 genes of these regions was 
deregulated. Third, two types of heterogeneity were observed in ERBB2-amplified
BCs. The genomic profiles of estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) and negative (ER-) 
ERBB2-amplified BCs were different. The WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway was
involved in ER- ERBB2-amplified BCs, and PVT1 and TRPS1 were candidate oncogenes 
associated with ER+ ERBB2-amplified BCs. The size of the ERBB2 amplicon was
different in inflammatory (IBC) and non-inflammatory BCs. ERBB2-amplified IBCs
were characterized by the downregulated and upregulated mRNA expression of ten
and two genes in proportion to CNA, respectively. IHC results showed (i) a linear
relationship between ERBB2 gene amplification and its gene and protein
expressions with a good correlation between ERBB2 expression and phosphorylation 
status; (ii) a potential signaling cross-talk between EGFR or IGF1R and ERBB2,
which could influence response of ERBB2-positive BCs to inhibitors. FOXA1 was
frequently coexpressed with ERBB2 but its expression did not impact on the
outcome of patients with ERBB2-amplified tumors.
CONCLUSION: We have shown that ER+ and ER- ERBB2-amplified BCs are different,
distinguished ERBB2 amplicons in IBC and non-IBC, and identified genomic features
that may be useful in the design of alternative therapeutical strategies.

PMCID: PMC2958950
PMID: 20932292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Oncol Rep. 2010 Nov;24(5):1233-9.

Loss of ERa and FOXA1 expression in a progression model of luminal type breast
cancer: insights from PyMT transgenic mouse model.

McCune K(1), Mehta R, Thorat MA, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

The classification of breast cancer into multiple molecular subtypes has
necessitated the need for biomarkers that can assess tumor progression and the
effects of chemopreventive agents on specific breast cancer subtypes. The goal of
this study was to identify biomarkers whose expression are altered along with
estrogen receptor a (ERa) in the polyoma middle-T antigen (PyMT) transgenic model
of breast cancer and to investigate the chemopreventive activity of phenethyl
isothiocyanate (PEITC). The diet of PyMT female mice was fortified with PEITC (8 
mmol/kg) and the mammary streak and/or gross tumors and metastases in lungs were 
subjected to immunohistochemical analyses for ERa, FOXA1, and GATA-3. FOXA1 is
associated with luminal type A cancers, while GATA-3 is a marker of luminal
progenitor cell differentiation. In both control and PEITC-treated groups, there 
was a progressive loss of ERa and FOXA1 but persistence of GATA-3 expression
indicating that the tumors retain luminal phenotype. Overall, the PyMT induced
tumors exhibited the entire gamut of phenotypes from ERa+/FOXA1+/GATA-3+ tumors
in the early stage to ERa±/FOXA1-/GATA-3+ in the late stage. Thus, PyMT model
serves as an excellent model for studying progression of luminal subtype tumors. 
PEITC treated animals had multiple small tumors, indicating delay in tumor
progression. Although these tumors were histologically similar to those in
controls, there was a lower expression of these biomarkers in normal luminal
cells indicating delay in tumor initiation. In in vitro studies, PEITC depleted
AldeFluor-positive putative stem/progenitor cells, which may partly be
responsible for the delay in tumor initiation.

PMCID: PMC2948410
PMID: 20878115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Dec;38(12):2105-9. doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.035436. Epub 2010
Aug 24.

Forkhead box protein A1 regulates UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B15 gene
transcription in LNCaP prostate cancer cells.

Hu DG(1), Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park SA 5042, Australia.

The UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 2B15 and 2B17 are the major UGTs involved
in the inactivation and elimination of the active androgens, dihydrotestosterone 
and testosterone. Although regulation of these UGT genes by various endogenous
and exogenous ligands, including steroid hormones and bile acids, is well
documented, the mechanisms controlling their basal gene expression are poorly
understood. We recently reported that Forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) regulates
the basal expression of the UGT2B17 gene in prostate cancer cells. In this study,
we show that FOXA1 also regulates basal expression of the UGT2B15 gene in the
prostate cell line LNCaP (lymph node carcinoma of the prostate). FOXA1 binds to a
site -208 to -217 base pairs relative to the UGT2B15 translation start site, as
shown by electromobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Mutation
of this site prevents binding and substantially decreases basal UGT2B15 promoter 
activity. Silencing of FOXA1 expression by small interfering RNA significantly
reduced UGT2B15 transcript levels, further confirming a crucial role of FOXA1 in 
controlling UGT2B15 gene expression. Because local inactivation of active
androgens by UGT2B15 and UGT2B17 has been shown to be a major determinant of
androgen response and signaling activity, regulation of the UGT2B15 and UGT2B17
genes by FOXA1 may have an important role in the maintenance of androgen
homeostasis within prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 20736324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Jul;128(2):315-26. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1073-y. 
Epub 2010 Aug 10.

RERG (Ras-like, oestrogen-regulated, growth-inhibitor) expression in breast
cancer: a marker of ER-positive luminal-like subtype.

Habashy HO(1), Powe DG, Glaab E, Ball G, Spiteri I, Krasnogor N, Garibaldi JM,
Rakha EA, Green AR, Caldas C, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Nottingham
University Hospitals NHS Trust, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Global gene expression profiling studies have classified breast cancer into a
number of distinct biological and molecular classes with clinical relevance. The 
heterogeneous luminal group, which is largely characterised by oestrogen receptor
(ER) expression, appears to contain distinct subgroups with differing behaviour. 
In this study, we analysed 47,293 gene transcripts in 128 invasive breast
carcinomas (BC) using Artificial Neural Networks and a cross-validation analysis 
in combination with an ensemble sample classification to identify genes that can 
be used to subclassify ER+ luminal tumours. The results were validated using
immunohistochemistry on TMAs containing 1,140 invasive breast cancers. Our
results showed that the RERG gene is one of the highest ranked genes to
differentiate between ER+ luminal-like and ER- non-luminal cancers based on a
10-fold external cross-validation analysis with an average classification
accuracy of 89%. This was confirmed in our protein expression studies that showed
RERG positive associations with markers of luminal differentiation including ER, 
luminal cytokeratins (CK19, CK18 and CK7/8) and FOXA1 (P = 0.004) and other
markers of good prognosis in BC including small size, lower histologic grade and 
positive expression of androgen receptor, nuclear BRCA1, FHIT and cell cycle
inhibitors p27 and p21. RERG expression was inversely associated with the
proliferation marker MIB1 (P = 0.005) and p53. Strong RERG expression showed an
association with longer breast cancer specific survival and distant metastasis
free interval in the whole series as well as in the ER+ luminal group and these
associations were independent of other prognostic variables. In conclusion, we
used novel bioinformatics methods to identify candidate genes to characterise ER+
luminal-like breast cancer. RERG gene is a key marker of the luminal BC class and
can be used to separate distinct prognostic subgroups.

PMID: 20697807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 10;400(1):34-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.07.132. Epub 2010 Aug 4.

ER regulates an evolutionarily conserved apoptosis pathway.

Liu Z(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, China. zhliu@implad.ac.cn

Estrogen receptor (ER) is regarded as a major causal factor in breast cancer and 
FoxA1, a winged-helix transcription factor belonging to the forkhead family, has 
been found to function as a pioneer factor in the recruitment of ER to several
cis-regulatory elements in the genome. High throughput chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyzed by hybridization to microarrays (ChIP-chip) can
reveal ER and FoxA1 binding sites occupied by transcription factors. However,
these results are blind to lineage-specific cis-regulatory elements. In this
study, we identified ER and FoxA1 binding sites conserved in evolution by using
Detection of LinEage-Specific Selection (DLESS) method. We also analyzed target
genes close to conserved cis-regulatory elements by combining gene-expression
data. A total of 7877 ER binding sites and 18,135 FoxA1 binding sites were
identified in MCF-7 cells by performing an unbiased genome-wide ChIP-chip with
False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 5%. Using DLESS method, we found target candidate
genes closest to fully conserved cis-regulatory elements related to apoptosis
according to gene ontology analysis. Furthermore, network analysis of
apoptosis-related genes within 10 kb of fully conserved cis-regulatory elements
was constructed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Apoptosis genes in the
network showed over- and under-expression in MCF-7 cell-line. And these
apoptosis-related genes closest to fully conserved cis-regulatory elements in
network showed strong correlation with ER in MCF-7 cells. These results elucidate
that ER regulates an evolutionarily conserved apoptosis pathway. This opens up
new perspectives in the apoptosis of human breast cancer from the evolution of
cis-regulatory elements.

Crown Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20691160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 May 25;90(20):1403-7.

[Diagnostic and prognostic significance of FOXA1 expression in molecular subtypes
of breast invasive ductal carcinomas].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu N(1), Niu Y, Wang SL, Yu Q, Zhang RJ, Liu TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Research Key Laboratory of National Ministry of Education,
Oncology Key Laboratory of Tianjin, Tianjin Cancer Institute & Cancer Hospital,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of FOXA1 in breast invasive ductal
carcinomas, observe its expression in all molecular subtypes of breast invasive
ductal carcinomas and understand its diagnostic and prognostic significance.
METHODS: Tissue specimens were obtained from 213 cases of breast invasive ductal 
carcinoma (IDC) and their expressions of FOXA1 and Ki67 detected by
immunohistochemistry. And the expressions of CK5/6 and CK14 were detected to
distinguish between normal breast-like subtype and basal-like subtype.
RESULTS: The expression of FOXA1 was observed in 150 cases (70.4%). It correlated
positively with ER and PR. But there was a negative correlation with histological
grade, Nottingham prognostic index, p53 and Ki67. The expression of FOXA1 had
difference between luminal and non-luminal subtypes. In luminal subtype, the
expression of FOXA1 was associated with histological grade, PR, NPI, Ki67 and A
subtype. In terms of prognosis, the expression of FOXA1 predicted a long
disease-free survival and overall survival.
CONCLUSION: The expression of FOXA1 is associated with a good prognosis. FOXA1 is
a promising candidate for clinical identification of luminal A subtype.
Prognostic analysis of FOXA1 in low-risk breast cancers may prove to be useful in
clinical treatment decision-making.

PMID: 20646630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Oct;49(10):948-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20807.

Identification of primary gene targets of TFAP2C in hormone responsive breast
carcinoma cells.

Woodfield GW(1), Chen Y, Bair TB, Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

The TFAP2C transcription factor is involved in mammary development,
differentiation, and oncogenesis. Previous studies established a role for TFAP2C 
in the regulation of ESR1 (ERalpha) and ERBB2 (Her2) in breast carcinomas.
However, the role of TFAP2C in different breast cancer phenotypes has not been
examined in detail. To develop a more complete characterization of TFAP2C target 
genes, ChIP-seq with anti-TFAP2C antibody and expression arrays with TFAP2C knock
down were analyzed in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells. Genomic sequences common to
the ChIP-seq data set defined the consensus sequence for TFAP2C chromatin binding
as the nine base sequence SCCTSRGGS (S = G/C, r = A/G), which closely matches the
previously defined optimal in vitro binding site. Comparing expression arrays
before and after knock down of TFAP2C with ChIP-seq data demonstrated a
conservative estimate that 8% of genes altered by TFAP2C expression are primary
target genes and includes genes that are both induced and repressed by TFAP2C. A 
set of 447 primary target genes of TFAP2C was identified, which included ESR1
(ERalpha), FREM2, RET, FOXA1, WWOX, GREB1, MYC, and members of the retinoic acid 
response pathway. The identification of ESR1, WWOX, GREB1, and FOXA1 as primary
targets confirmed the role of TFAP2C in hormone response. TFAP2C plays a critical
role in gene regulation in hormone responsive breast cancer and its target genes 
are different than for the Her2 breast cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2928401
PMID: 20629094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Oct;78(4):714-22. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.065953. Epub 2010 Jul 
13.

A novel polymorphism in a forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) binding site of the human UDP
glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 gene modulates promoter activity and is associated
with altered levels of circulating androstane-3a,17ß-diol glucuronide.

Hu DG(1), Gardner-Stephen D, Severi G, Gregory PA, Treloar J, Giles GG, English
DR, Hopper JL, Tilley WD, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park SA 5042, Australia.

UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 is present in the prostate, where it catalyzes
the addition of glucuronic acid to testosterone and dihydrotestosterone and their
metabolites androsterone and androstane-3a,17ß-diol. Hence, changes in UGT2B17
gene expression may affect the capacity of the prostate to inactivate and
eliminate male sex hormones. In this work, we identify a prevalent polymorphism, 
-155G/A, in the proximal promoter of the UGT2B17 gene. This polymorphism
modulates UGT2B17 promoter activity, because luciferase-gene reporter constructs 
containing the -155A allele were 13-fold more active than those containing the
-155G allele in prostate cancer LNCaP cells. The -155G/A polymorphism is
contained within a putative binding site for the transcription factor Forkhead
Box A1 (FOXA1). Using gene reporter, electromobility shift, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses, we show that FOXA1 binds to this site and
stimulates the UGT2B17 promoter. Furthermore, down-regulation of FOXA1 in LNCaP
cells substantially reduces UGT2B17 mRNA levels. The binding of FOXA1 and
subsequent stimulation of the UGT2B17 promoter is greatly reduced in the presence
of the -155G allele compared with the -155A allele. Consonant with its capacity
to be stimulated by FOXA1, the UGT2B17 -155A allele, compared with the -155G
allele, is associated with higher levels of circulating androstane-3a,17ß-diol
glucuronide. Although the initial phases of prostate cancer are
androgen-dependent and UGT2B17 inactivates androgens, there was no association of
the UGT2B17 -155G/A polymorphism with prostate cancer risk. In summary, this work
identifies FOXA1 as an important regulator of UGT2B17 expression in prostate
cancer LNCaP cells and identifies a polymorphism that alters this regulation.

PMID: 20628005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28604-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.149658. Epub
2010 Jul 7.

CCCTC-binding factor acts upstream of FOXA1 and demarcates the genomic response
to estrogen.

Zhang Y(1), Liang J, Li Y, Xuan C, Wang F, Wang D, Shi L, Zhang D, Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

Transcription activation by estrogen receptor (ER) is rapid and dynamic. How the 
prompt and precise ER response is established and maintained is still not fully
understood. Here, we report that two boundary elements surrounding the well
defined ERalpha target TFF1 locus are occupied by the CCCTC-binding factor
(CTCF). These elements are separated by 40 kb but cluster in the nuclear space
depending on CTCF but independent of estrogen and transcription. In contrast, in 
estrogen non-responsive breast cancer cells, the spatial proximity of these two
elements is lost and the entire locus instead displays a polycomb repressive
complex 2-controlled heterochromatin characteristic. We showed that CTCF acts
upstream of the "pioneer" factor FOXA1 in determining the genomic response to
estrogen. We propose that the CTCF-bound boundary elements demarcate active
versus inactive regions, building a framework of adjacent chromosome territory
that predisposes ERalpha-regulated transcription.

PMCID: PMC2937886
PMID: 20610384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2010 Oct;20(5):527-32. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2010.06.005. Epub 
2010 Jun 28.

The FoxA factors in organogenesis and differentiation.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6145,
United States. kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

The genetic analysis of the Foxa genes in both total and conditional mutant mice 
has clearly established that organogenesis of multiple systems is controlled by
this subfamily of winged helix transcription factors. These discoveries followed 
the establishment of the conceptional framework of the mechanism of action of the
FoxA proteins as 'pioneer factors' that can engage chromatin before other
transcription factors. Recent molecular and genomic studies have also shown that 
FoxA proteins can facilitate binding of several nuclear receptors to their
respective targets in a context-dependent manner, greatly increasing the range
and importance of FoxA factors in biology.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2943037
PMID: 20591647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Eur J Oral Sci. 2010 Jun;118(3):221-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0722.2010.00732.x.

Developmental changes in cellular and extracellular structural macromolecules in 
the secondary palate and in the nasal cavity of the mouse.

Vaziri Sani F(1), Kaartinen V, El Shahawy M, Linde A, Gritli-Linde A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of
Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden.

The aim of this study was to analyse the hitherto largely unknown expression
patterns of some specific cellular and extracellular molecules during palate and 
nasal cavity development. We showed that epithelia of the developing palate and
the vomerine epithelium express similar sets of structural proteins. With the
exception of keratin 15, which becomes barely detectable in the elevated palatal 
shelves, nearly all of these proteins become upregulated at the presumptive areas
of fusion and in the adhering epithelia of the palate and nasal septum. In vivo
and in vitro analyses indicated that reduction in the amount of keratin 15
protein is independent of Tgfbeta-Alk5 signalling. Foxa1 expression also
highlighted the regionalization of the palatal and nasal epithelia. Owing to the 
lack of reliable markers of the palatal periderm, the fate of peridermal cells
has been controversial. We identified LewisX/stage-specific embryonic antigen-1
as a specific peridermal marker, and showed that numerous peridermal cells remain
trapped in the medial epithelial seam (MES). The fate of these cells is probably 
apoptosis together with the rest of the MES cells, as we provided strong evidence
for this event. Heparan sulphate, chondroitin-6-sulphate, and versican displayed 
dynamically changing distribution patterns. The hitherto-unknown innervation
pattern of the developing palate was revealed. These findings may be of value for
unravelling the pathogenesis of palatal clefting.

PMID: 20572855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(3):R38. doi: 10.1186/bcr2592. Epub 2010 Jun 21.

Cooperative signaling between Wnt1 and integrin-linked kinase induces accelerated
breast tumor development.

Oloumi A(1), Maidan M, Lock FE, Tearle H, McKinney S, Muller WJ, Aparicio SA,
Dedhar S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics and Developmental Biology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, 675
West 10th Ave., Vancouver, BC, Canada. aoloumi@bccrc.ca

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is genetically and clinically a heterogeneous
disease. However, the exact contribution of different cell types and oncogenic
mutations to this heterogeneity are not well understood. Recently, we discovered 
an interaction between Wnt and integrin-linked kinase (ILK) within the signaling 
cascade that regulates cell growth and survival. Interestingly, mammary-specific 
expression of either one of these proteins has been shown to promote mammary
tumorigenesis. In light of our recent findings and to investigate the potential
interaction between Wnt and ILK proteins during mammary tumor formation and
progression, we established a transgenic mouse model that expresses both Wnt and 
ILK in mammary epithelial cells.
METHODS: A novel transgenic mouse model with mammary-specific expression of both 
Wnt1 and ILK was generated by crossing the two previously characterized mouse
models, MMTV-Wnt1 and MMTV-ILK. The resulting MMTV-Wnt/ILK mice were closely
monitored for tumor development and growth, as well as for the tumor onset. The
molecular phenotypes of both tumors and premalignant mammary glands were
investigated by using biochemical and global gene-expression analysis approaches.
RESULTS: A significant acceleration in mammary tumor incidence and growth was
observed in the MMTV-Wnt/ILK mice. Pre-neoplastic mammary glands also display
lobuloalveolar hyperplasia and an increase in ductal epithelium proliferation.
Apart from elevated expression of Wnt/ILK targets, such as beta-catenin and
cyclin D1, gene-expression profiling identified the surprising activation of the 
FOXA1 transcription factor. Upregulation of FOXA1, which is also known as the
molecular marker of differentiated mammary luminal cells, was consistent with the
expansion of the enriched luminal progenitor population or CD29loCD24hiCD61+
cells in MMTV-Wnt/ILK tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show cooperation between Wnt1 and ILK transgenes
during mammary carcinogenesis, leading to changes in a transcriptional network,
which could dictate a specific breast cancer phenotype with enhanced growth
dynamics. The MMTV-Wnt/ILK can be used as a model to identify further the genes
downstream of the estrogen receptor-beta/FOXA1 and to investigate the mechanisms 
targeting the expansion of the luminal progenitor cells leading to hyperplasia
and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2917033
PMID: 20565980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;24(8):1594-604. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0513. Epub 2010 Jun
9.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 maintain the metabolic and secretory features of the mature
beta-cell.

Gao N(1), Le Lay J, Qin W, Doliba N, Schug J, Fox AJ, Smirnova O, Matschinsky FM,
Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 play both redundant and distinct roles in early pancreas
development. We demonstrate here that inducible ablation of both transcription
factors in mature mouse beta-cells leads to impaired glucose homeostasis and
insulin secretion. The defects in both glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and
intracellular calcium oscillation are more pronounced than those in beta-cells
lacking only Foxa2. Unexpectedly, in contrast to the severe reduction of
beta-cell-enriched factors contributing to metabolic and secretory pathways,
expression of a large number of genes that are involved in neural differentiation
and function is significantly elevated. We further demonstrate that expression of
carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP or Mlxipl), an important
transcriptional regulator of carbohydrate metabolism, is significantly affected
in compound Foxa1/a2 mutant beta-cells. ChREBP expression is directly controlled 
by Foxa1 and Foxa2 in both the fetal endocrine pancreas as well as mature islets.
These data demonstrate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 play crucial roles in the development
and maintenance of beta-cell-specific secretory and metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2940470
PMID: 20534694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biometrics. 2011 Mar;67(1):151-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1541-0420.2010.01441.x.

PICS: probabilistic inference for ChIP-seq.

Zhang X(1), Robertson G, Krzywinski M, Ning K, Droit A, Jones S, Gottardo R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

ChIP-seq combines chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel
short-read sequencing. While it can profile genome-wide in vivo transcription
factor-DNA association with higher sensitivity, specificity, and spatial
resolution than ChIP-chip, it poses new challenges for statistical analysis that 
derive from the complexity of the biological systems characterized and from
variability and biases in its sequence data. We propose a method called PICS
(Probabilistic Inference for ChIP-seq) for identifying regions bound by
transcription factors from aligned reads. PICS identifies binding event locations
by modeling local concentrations of directional reads, and uses DNA fragment
length prior information to discriminate closely adjacent binding events via a
Bayesian hierarchical t-mixture model. It uses precalculated, whole-genome read
mappability profiles and a truncated t-distribution to adjust binding event
models for reads that are missing due to local genome repetitiveness. It
estimates uncertainties in model parameters that can be used to define confidence
regions on binding event locations and to filter estimates. Finally, PICS
calculates a per-event enrichment score relative to a control sample, and can use
a control sample to estimate a false discovery rate. Using published GABP and
FOXA1 data from human cell lines, we show that PICS' predicted binding sites were
more consistent with computationally predicted binding motifs than the
alternative methods MACS, QuEST, CisGenome, and USeq. We then use a simulation
study to confirm that PICS compares favorably to these methods and is robust to
model misspecification.

© 2010, The International Biometric Society.

PMID: 20528864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2010 Jun;293(6):938-46. doi: 10.1002/ar.20805.

Temporal changes in expression of FoxA1 and Wnt7A in isolated adult human
alveolar epithelial cells enhanced by heparin.

Apparao KB(1), Newman DR, Zhang H, Khosla J, Randell SH, Sannes PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, Center for Comparative Medicine
and Translational Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.

Pre- and postnatal developmental studies of the lung have provided compelling
evidence demonstrating multiple factors that orchestrate alveolar epithelial cell
differentiation. The extent to which reactivation of certain developmental
pathways in the adult might influence the course of differentiation of alveolar
type 2 cells (AT2) into AT1 cells is not known. In this study, we examined
selected members of the forkhead (Fox) family of transcription factors and the
Wnt (wingless) family of signaling proteins for expression during human alveolar 
cell differentiation in vitro and determined their potential responses to
sulfated components of extracellular matrix (ECM), like those shed from cell
surfaces or found in basement membrane and modeled by heparin. Isolated adult
human AT2 cells cultured over a 9-day period were used to define the temporal
profile of expression of targeted factors during spontaneous differentiation to
AT1-like cells. FoxA1 protein was upregulated at early to intermediate time
points, where it was strongly elevated by heparin. Gene expression of wnt7A
increased dramatically beginning on day 3 and was enhanced even further on days 7
and 9 by heparin, whereas protein expression appeared at days 7 and 9. These
temporal changes of expression suggest that sulfated ECMs may act to enhance the 
increase in FoxA1 at the critical juncture when AT2 cells commence the
differentiation process to AT1 cells, in addition to enhancing the increase in
wnt7A when the AT1 cell phenotype stabilizes. Collectively, these factors may act
to modulate differentiation in the adult human pulmonary alveolus.

PMCID: PMC4133099
PMID: 20503388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Development. 2010 Jun;137(12):2045-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.043299.

FOXA1 is an essential determinant of ERalpha expression and mammary ductal
morphogenesis.

Bernardo GM(1), Lozada KL, Miedler JD, Harburg G, Hewitt SC, Mosley JD, Godwin
AK, Korach KS, Visvader JE, Kaestner KH, Abdul-Karim FW, Montano MM, Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

FOXA1, estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and GATA3 independently predict
favorable outcome in breast cancer patients, and their expression correlates with
a differentiated, luminal tumor subtype. As transcription factors, each functions
in the morphogenesis of various organs, with ERalpha and GATA3 being established 
regulators of mammary gland development. Interdependency between these three
factors in breast cancer and normal mammary development has been suggested, but
the specific role for FOXA1 is not known. Herein, we report that Foxa1 deficiency
causes a defect in hormone-induced mammary ductal invasion associated with a loss
of terminal end bud formation and ERalpha expression. By contrast, Foxa1 null
glands maintain GATA3 expression. Unlike ERalpha and GATA3 deficiency, Foxa1 null
glands form milk-producing alveoli, indicating that the defect is restricted to
expansion of the ductal epithelium, further emphasizing the novel role for FOXA1 
in mammary morphogenesis. Using breast cancer cell lines, we also demonstrate
that FOXA1 regulates ERalpha expression, but not GATA3. These data reveal that
FOXA1 is necessary for hormonal responsiveness in the developing mammary gland
and ERalpha-positive breast cancers, at least in part, through its control of
ERalpha expression.

PMCID: PMC2875844
PMID: 20501593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 11;9:104. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-104.

The promoter for intestinal cell kinase is head-to-head with F-Box 9 and contains
functional sites for TCF7L2 and FOXA factors.

Sturgill TW(1), Stoddard PB, Cohn SM, Mayo MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, University of Virginia,
1300 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
tws7w@virginia.edu

BACKGROUND: Intestinal cell kinase (ICK; GeneID 22858) is a conserved MAPK and
CDK-like kinase that is widely expressed in human tissues. Data from the Cancer
Genome Anatomy Project indicated ICK mRNA is increased in cancer, and that its
expression correlated with expression of mRNA for an uncharacterized F-box
protein, FBX9 (GeneID: 26268). ICK and FBX9 genes are arranged head-to-head on
opposite strands, with start sites for transcription separated by approximately
3.3 kb. We hypothesized ICK and FBX9 are potentially important genes in cancer
controlled by a bidirectional promoter.
RESULTS: We assessed promoter activity of the intergenic region in both
orientations in cancer cell lines derived from breast (AU565, SKBR3), colon
(HCT-15, KM12), and stomach (AGS) cancers, as well as in embryonic human kidney
(HEK293T) cells. The intergenic segment was active in both orientations in all of
these lines, and ICK promoter activity was greater than FBX9 promoter activity.
Results from deletions and truncations defined a minimal promoter for ICK, and
revealed that repressors and enhancers differentially regulate ICK versus FBX9
promoter activity. The ICK promoter contains consensus motifs for several
FOX-family transcription factors that align when mouse and human are compared
using EMBOSS. FOXA1 and FOXA2 increase luciferase activity of a minimal promoter 
10-20 fold in HEK293T cells. Consensus sites for TCF7L2 (TCF4) (Gene Id: 6934)
are also present in both mouse and human. The expression of beta-catenin
increased activity of the minimal promoter approximately 10 fold. ICK reference
mRNAs (NM_014920.3, NM_016513) are expressed in low copy number and increased in 
some breast cancers, using a ten base tag 5'-TCAACCTTAT-3' specific for both ICK 
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: ICK and FBX9 are divergently transcribed from a bidirectional
promoter that is GC-rich and contains a CpG island. A minimal promoter for ICK
contains functional sites for beta-catenin/TCF7L2 and FOXA. These data are
consistent with functions that have been proposed for ICK in development and in
proliferation or survival of some breast and colon cancers.

PMCID: PMC2876993
PMID: 20459822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;39(2):136-9.

[Transcription factor Forkhead-box A1 and breast cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu N, Niu Y.

PMID: 20388388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gene. 2010 Jul 15;460(1-2):1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.03.013. Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Identification of a FOXA-dependent enhancer of human alcohol dehydrogenase 4
(ADH4).

Pochareddy S(1), Edenberg HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, MS4063, Indianapolis, IN 46202-5122, USA.

Human alcohol dehydrogenase 4 (ADH4) is one of the key enzymes involved in the
metabolism of alcohol. ADH4 is highly expressed in the liver, and previous
studies have revealed several cis-acting elements in the proximal promoter
region. In this study we have identified a distal upstream enhancer, 4E, of ADH4.
In HepG2 human hepatoma cells, 4E increased the activity of an ADH4 basal
promoter by 50-fold. 4E was cell-specific, as no enhancer activity was detected
in a human lung cell line, H1299. We have narrowed the enhancer activity to a 565
bp region and have identified multiple liver-enriched transcription factor
binding sites in the region. By electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we
confirmed binding of FOXA proteins to these sites. Site-directed mutagenesis
studies demonstrated that sites 1 and 4 have the biggest effect on enhancer
function, and mutations in multiple sites have multiplicative effects. We also
studied the effects of three variations in the minimal enhancer region. Two
variations had a significant effect on enhancer activity, decreasing the activity
to 0.6-fold, while one had small but significant effect. The differences in the
functional activity in different haplotypes suggest that this region could play
an important role in the risk for alcoholism.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2896571
PMID: 20363298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 21;285(21):16135-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088096. Epub
2010 Mar 26.

Foxa1 functions as a pioneer transcription factor at transposable elements to
activate Afp during differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Taube JH(1), Allton K, Duncan SA, Shen L, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Center for Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Epigenetic control of genes that are silent in embryonic stem cells, but destined
for expression during differentiation, includes distinctive hallmarks, such as
simultaneous activating/repressing (bivalent) modifications of chromatin and DNA 
hypomethylation at enhancers of gene expression. Although alpha-fetoprotein (Afp)
falls into this class of genes, as it is silent in pluripotent stem cells and
activated during differentiation of endoderm, we find that Afp chromatin lacks
bivalent histone modifications. However, critical regulatory sites for Afp
activation, overlapping Foxa1/p53/Smad-binding elements, are located within a
300-bp region lacking DNA methylation, due to transposed elements
underrepresented in CpG sequences: a short interspersed transposable element and 
a medium reiterated sequence 1 element. Forkhead family member Foxa1 is activated
by retinoic acid treatment of embryonic stem cells, binds its DNA consensus site 
within the short interspersed transposable/medium reiterated sequence 1 elements,
and displaces linker histone H1 from silent Afp chromatin. Small interfering RNA 
depletion of Foxa1 showed that Foxa1 is essential in providing chromatin access
to transforming growth factor beta-activated Smad2 and Smad4 and their subsequent
DNA binding. Together these transcription factors establish highly acetylated
chromatin and promote expression of Afp. Foxa1 acts as a pioneer transcription
factor in de novo activation of Afp, by exploiting a lack of methylation at
juxtaposed transposed elements, to bind and poise chromatin for intersection with
transforming growth factor beta signaling during differentiation of embryonic
stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2871482
PMID: 20348100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Hepatol. 2010 May;52(5):765-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.12.022. Epub 2010 Feb
18.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate bile duct development in mice.

Strazzabosco M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Center and Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, USA.
mario.strazzabosco@yale.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1537-45.

PMCID: PMC2862815
PMID: 20347503  [PubMed]


387. Am J Pathol. 2010 May;176(5):2139-49. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090477. Epub 2010 
Mar 12.

Subcellular localization of activated AKT in estrogen receptor- and progesterone 
receptor-expressing breast cancers: potential clinical implications.

Badve S(1), Collins NR, Bhat-Nakshatri P, Turbin D, Leung S, Thorat M, Dunn SE,
Geistlinger TR, Carroll JS, Brown M, Bose S, Teitell MA, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Internal Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA. sbadve@iupui.edu

Activated v-AKT murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1 (AKT)/protein kinase B
(PKB) kinase (pAKT) is localized to the plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and/or
nucleus in 50% of cancers. The clinical importance of pAKT localization and the
mechanism(s) controlling this compartmentalization are unknown. In this study, we
examined nuclear and cytoplasmic phospho-AKT (pAKT) expression by
immunohistochemistry in a breast cancer tissue microarray (n = 377) with
approximately 15 years follow-up and integrated these data with the expression of
estrogen receptor (ER)alpha, progesterone receptor (PR), and FOXA1. Nuclear
localization of pAKT (nuclear-pAKT) was associated with long-term survival (P =
0.004). Within the ERalpha+/PR+ subgroup, patients with nuclear-pAKT positivity
had better survival than nuclear-pAKT-negative patients (P < or = 0.05). The
association of nuclear-pAKT with the ERalpha+/PR+ subgroup was validated in an
independent cohort (n = 145). TCL1 family proteins regulate nuclear transport
and/or activation of AKT. TCL1B is overexpressed in ERalpha-positive compared
with ERalpha-negative breast cancers and in lung metastasis-free breast cancers. 
Therefore, we examined the possible control of TCL1 family member(s) expression
by the estrogen:ERalpha pathway. Estradiol increased TCL1B expression and
increased nuclear-pAKT levels in breast cancer cells; short- interfering RNA
against TCL1B reduced nuclear-pAKT. Overexpression of nuclear-targeted AKT1 in
MCF-7 cells increased cell proliferation without compromising sensitivity to the 
anti-estrogen, tamoxifen. These results suggest that subcellular localization of 
activated AKT plays a significant role in determining its function in breast
cancer, which in part is dependent on TCL1B expression.

PMCID: PMC2861080
PMID: 20228224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Dec;124(3):653-66. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-0816-0. 
Epub 2010 Mar 6.

Cortactin gene amplification and expression in breast cancer: a chromogenic in
situ hybridisation and immunohistochemical study.

Dedes KJ(1), Lopez-Garcia MA, Geyer FC, Lambros MB, Savage K, Vatcheva R,
Wilkerson P, Wetterskog D, Lacroix-Triki M, Natrajan R, Reis-Filho JS.

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, 
London, SW3 6JB, UK.

Amplification of 11q13 is found in approximately 15% of breast cancers. Cyclin D1
(CCND1) has been reported to be the 'driver' of this amplicon, however, multiple 
genes map to the smallest region of amplification of 11q13. Out of these genes,
cortactin (CTTN) has been shown to be consistently overexpressed at the mRNA
level in tumours harbouring 11q13 amplification. The aims of this study are to
define whether CTTN is consistently co-amplified with the main core of the 11q13 
amplicon, whether it is consistently overexpressed when amplified and to
determine correlations between CTTN amplification and overexpression with
clinicopathological features of breast cancers and survival of breast cancer
patients. CTTN and CCND1 chromogenic in situ hybridisation (CISH) probes and a
validated monoclonal antibody against CTTN were applied to a tissue microarray of
a cohort of breast cancers from patients treated with anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. CTTN and CCND1 amplifications were found in 12.3 and 12.4% of
cases, respectively. All cases harbouring CTTN amplification also displayed CCND1
amplification. High expression of CTTN was found in 10.8% of cases and was
associated with CTTN amplification, expression of 'basal' markers and
topoisomerase IIa. Exploratory subgroup analysis of tumours devoid of 11q13
amplification revealed that high expression of CTTN in the absence of CTTN gene
amplification was associated with lymph node negative disease, lack of hormone
receptors and FOXA1, expression of 'basal' markers, high Ki-67 indices, p53
nuclear expression, and basal-like and triple negative phenotypes. CTTN
expression and CTTN gene amplification were not associated with disease-,
metastasis-free and overall survival. In conclusion, CTTN is consistently
co-amplified with CCND1 and expressed at higher levels in breast cancers
harbouring 11q13 amplification, suggesting that CTTN may also constitute one of
the drivers of this amplicon. CTTN expression is not associated with the outcome 
of breast cancer patients treated with anthracycline-based chemotherapy.

PMID: 20213079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Prostate. 2010 Jun 15;70(9):934-51. doi: 10.1002/pros.21128.

Characterization of cis elements of the probasin promoter necessary for
prostate-specific gene expression.

Zhang J(1), Gao N, DeGraff DJ, Yu X, Sun Q, Case TC, Kasper S, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee.

BACKGROUND: The androgen-regulated probasin (PB) promoter has been used
extensively to target transgenes to the prostate in transgenic mice; however,
limited data exist on the mechanism that dictates prostate-specific gene
expression. Tissue-specific gene expression involves synergistic effects among
transcription factors associated in a complex bound to cis-acting DNA elements.
METHODS: Using comprehensive linker scan mutagenesis, enzyme mobility shift and
supershift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and transgenic animal studies, 
we have extensively characterized the prostate-specific PB promoter.
RESULTS: We identified a series of nonreceptor transcription factors that are
bound to the prostate-specific rat PB promoter. These factors include several
ubiquitously distributed proteins known to participate in steroid
receptor-mediated transcription. In addition, we identified two tissue-specific
DNA elements that are crucial in directing prostate-specific PB expression, and
confirmed the functional importance of both elements in transgenic animal
studies. These two elements are functionally interchangeable and can be bound by 
multiple protein complexes, including the forkhead transcription factor FoxA1, a 
"pioneer factor" that has a restricted distribution to some cells type that are
ectoderm and endoderm in origin. Using transgenic mice, we further demonstrate
that the minimal PB promoter region (-244/-96 bp) that encompasses these
tissue-specific elements results in prostate-specific gene expression in
transgenic mice, contains androgen receptor and FoxA1-binding sites, as well as
ubiquitous transcription factor binding sites.
CONCLUSION: We propose that these sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins,
including tissue-restricted and ubiquitous factors, create the first level of
transcriptional control, which responds to intracellular pathways that directs
prostate-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3712623
PMID: 20209642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):343-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.545. Epub 2010 Mar 7.

Nucleosome dynamics define transcriptional enhancers.

He HH(1), Meyer CA, Shin H, Bailey ST, Wei G, Wang Q, Zhang Y, Xu K, Ni M, Lupien
M, Mieczkowski P, Lieb JD, Zhao K, Brown M, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2010 Apr;42(4):282-4.

Chromatin plays a central role in eukaryotic gene regulation. We performed
genome-wide mapping of epigenetically marked nucleosomes to determine their
position both near transcription start sites and at distal regulatory elements,
including enhancers. In prostate cancer cells, where androgen receptor binds
primarily to enhancers, we found that androgen treatment dismisses a central
nucleosome present at androgen receptor binding sites that is flanked by a pair
of marked nucleosomes. A new quantitative model built on the behavior of such
nucleosome pairs correctly identified regions bound by the regulators of the
immediate androgen response, including androgen receptor and FOXA1. More
importantly, this model also correctly predicted previously unidentified binding 
sites for other transcription factors present after prolonged androgen
stimulation, including OCT1 and NKX3-1. Therefore, quantitative modeling of
enhancer structure provides a powerful predictive method to infer the identity of
transcription factors involved in cellular responses to specific stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2932437
PMID: 20208536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Oncol Lett. 2010 Mar;1(2):319-325. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Sonic Hedgehog pathway activity in prostate cancer.

Bragina O(1), Njunkova N, Sergejeva S, Järvekülg L, Kogerman P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Technomedicum, Tallinn
University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia.

Abnormal activation of the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway has been
demonstrated in a number of human tumors, including prostate cancer. The study
aimed to assess the activity of Shh pathway components (Shh, Gli1, Gli2 and
Gli3), as well as the proliferation markers FoxA1 and Notch1 during cancer
progression in the transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP). We
evaluated changes in respective proteins by immunohistochemistry at three time
points (12, 17 and 21 weeks of age) in the tissue of TRAMP and C57Bl/6 mice.
Moreover, the expression of mRNA of these proteins was assessed. The present
study shows a significant age-dependent increase in the number of Shh, Gli1, Gli3
and FoxA1-positive prostate cells and a decrease in Gli2-positive cells in TRAMP.
The study also supports the hypothesis that the development of prostate cancer
and its metastasis is associated with activation of the Shh signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3436354
PMID: 22966302  [PubMed]


392. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;24(4):859-72. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0499. Epub 2010 Feb
24.

Global characterization of transcriptional impact of the SRC-3 coregulator.

Lanz RB(1), Bulynko Y, Malovannaya A, Labhart P, Wang L, Li W, Qin J, Harper M,
O'Malley BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The nuclear receptor and bona fide oncogene, steroid receptor coactivator-3
(SRC-3, AIB1), acts as a master transcriptional regulator of breast cancer by
transducing growth signals via the estrogen receptor alpha (ER). In this resource
paper, we present the genome-wide localization analysis of SRC-3 chromatin
affinity sites in MCF-7 human breast cancer chromatin and compare the cis binding
sites to global cartographies for ER and FoxA1. By correlating their gene
proximal binding sites to integrated gene expression signatures, and in
combination with gene ontology analyses, we provide a functional classification
of estradiol-induced gene regulation that further highlights an intricate
transcriptional control of interdependent cellular pathways by SRC-3.
Furthermore, by presenting proteomics analyses of in vivo SRC-3- and
ER-associated proteins, we give strong evidence to support the idea that the
interpretative power of SRC-3 in estrogen signaling is mediated through the
formation of distinct, cell state-dependent protein complexes. Altogether, we
present the first approach in complementary comparative analyses that converges
results obtained by three discovery-driven methods (cistromics, transcriptomics, 
and proteomics) into testable hypotheses, thus providing a valuable resource for 
follow-up studies that further our understanding of estrogen signaling in human
diseases in general and breast cancer in particular.

PMCID: PMC2852354
PMID: 20181721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):2115-25. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2979. Epub
2010 Feb 16.

Loss of FOXA1/2 is essential for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
pancreatic cancer.

Song Y(1), Washington MK, Crawford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York
11794-8651, USA.

FOXA1 and FOXA2, members of the forkhead transcription factor family, are
critical for epithelial differentiation in many endoderm-derived organs,
including the pancreas. However, their role in tumor progression is largely
unknown. Here, we identified FOXA1 and FOXA2 as important antagonists of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) through their positive regulation of E-cadherin and maintenance of the
epithelial phenotype. In human PDA samples, FOXA1/2 are expressed in all
epithelia from normal to well-differentiated cancer cells, but are lost in
undifferentiated cancer cells. In PDA cell lines, FOXA1/2 expression is
consistently suppressed in experimental EMT models and RNAi silencing of FOXA1/2 
alone is sufficient to induce EMT. Conversely, ectopic FOXA1/2 expression can
potently neutralize several EMT-related E-cadherin repressive mechanisms.
Finally, ectopic FOXA2 expression could reactivate E-cadherin expression in a PDA
cell line with extensive promoter hypermethylation. In fact,
demethylation-mediated reactivation of E-cadherin expression in these cells
required concurrent reactivation of endogenous FOXA2 expression. We conclude that
suppression of FOXA1/2 expression is both necessary and sufficient for EMT during
PDA malignant progression.

PMCID: PMC2831111
PMID: 20160041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Mar;15(3):535-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01023.x.

Gene expression signatures differentiate ovarian/peritoneal serous carcinoma from
breast carcinoma in effusions.

Davidson B(1), Stavnes HT, Holth A, Chen X, Yang Y, Shih IeM, Wang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
Oslo, Norway. bend@medisin.uio.no

Ovarian/primary peritoneal carcinoma and breast carcinoma are the gynaecological 
cancers that most frequently involve the serosal cavities.With the objective of
improving on the limited diagnostic panel currently available for the
differential diagnosis of these two malignancies,as well as to define
tumour-specific biological targets, we compared their global gene expression
patterns. Gene expression profiles of 10 serous ovarian/peritoneal and eight
ductal breast carcinoma effusions were analysed using the HumanRef-8 BeadChip
from Illumina.Differentially expressed candidate genes were validated using
quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering using all 54,675 genes in the array separated ovarian from breast
carcinoma samples. We identified 288 unique probes that were significantly
differentially expressed in the two cancers by greater than 3.5-fold, of which 81
and 207 were overexpressed in breast and ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma,
respectively. SAM analysis identified 1078 differentially expressed probes with
false discovery rate less than 0.05. Genes overexpressed in breast carcinoma
included TFF1, TFF3, FOXA1, CA12, GATA3, SDC1, PITX1, TH, EHFD1, EFEMP1, TOB1 and
KLF2. Genes overexpressed in ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma included SPON1, RBP1,
MFGE8, TM4SF12, MMP7, KLK5/6/7, FOLR1/3,PAX8, APOL2 and NRCAM. The differential
expression of 14 genes was validated by quantitative real-time PCR, and
differences in 5 gene products were confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Expression
profiling distinguishes ovarian/peritoneal carcinoma from breast carcinoma and
identifies genes that are differentially expressed in these two tumour types. The
molecular signatures unique to these cancers may facilitate their differential
diagnosis and may provide a molecular basis for therapeutic target discovery.

PMCID: PMC3922375
PMID: 20132413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Dev Dyn. 2010 Mar;239(3):980-6. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22217.

Dynamic expression of Groucho-related genes Grg1 and Grg3 in foregut endoderm and
antagonism of differentiation.

Santisteban P(1), Recacha P, Metzger DE, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Alberto Sols Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

While much is known about Groucho corepressors in Drosophila development, less is
known about Grg homologs in mammalian embryogenesis. The transcription factors
FoxA1 and FoxA2 are redundantly necessary for liver-inductive competence of the
endoderm, and recently we found that FoxA factors bind Grg3, recruit the
corepressor to FoxA target genes, and cause transcriptional repression, when Grg3
is ectopically expressed in adult liver cell lines that express little or no
endogenous Grg. Unexpectedly, we now find that Grg1 and Grg3 mRNAs are
co-expressed with FoxA factors in the foregut endoderm, prior to liver
differentiation, though only Grg3 protein is expressed there. Grg3 mRNA and
protein are extinguished at the onset of liver differentiation. Lentiviral
delivery of Grg3 to explants of foregut endoderm suppresses liver gene induction.
We suggest that Grg expression in the endoderm helps suppress the liver program
and find that endodermal competence involves a balance between activators and
corepressors.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3071952
PMID: 20108349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):685-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1530. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Prognosis of hormone-dependent breast cancers: implications of the presence of
dysfunctional transcriptional networks activated by insulin via the immune
transcription factor T-bet.

McCune K(1), Bhat-Nakshatri P, Thorat MA, Nephew KP, Badve S, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha)-positive breast cancers that co-express
transcription factors GATA-3 and FOXA1 have a favorable prognosis. These
transcription factors form an autoregulatory hormonal network that influences
estrogen responsiveness and sensitivity to hormonal therapy. Disruption of this
network may be a mechanism whereby ERalpha-positive breast cancers become
resistant to therapy. The transcription factor T-bet is a negative regulator of
GATA-3 in the immune system. In this study, we report that insulin increases the 
expression of T-bet in breast cancer cells, which correlates with reduced
expression of GATA-3, FOXA1, and the ERalpha:FOXA1:GATA-3 target gene GREB-1. The
effects of insulin on GATA-3 and FOXA1 could be recapitulated through
overexpression of T-bet in MCF-7 cells (MCF-7-T-bet). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed reduced ERalpha binding to GREB-1 enhancer
regions in MCF-7-T-bet cells and in insulin-treated MCF-7 cells. MCF-7-T-bet
cells were resistant to tamoxifen in the presence of insulin and displayed
prolonged extracellular signal-regulated kinase and AKT activation in response to
epidermal growth factor treatment. ERalpha-positive cells with intrinsic
tamoxifen resistance as well as MCF-7 cells with acquired tamoxifen and
fulvestrant resistance expressed elevated levels of T-bet and/or reduced levels
of FOXA1 and GATA-3. Analysis of publicly available databases revealed
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-positive breast cancers expressing lower levels of FOXA1
(P = 0.0137) and GATA-3 (P = 0.0063) compared with
ERalpha-positive/T-bet-negative breast cancers. Thus, T-bet expression in primary
tumors and circulating insulin levels may serve as surrogate biomarkers to
identify ERalpha-positive breast cancers with a dysfunctional hormonal network,
enhanced growth factor signaling, and resistance to hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2807987
PMID: 20068169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;70(1):240-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2904.

ErbB3 binding protein 1 represses metastasis-promoting gene anterior gradient
protein 2 in prostate cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Ali TZ, Zhou H, D'Souza DR, Lu Y, Jaffe J, Liu Z, Passaniti A,
Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. Yzhan001@umaryland.edu

Dysregulation of the developmental gene anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2) has
been associated with a metastatic phenotype, but its mechanism of action and
control in prostate cancers is unknown. In this study, we show that
overexpression of AGR2 promotes the motility and invasiveness of nonmetastatic
LNCaP tumor cells, whereas silencing of AGR2 in the metastatic derivative C4-2B
blocks invasive behavior. ErbB3 binding protein 1 (EBP1), a putative repressor of
AGR2, is attenuated in prostate cancer. We show that the anti-invasive effect of 
EBP1 occurs, at least in part, through its ability to inhibit AGR2 expression.
Mechanistic investigations indicate that EBP1 downregulates Foxa1- and
Foxa2-stimulated AGR2 transcription and decreases metastatic behavior. In
contrast, EBP1 ablation upregulates AGR2 via Foxa1- and Foxa2-stimulated AGR2
promoter activity and increases metastatic behavior. In both prostate cell lines 
and primary tumors, we documented an inverse correlation between EBP1 and AGR2
levels. Collectively, our results reveal an EBP1-Foxa-AGR2 signaling circuit with
functional significance in metastatic prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3724404
PMID: 20048076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):321-30.

Forkhead box A1 transcriptional pathway in KRT7-expressing esophageal squamous
cell carcinomas with extensive lymph node metastasis.

Sano M(1), Aoyagi K, Takahashi H, Kawamura T, Mabuchi T, Igaki H, Tachimori Y,
Kato H, Ochiai A, Honda H, Nimura Y, Nagino M, Yoshida T, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, Department of Surgery, National Cancer Center Research
Institute and Central Hospital, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

Prognosis of cancers with lymph node metastasis is known to be very poor;
however, it is still controversial whether metastatic potential can be evaluated 
by expression profiles of primary tumors. Therefore, to address this issue, we
compared gene expression profiles of 24 esophageal squamous cell carcinomas
(ESCCs) with extensive lymph node metastasis and 11 ESCCs with no metastatic
lymph node. However, there was no gene cluster distinguishing these two groups,
suggesting that lymph node metastasis-associated genes are varied depending on
cases or subgroups. Therefore, we applied a recently developed filtering method
(S2N') to identify such genes, and successfully extracted 209 genes associated
with node status. Among them, over-expression of CALB1, KRT7/CK7, MUC1 and
CEA/CEACAM5 in poor prognostic cases with metastatic lymph nodes was confirmed in
two sets of ESCCs by RT-PCR. Each often seemed to have glandular cell
type-characteristics in both the gene expression and morphology. It was also
revealed that FOXA1 siRNA treatment of esophageal cancer cells reduced the mRNA
level of both KRT7 and a stabilizer of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)
regulator LOXL2, and that both FOXA1 and LOXL2 siRNAs reduced invasion and
migration of ESCC cells. In 15 KRT7-expressing ESCCs with metastatic lymph nodes,
60% expressed FOXA1 and 33% expressed both FOXA1 and LOXL2. These results suggest
that FOXA1 induces not only KRT7 but also LOXL2 in a subset of poor prognostic
ESCCs with metastatic lymph nodes, and it is also plausible, that other FOXA1
downstream genes could be therapeutic targets of poor prognostic ESCCs.

PMID: 20043065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 5;107(1):98-103. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0902001107.
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

A FOXA1-binding enhancer regulates Hoxb13 expression in the prostate gland.

McMullin RP(1), Dobi A, Mutton LN, Orosz A, Maheshwari S, Shashikant CS,
Bieberich CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Maryland Baltimore County,
Baltimore, MD 21250, USA.

Hoxb13 is robustly transcribed in derivatives of posterior endoderm including the
colon, rectum, and the prostate gland. Transcriptional activity in the prostate
persists unabated under conditions of androgen deprivation and throughout the
course of disease progression in a mouse prostate cancer model. To elucidate the 
molecular basis of prostate-restricted transcriptional activation of Hoxb13, a
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)-based reporter gene deletion analysis was
performed in transgenic mice. Two regions downstream of the Hoxb13 coding region 
were found to be required to support transcriptional activity in the prostate but
were completely dispensable for expression in the colon and rectum. Bioinformatic
analyses of one region identified a 37-bp element conserved in mammals. This
element, which bears two potential binding sites for Forkhead class transcription
factors, is occupied by FOXA1 in a human prostate cancer cell line. Precise
replacement of this enhancer with an extended LoxP site in the context of a
218,555-bp BAC reporter nearly extinguished Hoxb13-mediated transcriptional
activity in the mouse prostate. These data demonstrate that FOXA1 directly
regulates HOXB13 in human prostate epithelial cells, and show that this
prostate-specific regulatory mechanism is conserved in mice.

PMCID: PMC2806740
PMID: 20018680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 15;23(24):2824-38. doi: 10.1101/gad.1861209.

Transcriptional competence and the active marking of tissue-specific enhancers by
defined transcription factors in embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.

Xu J(1), Watts JA, Pope SD, Gadue P, Kamps M, Plath K, Zaret KS, Smale ST.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California at Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2009 Dec 15;23(24):2793-8.

We reported previously that well-characterized enhancers but not promoters for
typical tissue-specific genes, including the classic Alb1 gene, contain
unmethylated CpG dinucleotides and evidence of pioneer factor interactions in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. These properties, which are distinct from the bivalent
histone modification domains that characterize the promoters of genes involved in
developmental decisions, raise the possibility that genes expressed only in
differentiated cells may need to be marked at the pluripotent stage. Here, we
demonstrate that the forkhead family member FoxD3 is essential for the
unmethylated mark observed at the Alb1 enhancer in ES cells, with FoxA1 replacing
FoxD3 following differentiation into endoderm. Up-regulation of FoxD3 and loss of
CpG methylation at the Alb1 enhancer accompanied the reprogramming of mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) into induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. Studies
of two genes expressed in specific hematopoietic lineages revealed that the
establishment of enhancer marks in ES cells and iPS cells can be regulated both
positively and negatively. Furthermore, the absence of a pre-established mark
consistently resulted in resistance to transcriptional activation in the
repressive chromatin environment that characterizes differentiated cells. These
results support the hypothesis that pluripotency and successful reprogramming may
be critically dependent on the marking of enhancers for many or all
tissue-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2800090
PMID: 20008934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mod Pathol. 2010 Feb;23(2):270-5. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.172. Epub 2009 Nov 
27.

Expression of Forkhead-box protein A1, a marker of luminal A type breast cancer, 
parallels low Oncotype DX 21-gene recurrence scores.

Ademuyiwa FO(1), Thorat MA, Jain RK, Nakshatri H, Badve S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University, School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
IN 46202, USA.

The Oncotype DX assay is one of the molecular tests that provide predictive and
prognostic information to breast cancer patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive and node-negative disease. This study evaluates the association of 
Forkhead-box protein A1 (FOXA1) and GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) expressions
with Oncotype DX recurrences scores in 77 cases of patients with ER-positive
node-negative breast carcinomas diagnosed at Indiana University. The data were
correlated with patient age, tumor size, histologic type, Scarff-Bloom-Richardson
score, histologic grade, and progesterone receptor status. The median FOXA1 and
GATA3 scores were 240 and 200, respectively. The Oncotype DX recurrence scores
were low in 57%, intermediate in 30%, and high in 13% of cases. FOXA1 expression 
correlated negatively with Oncotype DX recurrence scores (P=0.004), and
histologic type (P=0.0004). Oncotype DX recurrences score also correlated
negatively with progesterone receptor (P=0.035) with 100% of progesterone
receptor-negative cases having high or intermediate Oncotype DX scores. FOXA1 and
GATA3 expressions correlated positively (P=0.014). The correlation between FOXA1 
expression and Oncotype DX recurrence scores remained significant after adjusting
for multiple comparisons and controlling for confounders such as histological
type, grade, and progesterone receptor. A statistically significant correlation
between the Oncotype DX recurrence scores and FOXA1 expression in our diverse
cohort of ER-positive breast cancer patients was observed. We propose that this
may represent a more cost-effective strategy to further risk stratify patients
with good prognosis in whom chemotherapy may be omitted. To confirm these
findings, further studies in a larger cohort of patients are warranted.

PMID: 19946260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Genome Biol. 2009;10(11):R129. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-11-r129. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Differential binding and co-binding pattern of FOXA1 and FOXA3 and their relation
to H3K4me3 in HepG2 cells revealed by ChIP-seq.

Motallebipour M(1), Ameur A, Reddy Bysani MS, Patra K, Wallerman O, Mangion J,
Barker MA, McKernan KJ, Komorowski J, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Rudbeck Laboratory, 
Dag Hammarskjölds väg 20, Uppsala SE-75185, Sweden.
mehdi.motallebipour@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The forkhead box/winged helix family members FOXA1, FOXA2, and FOXA3 
are of high importance in development and specification of the hepatic linage and
the continued expression of liver-specific genes.
RESULTS: Here, we present a genome-wide location analysis of FOXA1 and FOXA3
binding sites in HepG2 cells through chromatin immunoprecipitation with detection
by sequencing (ChIP-seq) studies and compare these with our previous results on
FOXA2. We found that these factors often bind close to each other in different
combinations and consecutive immunoprecipitation of chromatin for one and then a 
second factor (ChIP-reChIP) shows that this occurs in the same cell and on the
same DNA molecule, suggestive of molecular interactions. Using
co-immunoprecipitation, we further show that FOXA2 interacts with both FOXA1 and 
FOXA3 in vivo, while FOXA1 and FOXA3 do not appear to interact. Additionally, we 
detected diverse patterns of trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4me3)
at transcriptional start sites and directionality of this modification at FOXA
binding sites. Using the sequence reads at polymorphic positions, we were able to
predict allele specific binding for FOXA1, FOXA3, and H3K4me3. Finally, several
SNPs associated with diseases and quantitative traits were located in the
enriched regions.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that ChIP-seq can be used not only to create gene regulatory
maps but also to predict molecular interactions and to inform on the mechanisms
for common quantitative variation.

PMCID: PMC3091322
PMID: 19919681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;30(2):399-412. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00907-09. Epub 2009 Nov
16.

Histone deacetylase 7 and FoxA1 in estrogen-mediated repression of RPRM.

Malik S(1), Jiang S, Garee JP, Verdin E, Lee AV, O'Malley BW, Zhang M, Belaguli
NS, Oesterreich S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 3 Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Activation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) results in both induction and
repression of gene transcription; while mechanistic details of estrogen induction
are well described, details of repression remain largely unknown. We
characterized several ERalpha-repressed targets and examined in detail the
mechanism for estrogen repression of Reprimo (RPRM), a cell cycle inhibitor.
Estrogen repression of RPRM is rapid and robust and requires a tripartite
interaction between ERalpha, histone deacetylase 7 (HDAC7), and FoxA1. HDAC7 is
the critical HDAC needed for repression of RPRM; it can bind to ERalpha and
represses ERalpha's transcriptional activity--this repression does not require
HDAC7's deacetylase activity. We further show that the chromatin pioneer factor
FoxA1, well known for its role in estrogen induction of genes, is recruited to
the RPRM promoter, is necessary for repression of RPRM, and interacts with HDAC7.
Like other FoxA1 recruitment sites, the RPRM promoter is characterized by
H3K4me1/me2. Estrogen treatment causes decreases in H3K4me1/me2 and release of
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) from the RPRM proximal promoter. Overall, these data
implicate a novel role for HDAC7 and FoxA1 in estrogen repression of RPRM, a
mechanism which could potentially be generalized to many more estrogen-repressed 
genes and hence be important in both normal physiology and pathological
processes.

PMCID: PMC2798473
PMID: 19917725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Sep;19(9):1365-74. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0386.

Increased levels of FoxA1 transcription factor in pluripotent P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells stimulate neural differentiation.

Tan Y(1), Xie Z, Ding M, Wang Z, Yu Q, Meng L, Zhu H, Huang X, Yu L, Meng X, Chen
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Center and State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and
Chemometrics, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China. yjtan@hnu.cn

Transcription factor FoxA1 plays a critical role during embryonic development and
is activated during retinoic acid (RA)-induced neural differentiation of
pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma cells at the early stage, which is marked by 
decreased expression of Nanog and increased expression of neural stem cell marker
Nestin. To further understand how FoxA1 mediates neural differentiation, we have 
overexpressed FoxA1 through an adenovirus vector in P19 cells and identified that
early neurogenesis-related sonic hedgehog (Shh) gene is activated directly by
FoxA1. Knockdown of FoxA1 expression during P19 cell neural differentiation
results in prevention of Shh and Nestin induction. FoxA1 binds to Shh promoter at
-486 to -462 bp region and activates the promoter in cotransfection assays.
Furthermore, overexpression of FoxA1 alone in P19 cells stimulates expression of 
Nestin and results in decreased protein levels of Nanog. During RA-induced P19
cell differentiation, elevated levels of FoxA1 increase the population of
neurons, evidenced by stimulated expression of neuron-specific Neurofilament-1
and Tubulin betaIII. Together, our results suggest a critical involvement of
FoxA1 in stimulating neural differentiation of pluripotent stem cells at early
stages.

PMID: 19916800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):464-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.063149. Epub 2009
Nov 5.

Stable chromatin binding prevents FoxA acetylation, preserving FoxA chromatin
remodeling.

Kohler S(1), Cirillo LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

FoxA1-3 (formerly HNF3alpha, -beta, and -gamma), members of the FoxA subfamily of
forkhead transcription factors, function as initial chromatin-binding and
chromatin-remodeling factors in a variety of tissues, including liver and
pancreas. Despite essential roles in development and metabolism, regulation of
FoxA factors is not well understood. This study examines a potential role for
acetylation in the regulation of FoxA chromatin binding and remodeling. Using in 
silico analysis, we have identified 11 putative p300 acetylation sites within
FoxA1, five of which are located within wings 1 and 2 of its winged-helix
DNA-binding domain. These polypeptide structures stabilize FoxA DNA and chromatin
binding, and we have demonstrated that acetylation attenuates FoxA binding to DNA
and diminishes its ability to remodel chromatin. FoxA acetylation is inhibited by
chromatin binding. We propose a model whereby stable chromatin binding protects
the FoxA DNA-binding domain from acetylation to preserve chromatin binding and
remodeling by FoxA factors in the absence of extracellular cues.

PMCID: PMC2804194
PMID: 19897491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):41-54. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082694ar.

Characterization of mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation into the pancreatic
lineage in vitro by transcriptional profiling, quantitative RT-PCR and
immunocytochemistry.

Rolletschek A(1), Schroeder IS, Schulz H, Hummel O, Huebner N, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)In vitro Differentiation Group, Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop
Plant Research (IPK), Gatersleben, Germany.

We have previously shown that mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells differentiate into 
insulin-positive cells via multi-lineage progenitors. Here, we used Affymetrix
chips and quantitative RT-PCR analysis to determine transcriptional profiles of
undifferentiated wildtype (wt) and Pax4 expressing (Pax4+) ES cells and
differentiated cells of committed progenitor and advanced stages. From
undifferentiated to the committed stage, 237 (wt) and 263 (Pax4+) transcripts
were 5- or more-fold up-regulated, whereas from the committed to the advanced
stage, 28 (wt) and 5 (Pax4+) transcripts, respectively, were two- or more-fold
up-regulated. Transcripts were classified into main subclasses including
transcriptional regulation, signalling/growth factors, adhesion/extracellular
matrix, membrane/transport, metabolism and organogenesis. Remarkably,
endoderm-specific Sox17 and early pancreas-specific Isl1 transcripts were
up-regulated at an earlier stage of multi-lineage progenitors, whereas highly
up-regulated probe sets and transcripts of genes involved in endoderm,
pancreatic, hepatic, angiogenic and neural differentiation were detected at the
committed progenitor stage. Pax4+ cells showed specific differences in transcript
up-regulation and a lower amount of up-regulated neural-specific transcripts in
comparison to wt cells, but no enhanced gene expression complexity.
Immunocytochemical analysis of selected proteins involved in endoderm and
pancreatic differentiation, such as chromogranin B, transthyretin, Foxa1 and
neuronatin revealed co-expression with insulin- or C-peptide-positive cells. The 
comparison of transcript profiles of ES cells differentiating in vitro with those
of the embryonic and adult pancreas in vivo suggested that in vitro
differentiated cells resemble an embryonal stage of development, supporting the
view that ES-derived pancreatic cells are unable to complete pancreatic
differentiation in vitro.

PMID: 19876843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Prostate. 2010 Mar 1;70(4):353-61. doi: 10.1002/pros.21069.

Overexpression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha induces apoptosis through the 
upregulation and accumulation of cytoplasmic p53 in prostate cancer cells.

Lee HJ(1), Chattopadhyay S, Yoon WH, Bahk JY, Kim TH, Kang HS, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha (HNF-3alpha) has been known to act
as a repressor in the pathogenesis of many cancers. Herein, we investigated the
effect of HNF-3alpha overexpression in prostate cancer cells.
METHODS: HNF-3alpha was overexpressed in prostate cancer cells using an
adenovirus recombinant expressing wild-type HNF-3alpha. The apoptosis of prostate
cancer cells was determined by TUNEL, FACS, and caspase activity analyses.
RESULTS: Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of HNF-3alpha caused cell death in
prostate cancer cells as assessed by changes in cellular and nuclear morphology, 
TUNEL analysis, and caspase activations. Furthermore, FACS analysis showed an
increased sub-G1 phase of cell cycle as well as the G2/M phase with a
corresponding decrease in S phases. HNF-3alpha overexpression caused the
upregulation of p53 protein and its accumulation, together with HNF-3alpha, in
the cytoplasm. It also causes Bax protein to localize to the
mitochondria-enriched fraction. These findings suggest that multiple apoptotic
pathways seem to be involved in the HNF-3alpha-induced cell death: pathways
involving the accumulation of p53 protein in the cytoplasm and subsequent
cytochrome c release, and other pathways involving death receptor signaling and
caspase-8 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the current study suggest a novel function of
HNF-3alpha as a killer of malignant prostate cancer cells, which reveals
HNF-3alpha as a promising therapeutic molecule for prostate cancers.

Prostate 70: 353-361, 2010. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19866472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):3032-42. doi: 10.1002/stem.244.

Lineage enforcement by inductive mesenchyme on adult epithelial stem cells across
developmental germ layers.

Taylor RA(1), Wang H, Wilkinson SE, Richards MG, Britt KL, Vaillant F, Lindeman
GJ, Visvader JE, Cunha GR, St John J, Risbridger GP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Urological Research, Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash
University, Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia.

During development, cell differentiation is accompanied by the progressive loss
of pluripotent gene expression and developmental potential, although
de-differentiation in specialized cells can be induced by reprogramming
strategies, indicating that transdifferentiation potential is retained in adult
cells. The stromal niche provides differentiating cues to epithelial stem cells
(SCs), but current evidence is restricted to tissue types within the same
developmental germ layer lineage. Anticipating the use of adult SCs for tissue
regeneration, we examined if stroma can enforce lineage commitment across germ
layer boundaries and promote transdifferentiation of adult epithelial SCs. Here, 
we report tissue-specific mesenchyme instructing epithelial cells from a
different germ layer origin to express dual phenotypes. Prostatic stroma induced 
mammary epithelia (or enriched Lin(-)CD29(HI)CD24(+/MOD) mammary SCs) to generate
glandular epithelia expressing both prostatic and mammary markers such as steroid
hormone receptors and transcription factors including Foxa1, Nkx3.1, and GATA-3. 
Array data implicated Hh and Wnt pathways in mediating stromal-epithelial
interactions (validated by increased Cyclin D1 expression). Other recombinants of
prostatic mesenchyme and skin epithelia, or preputial gland mesenchyme and
bladder or esophageal epithelia, showed foci expressing new markers adjacent to
the original epithelial differentiation (e.g., sebaceous cells within bladder
urothelium), confirming altered lineage specification induced by stroma and
evidence of cross-germ layer transdifferentiation. Thus, stromal cell niche is
critical in maintaining (or redirecting) differentiation in adult epithelia. In
order to use adult epithelial SCs in regenerative medicine, we must additionally 
regulate their intrinsic properties to prevent (or enable) transdifferentiation
in specified SC niches.

PMID: 19862839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Dec;23(12):2038-47. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0092. Epub 2009 Oct
21.

Upstream stimulatory factor 2, a novel FoxA1-interacting protein, is involved in 
prostate-specific gene expression.

Sun Q(1), Yu X, Degraff DJ, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. qian.s.sun@vanderbilt.edu

The forkhead protein A1 (FoxA1) is critical for the androgenic regulation of
prostate-specific promoters. Prostate tissue rescued from FoxA1 knockout mice
exhibits abnormal prostate development, typified by the absence of expression of 
differentiation markers and inability to engage in secretion. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and coimmunoprecipitation studies revealed that FoxA1 is one 
of the earliest transcription factors that binds to prostate-specific promoters, 
and that a direct protein-protein interaction occurs between FoxA1 and androgen
receptor. Interestingly, evidence of the interaction of FoxA1 with other
transcription factors is lacking. The upstream stimulatory factor 2 (USF2), an
E-box-binding transcription factor of the basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine-zipper
family, binds to a consensus DNA sequence similar to FoxA1. Our in vitro and in
vivo studies demonstrate the binding of USF2 to prostate-specific gene promoters 
including the probasin promoter, spermine-binding protein promoter, and
prostate-specific antigen core enhancer. Furthermore, we show a direct physical
interaction between FoxA1 and USF2 through the use of immunoprecipitation and
glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assays. This interaction is mediated via the 
forkhead DNA-binding domain of FoxA1 and the DNA-binding domain of USF2. In
summary, these data indicate that USF2 is one of the components of the
FoxA1/androgen receptor transcriptional protein complex that contributes to the
expression of androgen-regulated and prostate-specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2796152
PMID: 19846536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jan 15;314(1):17-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.09.011.
Epub 2009 Sep 20.

Valproic acid restores ER alpha and antiestrogen sensitivity to ER alpha-negative
breast cancer cells.

Fortunati N(1), Bertino S, Costantino L, De Bortoli M, Compagnone A, Bandino A,
Catalano MG, Boccuzzi G.

Author information: 
(1)Oncological Endocrinology, AUO San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDIs) are valuable drugs in breast cancer where
estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha) can be silenced by epigenetic modifications.
We report the effect of the clinically available HDI, valproic acid (VPA), on ER 
alpha expression and function in ER-negative breast cancer cells, MDA-MB-231. VPA
induced ER alpha mRNA and protein, while did not modify ER beta. In VPA-treated
cells, we also observed: (1) a correct transcriptional response to estradiol
after transfection with the luciferase gene under the control of an
estrogen-responsive minimal promoter (ERE-TKluc); (2) increased expression of the
ER-related transcription factor FoxA1; (3) estradiol-induced up-regulation of
several estrogen-regulated genes (e.g. pS2, progesterone receptor); (4)
inhibitory effect of tamoxifen on cell growth. In conclusion, the HDI VPA,
inducing ER alpha and FoxA1, confers to MDA-MB 231 cells an estrogen-sensitive
"phenotype", restoring their sensitivity to antiestrogen therapy.

PMID: 19772891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Gastroenterology. 2009 Dec;137(6):2052-62. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.059.
Epub 2009 Sep 6.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 control the differentiation of goblet and enteroendocrine L- and 
D-cells in mice.

Ye DZ(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The winged helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are
expressed in all epithelia of the gastrointestinal tract from its embryonic
origin into adulthood. In vitro studies have shown that Foxa1/a2 can
transactivate the promoters of Mucin 2 (Muc2), which is expressed in goblet
cells, and of preproglucagon, which is expressed in enteroendocrine cells. These 
findings suggest Foxa1/a2 as critical factors in the differentiation of gut
epithelial cells.
METHODS: Mice with intestine-specific simultaneous deletion of Foxa1 and Foxa2
were derived using the Cre-loxP system and analyzed using histologic and
molecular means.
RESULTS: Both Foxa1 and Foxa2 were deleted successfully in the epithelia of the
small intestine and colon using Villin-Cre mice. Immunohistochemical staining
showed that Foxa1/a2 mutants lack glucagon-like peptide-1- and
peptide-2-expressing cells (L-cells), and have reduced numbers of somatostatin
(D-cells) and peptide YY-expressing cells (L-cells). Preproglucagon,
somatostatin, and peptide YY messenger RNA (mRNA) levels also were reduced
significantly in Foxa1/a2 mutants. Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential regulators
of these enteroendocrine lineages in vivo. The mRNA levels of transcription
factors Islet-1 and Pax6 were reduced significantly in the small intestine,
showing that Foxa1 and Foxa2 impact on a transcription factor network in the
enteroendocrine lineage. In addition, deletion of Foxa1/a2 caused a reduction in 
goblet cell number with altered expression of the secretory mucins Muc2, Mucin5b,
Mucin5ac, and Mucin 6.
CONCLUSIONS: The winged helix factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential members of
the transcription factor network that govern secretory cell differentiation in
the mammalian gastrointestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC2789913
PMID: 19737569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;651:58-65.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 transcription factors regulate differentiation of midbrain
dopaminergic neurons.

Ang SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)NIMR, The Rigeway, London, NW7 1AA. sang@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Midbrain dopaminergic neurons (mDA), comprising the substanti nigra pars compacta
(A8), the ventral tegmental area (A9) and the retrorubal field (A10) subgroups,
are generated from floor plate progenitors, rostral to the isthmic boundary.
Floor plate progenitors are specified to become mDA progenitors between embryonic
days 8.0 and 10.5. Subsequently these progenitors undergo neuronal
differentiation in two phases, termed early and late differentiation to generate 
immature and mature neurons respectively. Genes that regulate specification,
early and late phases of differentiation ofmDA cells have recently been
identified. Among them, the forkhead winged helix transcription factors Foxal and
Foxa2 (Foxa1/2), have been shown to have essential and dose dependent roles at
multiple phases of development. In this chapter, I will summarize recent studies 
demonstrating a role for Foxa1/2 in regulating the neuronal specification and
differentiation ofmDA progenitors and conclude with projections on future
directions of this area of research.

PMID: 19731550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Oct;29(20):5413-25. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00368-09. Epub 2009 Aug 
17.

FoxA1 binding directs chromatin structure and the functional response of a
glucocorticoid receptor-regulated promoter.

Belikov S(1), Astrand C, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Medical Nobel Institute, Box
285, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Reconstitution of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-regulated mouse mammary tumor 
virus (MMTV) promoter in Xenopus oocytes was used to monitor the effects of
different transcription factor contexts. Three constitutively binding factors,
nuclear factor 1 (NF1), octamer transcription factor 1 (Oct1), and the Forkhead
box A1 (FoxA1), were shown to act in concert, to direct the chromatin structure, 
and to enhance the GR response. FoxA1 has a dominant effect in the absence of
hormone and induces a cluster of DNase I-hypersensitive sites in the segment
comprising bp -400 to +25. This FoxA1-mediated chromatin remodeling does not
induce MMTV transcription, as opposed to that of the GR. However, the robust
FoxA1-dependent chromatin opening has the following drastic functional
consequences on the hormone regulation: (i) GR-DNA binding is facilitated, as
revealed by dimethyl sulfate in vivo footprinting, leading to increased
hormone-induced transcription, and (ii) the GR antagonist RU486 is converted into
a partial agonist in the presence of FoxA1 via ligand-independent GR activation. 
We conclude that FoxA1 mediates a preset chromatin structure and directs a
context-specific response of a nuclear receptor. Furthermore, the alternative
nucleosome arrangement induced by GR and FoxA1 implies this to be determined by
constitutive binding of transcription factors rather than by the DNA sequence
itself.

PMCID: PMC2756877
PMID: 19687299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS Genet. 2009 Aug;5(8):e1000597. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000597. Epub 2009 
Aug 14.

Functional enhancers at the gene-poor 8q24 cancer-linked locus.

Jia L(1), Landan G, Pomerantz M, Jaschek R, Herman P, Reich D, Yan C, Khalid O,
Kantoff P, Oh W, Manak JR, Berman BP, Henderson BE, Frenkel B, Haiman CA,
Freedman M, Tanay A, Coetzee GA.

Author information: 
(1)USC/Norris Cancer Center, Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Multiple discrete regions at 8q24 were recently shown to contain alleles that
predispose to many cancers including prostate, breast, and colon. These regions
are far from any annotated gene and their biological activities have been
unknown. Here we profiled a 5-megabase chromatin segment encompassing all the
risk regions for RNA expression, histone modifications, and locations occupied by
RNA polymerase II and androgen receptor (AR). This led to the identification of
several transcriptional enhancers, which were verified using reporter assays. Two
enhancers in one risk region were occupied by AR and responded to androgen
treatment; one contained a single nucleotide polymorphism (rs11986220) that
resides within a FoxA1 binding site, with the prostate cancer risk allele
facilitating both stronger FoxA1 binding and stronger androgen responsiveness.
The study reported here exemplifies an approach that may be applied to any
risk-associated allele in non-protein coding regions as it emerges from
genome-wide association studies to better understand the genetic predisposition
of complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC2717370
PMID: 19680443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 25;106(34):14478-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900198106. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Chromosome 14 transfer and functional studies identify a candidate tumor
suppressor gene, mirror image polydactyly 1, in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Cheung AK(1), Lung HL, Ko JM, Cheng Y, Stanbridge EJ, Zabarovsky ER, Nicholls JM,
Chua D, Tsao SW, Guan XY, Lung ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Center for Cancer Research, Hong Kong University of 
Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, People's
Republic of China.

Chromosome 14 allelic loss is common in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and may
reflect essential tumor suppressor gene loss in tumorigenesis. An intact
chromosome 14 was transferred to an NPC cell line using a microcell-mediated
chromosome transfer approach. Microcell hybrids (MCHs) containing intact
exogenously transferred chromosome 14 were tumor suppressive in athymic mice,
demonstrating that intact chromosome 14 NPC MCHs are able to suppress tumor
growth in mice. Comparative analysis of these MCHs and their derived tumor
segregants identified 4 commonly eliminated tumor-suppressive CRs. Here we
provide functional evidence that a gene, Mirror-Image POLydactyly 1 (MIPOL1),
which maps within a single 14q13.1-13.3 CR and that hitherto has been reported to
be associated only with a developmental disorder, specifically suppresses in vivo
tumor formation. MIPOL1 gene expression is down-regulated in all NPC cell lines
and in approximately 63% of NPC tumors via promoter hypermethylation and allelic 
loss. SLC25A21 and FOXA1, 2 neighboring genes mapping to this region, did not
show this frequent down-regulated gene expression or promoter hypermethylation,
precluding possible global methylation effects and providing further evidence
that MIPOL1 plays a unique role in NPC. The protein localizes mainly to the
nucleus. Re-expression of MIPOL1 in the stable transfectants induces cell cycle
arrest. MIPOL1 tumor suppression is related to up-regulation of the
p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p27(KIP1) protein pathways. This study provides compelling
evidence that chromosome 14 harbors tumor suppressor genes associated with NPC
and that a candidate gene, MIPOL1, is associated with tumor development.

PMCID: PMC2732794
PMID: 19667180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Inflammation. 2009 Oct;32(5):322-32. doi: 10.1007/s10753-009-9139-x.

A role for forkhead box A1 in acute lung injury.

Song L(1), Zhang B, Feng Y, Luo X, Wei X, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Shock, Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

Forkhead box protein A1 (FoxA1) is an evolutionarily conserved winged helix
transcription factor with diverse regulatory functions. However, little is known 
about the role of FoxA1 in acute lung injury (ALI) and pulmonary cell injury. In 
this study, an in vivo model was employed whereby rats were administered an
intravenous injection of oleic acid (OA, 0.1 ml/kg), and alveolar type II
epithelial cells (AT-2 cells) injury was induced by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)) 
in vitro. OA injection resulted in lung injury and AT-2 cells apoptosis in vivo. 
OA injection and H(2)O(2) upregulated FoxA1 mRNA and protein in lung tissue of
the in vivo ALI model and in H(2)O(2) challenged AT-2 cells. Overexpression of
FoxA1 promoted apoptosis, whereas FoxA1 deficiency, induced by antisense
oligonucleotides, decreased AT-2 cells apoptosis induced by H(2)O(2), as shown by
flow cytometry. These results suggest that FoxA1 may play an important role in
ALI by promoting apoptosis of pulmonary epithelial cells.

PMID: 19649697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Cell. 2009 Jul 23;138(2):245-56. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.056.

Androgen receptor regulates a distinct transcription program in
androgen-independent prostate cancer.

Wang Q(1), Li W, Zhang Y, Yuan X, Xu K, Yu J, Chen Z, Beroukhim R, Wang H, Lupien
M, Wu T, Regan MM, Meyer CA, Carroll JS, Manrai AK, Jänne OA, Balk SP, Mehra R,
Han B, Chinnaiyan AM, Rubin MA, True L, Fiorentino M, Fiore C, Loda M, Kantoff
PW, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The evolution of prostate cancer from an androgen-dependent state to one that is 
androgen-independent marks its lethal progression. The androgen receptor (AR) is 
essential in both, though its function in androgen-independent cancers is poorly 
understood. We have defined the direct AR-dependent target genes in both
androgen-dependent and -independent cancer cells by generating AR-dependent gene 
expression profiles and AR cistromes. In contrast to what is found in
androgen-dependent cells, AR selectively upregulates M-phase cell-cycle genes in 
androgen-independent cells, including UBE2C, a gene that inactivates the M-phase 
checkpoint. We find that epigenetic marks at the UBE2C enhancer, notably histone 
H3K4 methylation and FoxA1 transcription factor binding, are present in
androgen-independent cells and direct AR-enhancer binding and UBE2C activation.
Thus, the role of AR in androgen-independent cancer cells is not to direct the
androgen-dependent gene expression program without androgen, but rather to
execute a distinct program resulting in androgen-independent growth.

PMCID: PMC2726827
PMID: 19632176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):386-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.006. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 function both upstream of and cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b 
in a feedforward loop promoting mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuron development.

Lin W(1), Metzakopian E, Mavromatakis YE, Gao N, Balaskas N, Sasaki H, Briscoe J,
Whitsett JA, Goulding M, Kaestner KH, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons control voluntary movement and reward based
behaviours. Their dysfunction can lead to neurological disorders, including
Parkinson's disease. These neurons are thought to arise from progenitors in the
floor plate of the caudal diencephalon and midbrain. Members of the Foxa family
of forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Foxa1 and Foxa2, have previously
been shown to regulate neuronal specification and differentiation of
mesodiencephalic progenitors. However, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are also expressed earlier
during regional specification of the rostral brain. In this paper, we have
examined the early function of Foxa1 and Foxa2 using conditional mutant mice. Our
studies show that Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively regulate Lmx1a and Lmx1b expression 
and inhibit Nkx2.2 expression in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic progenitors.
Subsequently, Foxa1 and Foxa2 function cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b to
regulate differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that Nkx2.2 and TH genes are likely
direct targets of Foxa1 and Foxa2 in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic cells in vivo.
Foxa1 and Foxa2 also inhibit GABAergic neuron differentiation by repressing the
Helt gene in the ventral midbrain. Our data therefore provide new insights into
the specification and differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons
and identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2 as essential regulators in these processes.

PMID: 19607821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(3):R40. doi: 10.1186/bcr2327. Epub 2009 Jun 23.

Expression of FOXA1 and GATA-3 in breast cancer: the prognostic significance in
hormone receptor-negative tumours.

Albergaria A(1), Paredes J, Sousa B, Milanezi F, Carneiro V, Bastos J, Costa S,
Vieira D, Lopes N, Lam EW, Lunet N, Schmitt F.

Author information: 
(1)Development Domain, Institute of Life and Health Sciences (ICVS), School of
Health Sciences of Minho University, Campus de Gualtar, Braga, Portugal.
aalbergaria@ipatimup.pt

INTRODUCTION: The expression of additional genes, other than oestrogen receptor
(ER), may be important to the hormone-responsive phenotype of breast cancer.
Microarray analyses have revealed that forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and GATA binding
protein 3 (GATA-3) are expressed in close association with ERalpha, both encoding
for transcription factors with a potential involvement in the ERalpha-mediated
action in breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to explore if the
expression of FOXA1 and GATA-3 may provide an opportunity to stratify subsets of 
patients that could have better outcome, among the ERalpha-negative/poor
prognosis breast cancer group.
METHODS: We evaluate FOXA1 and GATA-3 expression in 249 breast carcinomas by
immunohistochemistry, associating it with breast cancer molecular markers,
clinicopathological features and patient's survival. The clinicopathological
features and immunohistochemical markers of the tumours were compared using the
chi-square test and ANOVA. Disease-free survival was analysed through
Kaplan-Meier survival curves and Cox regression.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression was demonstrated in 42% of invasive carcinomas, while
GATA-3 was detected in 48% of the cases. FOXA1 expression was inversely
associated with tumour size, Nottingham Prognostic Index, histological grade,
lymph vascular invasion, lymph node stage and human epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER-2) overexpression, while GATA-3 expression showed inverse
association with histological grade and HER-2. Both FOXA1 and GATA-3 were
directly associated with ERalpha and progesterone receptor. Among FOXA1-positive 
tumours, 83.1% are comprised in the luminal A subtype, similar to GATA-3 where
87.7% of positive tumours were classified within this molecular subtype. In the
subset of ERalpha-negative patients, those who were FOXA1-negative had a
3.61-fold increased risk of breast cancer recurrence when compared with the
FOXA1-positive.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 was a significant predictor of good outcome in breast cancer, 
whereas GATA-3 was an important luminal marker. The expression of FOXA1 may be
used for risk stratification among ERalpha-negative patients.

PMCID: PMC2716509
PMID: 19549328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genes Dev. 2009 Jul 1;23(13):1522-33. doi: 10.1101/gad.1787109. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Histone H2A.Z is essential for estrogen receptor signaling.

Gévry N(1), Hardy S, Jacques PE, Laflamme L, Svotelis A, Robert F, Gaudreau L.

Author information: 
(1)Département de biologie, Faculté des sciences, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Incorporation of H2A.Z into the chromatin of inactive promoters has been shown to
poise genes for their expression. Here we provide strong evidence that H2A.Z is
incorporated into the promoter regions of estrogen receptor (ERalpha) target
genes only upon gene induction, and that, in a cyclic pattern. Moreover, members 
of the human H2A.Z-depositing complex, p400, also follow the same gene
recruitment kinetics as H2A.Z. Importantly, cellular depletion of H2A.Z or p400
leads to a severe defect in estrogen signaling, including loss of
estrogen-specific cell proliferation. We find that incorporation of H2A.Z within 
TFF1 promoter chromatin allows nucleosomes to adopt preferential positions along 
the DNA translational axis. Finally, we provide evidence that H2A.Z is essential 
to allow estrogen-responsive enhancer function. Taken together, our results
provide strong mechanistic insight into how H2A.Z regulates ERalpha-mediated gene
expression and provide a novel link between H2A.Z-p400 and ERalpha-dependent gene
regulation and enhancer function.

PMCID: PMC2704467
PMID: 19515975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Aug 14;386(1):30-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.120. Epub 2009 May 30.

Up-regulation of the HSP72 by Foxa1 in MCF-7 human breast cancer cell line.

Song L(1), Xu Z, Zhang C, Qiao X, Huang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Shock, Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, 110 Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan 410078,
People's Republic of China. songlan311492@163.com

Forkhead box protein A1 (Foxa1) is an evolutionarily conserved winged helix
transcription factor. In this study, the effect of Foxa1 on the expression of
HSP72 was examined by RT-PCR and Western blot in Foxa1 overexpression or
deficient cells. The results showed overexpression of Foxa1 promoted the
expression of HSP72, while Foxa1 depletion, induced by antisense
oligonucleotides, decreased the expression of HSP72 in MCF-7 cells under normal
and heat stress condition. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that Foxa1 bound to HSP72 promoter, and heat stress 
promoted its DNA binding activity. Luciferase reporter showed that Foxa1 also
increased the transcription activity of HSP72 promoter. These results indicate an
important role for Foxa1 as a novel regulator of expression of HSP72.

PMID: 19486887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3680-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-3155.
Epub 2009 May 26.

FOXA1 is a potential oncogene in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

Nucera C(1), Eeckhoute J, Finn S, Carroll JS, Ligon AH, Priolo C, Fadda G, Toner 
M, Sheils O, Attard M, Pontecorvi A, Nose V, Loda M, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

PURPOSE: FOXA1 is a mammalian endodermal transcription factor belonging to the
human forkhead box gene family that plays a role in certain tumor types. Here, we
investigated the potential role of FOXA1 in human thyroid carcinomas.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the level of FOXA1 expression and gene copy
number by immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization,
respectively, in a cohort of benign and malignant thyroid tumors. In addition, we
examined the role of FOXA1 in the proliferation of an undifferentiated thyroid
carcinoma cell line by short hairpin RNA-mediated silencing.
RESULTS: We show that FOXA1 is overexpressed in human anaplastic thyroid
carcinomas (ATC). In addition, we identify FOXA1 DNA copy number gain within the 
14q21.1 locus in both an ATC cell line and human ATC cases. Silencing of FOXA1 in
an ATC cell line causes G(1) growth arrest and reduction of cell proliferation.
Moreover, we observe a potential link between FOXA1 and the cell cycle machinery 
by identifying p27(kip1) up-regulation on FOXA1 silencing.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA1 is overexpressed in aggressive thyroid cancers and involved in
cell cycle progression in an ATC cell line. Therefore, FOXA1 may be an important 
oncogene in thyroid tumorigenesis and a potential new therapeutic target for the 
treatment of anaplastic thyroid cancers.

PMID: 19470727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jul 24;385(2):220-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.05.030. Epub 2009 May 13.

Role of FOXA in mitochondrial citrate carrier gene expression and insulin
secretion.

Iacobazzi V(1), Infantino V, Bisaccia F, Castegna A, Palmieri F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

In this study, we have investigated the transcriptional role of the FOXA site
present in the promoter of the mitochondrial citrate carrier (CIC) gene. We have 
shown that wild-type (but not mutated) CIC FOXA site cloned in front of the
luciferase promoter confers transcriptional activation of the gene reporter,
particularly in cells overexpressing FOXA1. We have also demonstrated that
overexpression and silencing of FOXA increases and reduces CIC transcript and
protein levels, respectively. In addition, FOXA1 silencing in INS-1 cells
decreases not only CIC mRNA and protein but also the amount of citrate in the
cytosol and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. These results show that FOXA
plays a role in the transcriptional regulation of CIC and in insulin secretion.

PMID: 19445897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1537-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI38201. Epub 2009 May 11.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate bile duct development in mice.

Li Z(1), White P, Tuteja G, Rubins N, Sackett S, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6145, USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2010 May;52(5):765-7.

The forkhead box proteins A1 and A2 (Foxa1 and Foxa2) are transcription factors
with critical roles in establishing the developmental competence of the foregut
endoderm and in initiating liver specification. Using conditional gene ablation
during a later phase of liver development, we show here that deletion of both
Foxa1 and Foxa2 (Foxa1/2) in the embryonic liver caused hyperplasia of the
biliary tree. Abnormal bile duct formation in Foxa1/2-deficient liver was due, at
least in part, to activation of IL-6 expression, a proliferative signal for
cholangiocytes. The glucocorticoid receptor is a negative regulator of IL-6
transcription; in the absence of Foxa1/2, the glucocorticoid receptor failed to
bind to the IL-6 promoter, causing enhanced IL-6 expression. Thus, after liver
specification, Foxa1/2 are required for normal bile duct development through
prevention of excess cholangiocyte proliferation. Our data suggest that Foxa1/2
function as terminators of bile duct expansion in the adult liver through
inhibition of IL-6 expression.

PMCID: PMC2689124
PMID: 19436110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Hepatology. 2009 Jul;50(1):282-90. doi: 10.1002/hep.22971.

Protein or amino acid deprivation differentially regulates the hepatic forkhead
box protein A (FOXA) genes through an activating transcription
factor-4-independent pathway.

Su N(1), Thiaville MM, Awad K, Gjymishka A, Brant JO, Yang TP, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

The FOXA (forkhead box A) proteins (FOXA1, FOXA2, and FOXA3) play a critical role
in the development of the liver, and they also regulate metabolism in adult
hepatic tissue. The liver responds to changes in nutrient availability by
initiating a number of stress signaling pathways. The present studies
demonstrated that in mouse dams fed a low-protein diet hepatic expression of
FOXA2 and FOXA3 messenger RNA, but not FOXA1, was induced. Conversely, fetal
liver did not exhibit this regulation. Amino acid deprivation of HepG2 hepatoma
cells also enhanced transcription from the FOXA2 and FOXA3 genes. In contrast,
endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibited the expression of FOXA1, only slightly
induced FOXA2, and had no effect on FOXA3. The FOXA2 and FOXA3 messenger RNA
induction by amino acid deprivation did not require activating transcription
factor 4, a critical component of the conventional amino acid response (AAR)
pathway, but their induction was partially dependent on CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta. Simultaneous knockdown of both FOXA2 and FOXA3 by small interfering
RNA did not affect the activation of other amino acid responsive genes,
suggesting that the FOXA proteins are not required for the known AAR pathway.
Collectively, the results document that the hepatic FOXA family of genes are
differentially regulated by amino acid availability.

PMCID: PMC3594789
PMID: 19415718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(2):R23. doi: 10.1186/bcr2249. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

Association of GATA3, P53, Ki67 status and vascular peritumoral invasion are
strongly prognostic in luminal breast cancer.

Jacquemier J(1), Charafe-Jauffret E, Monville F, Esterni B, Extra JM,
Houvenaeghel G, Xerri L, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Oncologie Moléculaire Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de
Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, UMR891 Inserm, IFR137, 232 Bd sainte
Marguerite Marseille, France. jacquemierj@marseille.fnclcc.fr

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancers are traditionally divided into hormone-receptor
positive and negative cases. This classification helps to guide patient
management. However, a subgroup of hormone-receptor positive patients relapse
irrespective of hormonal therapy. Gene expression profiling has classified breast
tumours into five major subtypes with significant different outcome. The two
luminal subtypes, A and B, show high expression of ESR1, GATA3 and FOXA1 genes.
Prognostic biomarkers for oestrogen receptor (ER)-positive cases include
progesterone receptor (PR) and androgen receptor (AR), and proteins related to
proliferation or apoptotic resistance. The aim of this study was to identify the 
best predictors of success of hormonal therapy.
METHODS: By immunohistochemistry we studied 10 markers in a consecutive series of
832 cases of breast carcinoma treated at the Paoli-Calmettes Institute from 1990 
to 2002 and deposited onto tissue microarrays (TMA). These markers were
luminal-related markers ER, PR, AR, FOXA1 and GATA3 transcription factors,
proliferation-related Ki67 and CCND1, ERBB2, anti-apoptotic BCL2 and P53. We also
measured vascular peritumoural invasion (VPI), size, grade and lymph node
involvement. For 143 cases, gene expression profiles were available. Adjuvant
chemotherapy and hormonal therapy were given to high- and low-risk patients,
respectively. The 162 events observed and taken into account were metastases.
RESULTS: Molecular expression of the 10 parameters and subtype with ER status
were strongly correlated. Of the 67 luminal A cases of this series, 63 were
ER-positive. Multivariate analyses showed the highly significant prognostic value
of VPI (hazard ratio (HR) = 2.47), Ki67 (HR = 2.9), P53 (HR = 2.9) and GATA3 (HR 
= 0.5) for the 240 patients who received hormonal therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: A panel of three antibodies (Ki67, P53 and GATA3) associated with
VPI can significantly improve the traditional prognosticators in predicting
outcome for ER-positive breast cancer patients receiving hormonal therapy.

PMCID: PMC2688952
PMID: 19405945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Apr;7(4):511-22. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0107.

Genetic alterations and oncogenic pathways associated with breast cancer
subtypes.

Hu X(1), Stern HM, Ge L, O'Brien C, Haydu L, Honchell CD, Haverty PM, Peters BA, 
Wu TD, Amler LC, Chant J, Stokoe D, Lackner MR, Cavet G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Breast cancers can be divided into subtypes with important implications for
prognosis and treatment. We set out to characterize the genetic alterations
observed in different breast cancer subtypes and to identify specific candidate
genes and pathways associated with subtype biology. mRNA expression levels of
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 were shown to predict marker
status determined by immunohistochemistry and to be effective at assigning
samples to subtypes. HER2(+) cancers were shown to have the greatest frequency of
high-level amplification (independent of the ERBB2 amplicon itself), but
triple-negative cancers had the highest overall frequencies of copy gain.
Triple-negative cancers also were shown to have more frequent loss of phosphatase
and tensin homologue and mutation of RB1, which may contribute to genomic
instability. We identified and validated seven regions of copy number alteration 
associated with different subtypes, and used integrative bioinformatics analysis 
to identify candidate oncogenes and tumor suppressors, including ERBB2, GRB7,
MYST2, PPM1D, CCND1, HDAC2, FOXA1, and RASA1. We tested the candidate oncogene
MYST2 and showed that it enhances the anchorage-independent growth of breast
cancer cells. The genome-wide and region-specific differences between subtypes
suggest the differential activation of oncogenic pathways.

PMID: 19372580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Bone. 2009 Aug;45(2):289-94. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2009.03.676. Epub 2009 Apr 14.

The -9247 T/C polymorphism in the SOST upstream regulatory region that
potentially affects C/EBPalpha and FOXA1 binding is associated with osteoporosis.

Huang QY(1), Li GH, Kung AW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
huangqy@hkucc.hku.hk

Accumulating evidence shows that genes that cause monogenic diseases also
contribute to similar complex disease in the general population. We sought to
determine whether the allelic variation in seven monogenic bone disease genes
(CLCN7, TCIRGI, SOST, CA2, CSTK, TGFB1 and SLC26A2) contributes to
osteoporosis/bone mineral density (BMD) variation in the normal Chinese
population. We conducted a gene-wide tag SNP-based association study in 1243
Chinese subjects with low BMD (Z-scores < or = -1.28, equivalent to the lowest
10% of the population) and high BMD (Z-score > or = +1.0). Twenty-two tag SNPs
were selected and genotyped by using the high-throughput Sequenom genotyping
platform. Allelic and haplotype association tests were conducted by Haploview and
binary logistic regression analyses. The -9247 polymorphism rs1230399 in the
upstream regulatory region of the sclerostin gene showed significant
genotypic/allelic associations with spine, femoral neck, trochanter and total hip
BMD (P=0.03-0.004). The T-allele of rs1230399 increased the risk of osteoporosis 
(OR=1.52, P=0.005). Computational analysis showed that rs1230399 is located at
the core consensus recognition site of two cooperating transcription factors
C/EBPalpha and FOXA1 that modulate estrogen receptor function. T-->C polymorphism
abolishes the binding of both C/EBPalpha and FOXA1 to the sclerostin gene. Our
data suggest a mechanistic link between rs1230399 and BMD through estrogen
ERalpha/FOXA1 signaling pathways driven by long-distance enhancers.

PMID: 19371798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Jun;16(2):381-9. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0038. Epub 2009
Apr 15.

Cistromics of hormone-dependent cancer.

Lupien M(1), Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Dartmouth Medical School, Norris Cotton Cancer Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire 
03756, USA.

Alterations in transcription programs are a fundamental feature of cancer.
Nuclear receptors, such as the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) and androgen
receptors (ARs), are central in this process as they can directly impact gene
expression through interaction with the chromatin and subsequent association with
coregulators and the transcriptional machinery. Unbiased genome-wide
investigations have demonstrated the predominant recruitment of both ERalpha and 
AR to distant (non-promoter)-regulatory elements. Furthermore, these studies
revealed a clear relationship between sites of transcription factor recruitment
and gene regulation. Indeed, expression profiles from AR-positive primary
prostate tumors and cell lines directly relate to the AR cistrome in prostate
cancer cells, while the ERalpha cistrome in breast cancer cells relates to
expression profiles from ERalpha-positive primary breast tumors. Additionally,
cell-type-specific ERalpha cistromes are linked to lineage-specific
estrogen-induced expression profiles in different cell types, for example
osteosarcoma and breast cancer cells. The pioneer factor forkhead box A1
(FoxA1/HNF3alpha) plays a central role in AR and ERalpha signaling. It is
recruited in a lineage-specific manner translating the epigenetic signature
consisting of mono- and dimethylated histone H3 on lysine 4 (H3K4me1/me2) into
functional regulatory elements. Hence, through the interplay between the pioneer 
factor, namely FoxA1, and epigenetic events, the transcriptional potential of a
given cell lineage is predefined. Since this directly impacts signaling through
nuclear receptors, these discoveries should significantly impact the development 
of novel therapeutic strategies directed against multiple types of cancer.

PMID: 19369485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(12):3413-23. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00020-09. Epub 2009 Apr 
13.

Coactivator function defines the active estrogen receptor alpha cistrome.

Lupien M(1), Eeckhoute J, Meyer CA, Krum SA, Rhodes DR, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St., Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Proper activation of transcriptional networks in complex organisms is central to 
the response to stimuli. We demonstrate that the selective activation of a subset
of the estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) cistrome in MCF7 breast cancer cells
provides specificity to the estradiol (E2) response. ERalpha-specific enhancers
that are subject to E2-induced coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase 
1 (CARM1) action are critical to E2-stimulated gene expression. This is true for 
both FoxA1-dependent and independent enhancers. In contrast, a subset of
E2-suppressed genes are controlled by FoxA1-independent ERalpha binding sites.
Nonetheless, these are sites of E2-induced CARM1 activity. In addition, the MCF7 
RNA polymerase II cistrome reveals preferential occupancy of E2-regulated
promoters prior to stimulation. Interestingly, E2-suppressed genes tend to lie in
otherwise silent genomic regions. Together, our results suggest that the
transcriptional response to E2 in breast cancer cells is dependent on the
interplay between polymerase II pre-occupied promoters and the subset of the
ERalpha cistrome associated with coactivation.

PMCID: PMC2698732
PMID: 19364822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Am J Pathol. 2009 Apr;174(4):1172-90. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080882.

Genetic ablation of caveolin-1 drives estrogen-hypersensitivity and the
development of DCIS-like mammary lesions.

Mercier I(1), Casimiro MC, Zhou J, Wang C, Plymire C, Bryant KG, Daumer KM,
Sotgia F, Bonuccelli G, Witkiewicz AK, Lin J, Tran TH, Milliman J, Frank PG,
Jasmin JF, Rui H, Pestell RG, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Caveolin-1 (Cav-1) loss-of-function mutations are exclusively associated with
estrogen receptor-positive (ER(+)) human breast cancers. To dissect the role of
Cav-1 loss-of-function in the pathogenesis of human breast cancers, we used
Cav-1(-/-) null mice as a model system. First, we demonstrated that Cav-1(-/-)
mammary epithelia overexpress two well-established ER co-activator genes, CAPER
and Foxa1, in addition to ER-alpha. Thus, the functional loss of Cav-1 may be
sufficient to confer estrogen-hypersensitivity in the mammary gland. To test this
hypothesis directly, we subjected Cav-1(-/-) mice to ovariectomy and estrogen
supplementation. As predicted, Cav-1(-/-) mammary glands were hyper-responsive to
estrogen and developed dysplastic mammary lesions with adjacent stromal
angiogenesis that resemble human ductal carcinoma in situ. Based on an extensive 
biomarker analysis, these Cav-1(-/-) mammary lesions contain cells that are
hyperproliferative and stain positively with nucleolar (B23/nucleophosmin) and
stem/progenitor cell markers (SPRR1A and beta-catenin). Genome-wide
transcriptional profiling identified many estrogen-related genes that were
over-expressed in Cav-1(-/-) mammary glands, including CAPER--an ER co-activator 
gene and putative stem/progenitor cell marker. Analysis of human breast cancer
samples revealed that CAPER is overexpressed and undergoes a
cytoplasmic-to-nuclear shift during the transition from pre-malignancy to ductal 
carcinoma in situ. Thus, Cav-1(-/-) null mice are a new preclinical model for
studying the molecular paradigm of estrogen hypersensitivity and the development 
of estrogen-dependent ductal carcinoma in situ lesions.

PMCID: PMC2671351
PMID: 19342371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. EMBO J. 2009 May 20;28(10):1418-28. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.88. Epub 2009 Apr 4.

ChIP-Seq of ERalpha and RNA polymerase II defines genes differentially responding
to ligands.

Welboren WJ(1), van Driel MA, Janssen-Megens EM, van Heeringen SJ, Sweep FC, Span
PN, Stunnenberg HG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Nijmegen Centre for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

We used ChIP-Seq to map ERalpha-binding sites and to profile changes in RNA
polymerase II (RNAPII) occupancy in MCF-7 cells in response to estradiol (E2),
tamoxifen or fulvestrant. We identify 10 205 high confidence ERalpha-binding
sites in response to E2 of which 68% contain an estrogen response element (ERE)
and only 7% contain a FOXA1 motif. Remarkably, 596 genes change significantly in 
RNAPII occupancy (59% up and 41% down) already after 1 h of E2 exposure. Although
promoter proximal enrichment of RNAPII (PPEP) occurs frequently in MCF-7 cells
(17%), it is only observed on a minority of E2-regulated genes (4%). Tamoxifen
and fulvestrant partially reduce ERalpha DNA binding and prevent RNAPII loading
on the promoter and coding body on E2-upregulated genes. Both ligands act
differently on E2-downregulated genes: tamoxifen acts as an agonist thus
downregulating these genes, whereas fulvestrant antagonizes E2-induced repression
and often increases RNAPII occupancy. Furthermore, our data identify genes
preferentially regulated by tamoxifen but not by E2 or fulvestrant. Thus
(partial) antagonist loaded ERalpha acts mechanistically different on
E2-activated and E2-repressed genes.

PMCID: PMC2688537
PMID: 19339991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Genes Dev. 2009 Apr 1;23(7):804-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.1775509.

Nucleosome-binding affinity as a primary determinant of the nuclear mobility of
the pioneer transcription factor FoxA.

Sekiya T(1), Muthurajan UM, Luger K, Tulin AV, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Progenitor Cells Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

FoxA proteins are pioneer transcription factors, among the first to bind
chromatin domains in development and enable gene activity. The Fox DNA-binding
domain structurally resembles linker histone and binds nucleosomes stably. Using 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching, we found that FoxA1 and FoxA2 move
much more slowly in nuclei than other transcription factor types, including
c-Myc, GATA-4, NF-1, and HMGB1. We find that slower nuclear mobility correlates
with high nonspecific nucleosome binding, and point mutations that disrupt
nonspecific binding markedly increase nuclear mobility. FoxA's distinct nuclear
mobility is consistent with its pioneer activity in chromatin.

PMCID: PMC2666343
PMID: 19339686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 May 15;18(10):1769-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp089. Epub 2009 Mar
6.

Requirement for Shh and Fox family genes at different stages in sweat gland
development.

Kunisada M(1), Cui CY, Piao Y, Ko MS, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, NIH Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Sweat glands play a fundamental role in thermal regulation in man, but the
molecular mechanism of their development remains unknown. To initiate analyses,
we compared the model of Eda mutant Tabby mice, in which sweat glands were not
formed, with wild-type (WT) mice. We inferred developmental stages and critical
genes based on observations at seven time points spanning embryonic, postnatal
and adult life. In WT footpads, sweat gland germs were detected at E17.5. The
coiling of secretory portions started at postnatal day 1 (P1), and sweat gland
formation was essentially completed by P5. Consistent with a controlled
morphological progression, expression profiling revealed stage-specific gene
expression changes. Similar to the development of hair follicles-the other major 
skin appendage controlled by EDA-sweat gland induction and initial progression
were accompanied by Eda-dependent up-regulation of the Shh pathway. During the
further development of sweat gland secretory portions, Foxa1 and Foxi1, not at
all expressed in hair follicles, were progressively up-regulated in WT but not in
Tabby footpads. Upon completion of WT development, Shh declined to Tabby levels, 
but Fox family genes remained at elevated levels in mature sweat glands. The
results provide a framework for the further analysis of phased down-stream
regulation of gene action, possibly by a signaling cascade, in response to Eda.

PMCID: PMC2671986
PMID: 19270025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2009 Mar 5;11:e8. doi: 10.1017/S1462399409001008.

FOXA1 in breast cancer.

Nakshatri H(1), Badve S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA. hnakshat@iupui.edu

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease and classification is important for
clinical management. At least five subtypes can be identified based on unique
gene expression patterns; this subtype classification is distinct from the
histopathological classification. The transcription factor network(s) required
for the specific gene expression signature in each of these subtypes is currently
being elucidated. The transcription factor network composed of the oestrogen
(estrogen) receptor alpha (ERalpha), FOXA1 and GATA3 may control the gene
expression pattern in luminal subtype A breast cancers. Breast cancers that are
dependent on this network correspond to well-differentiated and
hormone-therapy-responsive tumours with good prognosis. In this review, we
discuss the interplay between these transcription factors with a particular
emphasis on FOXA1 structure and function, and its ability to control ERalpha
function. Additionally, we discuss modulators of FOXA1 function,
ERalpha-FOXA1-GATA3 downstream targets, and potential therapeutic agents that may
increase differentiation through FOXA1.

PMID: 19261198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 17;284(16):10755-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809115200. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

On the role of FOX transcription factors in adipocyte differentiation and
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.

Gerin I(1), Bommer GT, Lidell ME, Cederberg A, Enerback S, Macdougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular & Integrative Physiology and Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

In this study, we explore the effects of several FOX and mutant FOX transcription
factors on adipocyte determination, differentiation, and metabolism. In addition 
to Foxc2 and Foxo1, we report that Foxf2, Foxp1, and Foxa1 are other members of
the Fox family that show regulated expression during adipogenesis. Although
enforced expression of FOXC2 inhibits adipogenesis, Foxf2 slightly enhances the
rate of differentiation. Constitutively active FOXC2-VP16 inhibits adipogenesis
through multiple mechanisms. FOXC2-VP16 impairs the transient induction of
C/EBPbeta during adipogenesis and induces expression of the transcriptional
repressor Hey1 as well as the activator of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Wnt10b.
The constitutive transcriptional repressor, FOXC2-Eng, enhances adipogenesis of
preadipocytes and multipotent mesenchymal precursors and determines NIH-3T3 and
C2C12 cells to the adipocyte lineage. Although PPARgamma ligand or C/EBPalpha are
not necessary for stimulation of adipogenesis by FOXC2-Eng, at least low levels
of PPARgamma protein are absolutely required. Finally, expression of FOXC2-Eng in
adipocytes increases insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, further expanding the
profound and pleiotropic effects of FOX transcription factors on adipocyte
biology.

PMCID: PMC2667763
PMID: 19244248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. BJU Int. 2009 Jun;103(11):1574-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2009.08351.x. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Gene expression of forkhead transcription factors in the normal and diseased
human prostate.

van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L(1), Dits NF, Jenster G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE To assess the expression of forkhead transcription factors (FOX) in
normal prostate and prostate diseases, as since the first FOX was identified, its
family members have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes, including
embryonic development and disease. MATERIAL AND METHODS We analysed a set of 12
different FOX genes by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction in prostate zones, prostate cancer, lymph node metastases, benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), xenografts and several prostate cell lines. RESULTS 
There were striking differences among the expression of various FOX family
members; most prominent were the high expression of FOXF1 and FOXF2 in the normal
prostate transition zone and BPH, and their decreased expression in prostate
cancer. Interestingly, although the FOXF genes are stroma-specific, some of the
androgen-independent prostate cancer xenografts uniquely express these two genes.
FOXD1 and FOXD2 were more highly expressed in prostate cancer and lymph node
metastases. FOXA1 and FOXC1 have an opposite expression pattern for
androgen-dependent growth of prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS Various members of the FOX family are differentially expressed in the
zones of the normal prostate and in benign and malignant outgrowths. The
expression profiles of FOXF1 and FOXF2 suggest a role in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, while FOXA1 and FOXC1 expression is linked to
androgen-associated growth status of cancer.

PMID: 19220249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009 Nov;118(1):151-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0317-1.
Epub 2009 Feb 10.

A 7 Mb region within 11q13 may contain a high penetrance gene for breast cancer.

Rosa-Rosa JM(1), Pita G, González-Neira A, Milne RL, Fernandez V, Ruivenkamp C,
van Asperen CJ, Devilee P, Benitez J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Melchor Fernandez Almagro 3, Madrid, 28029, Spain.

Familial breast cancer represents up to 5% of all breast cancer cases. Recently, 
our group has performed a new SNP-based linkage study in 19 non-BRCA1/2 families.
We found that a single family was linked to regions in two different chromosomes 
(11q13 and 14q21), and observed a non-parametric LOD score of 11.5 in both
regions. In the present study, we ruled out any possible translocation between
the chromosomes. We also used both a panel of STRs and an indirect approach based
on HapMap data to narrow down these regions from 28 to 7 Mb in chromosome 11 and 
from 14.5 to 8.5 Mb in chromosome 14. We performed a mutational screening on
candidate genes in 11q13 (NUMA1, FGF3, CCND1, RAD9A, RNF121, FADD and
hsa-mir-192), and on FOXA1 in 14q21. Although we have not found any deleterious
mutations in the coding region of these genes, data from STR markers confirm
11q13 as a candidate region to contain a breast cancer susceptibility gene.

PMID: 19205878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. BMC Cancer. 2009 Jan 30;9:43. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-43.

Screening and association testing of common coding variation in steroid hormone
receptor co-activator and co-repressor genes in relation to breast cancer risk:
the Multiethnic Cohort.

Haiman CA(1), Garcia RR, Hsu C, Xia L, Ha H, Sheng X, Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, 
Henderson BE, Stallcup MR, Greene GL, Press MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California/Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California, 
USA. haiman@usc.edu

BACKGROUND: Only a limited number of studies have performed comprehensive
investigations of coding variation in relation to breast cancer risk. Given the
established role of estrogens in breast cancer, we hypothesized that coding
variation in steroid receptor coactivator and corepressor genes may alter
inter-individual response to estrogen and serve as markers of breast cancer risk.
METHODS: We sequenced the coding exons of 17 genes (EP300, CCND1, NME1, NCOA1,
NCOA2, NCOA3, SMARCA4, SMARCA2, CARM1, FOXA1, MPG, NCOR1, NCOR2, CALCOCO1, PRMT1,
PPARBP and CREBBP) suggested to influence transcriptional activation by steroid
hormone receptors in a multiethnic panel of women with advanced breast cancer (n 
= 95): African Americans, Latinos, Japanese, Native Hawaiians and European
Americans. Association testing of validated coding variants was conducted in a
breast cancer case-control study (1,612 invasive cases and 1,961 controls) nested
in the Multiethnic Cohort. We used logistic regression to estimate odds ratios
for allelic effects in ethnic-pooled analyses as well as in subgroups defined by 
disease stage and steroid hormone receptor status. We also investigated effect
modification by established breast cancer risk factors that are associated with
steroid hormone exposure.
RESULTS: We identified 45 coding variants with frequencies > or = 1% in any one
ethnic group (43 non-synonymous variants). We observed nominally significant
positive associations with two coding variants in ethnic-pooled analyses (NCOR2: 
His52Arg, OR = 1.79; 95% CI, 1.05-3.05; CALCOCO1: Arg12His, OR = 2.29; 95% CI,
1.00-5.26). A small number of variants were associated with risk in disease
subgroup analyses and we observed no strong evidence of effect modification by
breast cancer risk factors. Based on the large number of statistical tests
conducted in this study, the nominally significant associations that we observed 
may be due to chance, and will need to be confirmed in other studies.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that common coding variation in these candidate 
genes do not make a substantial contribution to breast cancer risk in the general
population. Cataloging and testing of coding variants in coactivator and
corepressor genes should continue and may serve as a valuable resource for
investigations of other hormone-related phenotypes, such as inter-individual
response to hormonal therapies used for cancer treatment and prevention.

PMCID: PMC2637888
PMID: 19183483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Cancer Res. 2009 Jan 15;69(2):709-17. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3415.

Genome-wide promoter analysis of the SOX4 transcriptional network in prostate
cancer cells.

Scharer CD(1), McCabe CD, Ali-Seyed M, Berger MF, Bulyk ML, Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

SOX4 is a critical developmental transcription factor in vertebrates and is
required for precise differentiation and proliferation in multiple tissues. In
addition, SOX4 is overexpressed in many human malignancies, but the exact role of
SOX4 in cancer progression is not well understood. Here, we have identified the
direct transcriptional targets of SOX4 using a combination of genome-wide
localization chromatin immunoprecipitation-chip analysis and transient
overexpression followed by expression profiling in a prostate cancer model cell
line. We have also used protein-binding microarrays to derive a novel
SOX4-specific position-weight matrix and determined that SOX4 binding sites are
enriched in SOX4-bound promoter regions. Direct transcriptional targets of SOX4
include several key cellular regulators, such as EGFR, HSP70, Tenascin C,
Frizzled-5, Patched-1, and Delta-like 1. We also show that SOX4 targets 23
transcription factors, such as MLL, FOXA1, ZNF281, and NKX3-1. In addition, SOX4 
directly regulates expression of three components of the RNA-induced silencing
complex, namely Dicer, Argonaute 1, and RNA Helicase A. These data provide new
insights into how SOX4 affects developmental signaling pathways and how these
changes may influence cancer progression via regulation of gene networks involved
in microRNA processing, transcriptional regulation, the TGFbeta, Wnt, Hedgehog,
and Notch pathways, growth factor signaling, and tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC2629396
PMID: 19147588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 15;22(24):3435-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.1752608.

Dynamic regulation of Pdx1 enhancers by Foxa1 and Foxa2 is essential for pancreas
development.

Gao N(1), LeLay J, Vatamaniuk MZ, Rieck S, Friedman JR, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The onset of pancreas development in the foregut endoderm is marked by activation
of the homeobox gene Pdx1 (IPF1). Pdx1 is essential for the expansion of the
pancreatic primordium and the development of endocrine islets. The control of
Pdx1 expression has been only partially elucidated. We demonstrate here that the 
winged-helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 co-occupy multiple regulatory 
domains in the Pdx1 gene. Compound conditional ablation of both Foxa1 and Foxa2
in the pancreatic primordium results in complete loss of Pdx1 expression and
severe pancreatic hypoplasia. Mutant mice exhibit hyperglycemia with severely
disrupted acinar and islet development, and die shortly after birth. Assessment
of developmental markers in the mutant pancreas revealed a failure in the
expansion of the pancreatic anlage, a blockage of exocrine and endocrine cell
differentiation, and an arrest at the primitive duct stage. Comparing their
relative developmental activity, we find that Foxa2 is the major regulator in
promoting pancreas development and cell differentiation. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitations (ChIP) and ChIP sequencing (ChIPSeq) of fetal pancreas and
islet chromatin, we demonstrate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 predominantly occupy a
distal enhancer at -6.4 kb relative to the transcriptional start site in the Pdx1
gene. In addition, occupancy of the well-characterized proximal Pdx1 enhancer by 
Foxa1 and Foxa2 is developmental stage-dependent. Thus, the regulation of Pdx1
expression by Foxa1 and Foxa2 is a key early event controlling the expansion and 
differentiation of the pancreatic primordia.

PMCID: PMC2607077
PMID: 19141476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Genome Res. 2009 Mar;19(3):372-80. doi: 10.1101/gr.084582.108. Epub 2009 Jan 7.

Cell-type selective chromatin remodeling defines the active subset of FOXA1-bound
enhancers.

Eeckhoute J(1), Lupien M, Meyer CA, Verzi MP, Shivdasani RA, Liu XS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Rennes I, CNRS, UMR 6026, Equipe SPARTE, Campus de Beaulieu,
35042 Rennes cedex, France.

Selective activity of a specific set of enhancers defines tissue-specific gene
transcription. The pioneer factor FOXA1 has been shown to induce functional
enhancer competency through chromatin openings. We have previously found that
FOXA1 is recruited to thousands of regions across the genome of a given cell
type. Here, we monitored the chromatin structure at FOXA1 binding sites on a
chromosome-wide scale using formaldehyde assisted isolation of regulatory
elements (FAIRE). Surprisingly, we find that a significant fraction of
FOXA1-bound sites have a relatively closed chromatin conformation linked to a
shift of the epigenetic signature toward repressive histone marks. Importantly,
these sites are not correlated with gene expression in a given cell type
suggesting that FOXA1 is required, but not sufficient, for the functional
activity of bound enhancers. Interestingly, we find that a significant proportion
of the inactive FOXA1-bound regulatory sites in one cell type are actually
functional in another cellular context. We found that at least half of the FOXA1 
binding sites from a given cell type are shared with another cell lineage.
Mechanisms that restrict the activity of shared FOXA1-bound enhancers likely play
a significant role in defining the cell-type-specific functions of FOXA1.

PMCID: PMC2661808
PMID: 19129543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1049-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1028. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Identification of an inter-transcription factor regulatory network in human
hepatoma cells by Matrix RNAi.

Tomaru Y(1), Nakanishi M, Miura H, Kimura Y, Ohkawa H, Ohta Y, Hayashizaki Y,
Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)OMICS Sciences Center (OSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-Cho,
Japan.

Transcriptional regulation by transcriptional regulatory factors (TRFs) of their 
target TRF genes is central to the control of gene expression. To study a static 
multi-tiered inter-TRF regulatory network in the human hepatoma cells, we have
applied a Matrix RNAi approach in which siRNA knockdown and quantitative RT-PCR
are used in combination on the same set of TRFs to determine their
interdependencies. This approach focusing on several liver-enriched TRF families,
each of which consists of structurally homologous members, revealed many
significant regulatory relationships. These include the cross-talks between
hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) and the other TRF groups such as
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPs), retinoic acid receptors (RARs), retinoid
receptors (RXRs) and RAR-related orphan receptors (RORs), which play key
regulatory functions in human hepatocytes and liver. In addition, various
multi-component regulatory motifs, which make up the complex inter-TRF regulatory
network, were identified. A large part of the regulatory edges identified by the 
Matrix RNAi approach could be confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. The
resultant significant edges enabled us to depict the inter-TRF TRN forming an
apparent regulatory hierarchy of (FOXA1, RXRA) --> TCF1 --> (HNF4A, ONECUT1) --> 
(RORC, CEBPA) as the main streamline.

PMCID: PMC2651797
PMID: 19129217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2009 Jul;14(4):417-25. doi: 10.1007/s12192-008-0095-4.
Epub 2009 Jan 7.

Role of Foxa1 in regulation of bcl2 expression during oxidative-stress-induced
apoptosis in A549 type II pneumocytes.

Song L(1), Wei X, Zhang B, Luo X, Liu J, Feng Y, Xiao X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Shock, Department of Pathophysiology, Xiangya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

Forkhead box protein A1 (Foxa1) is an evolutionarily conserved winged helix
transcription factor that was traditionally considered to be involved in
embryonic development and cell differentiation. However, little is known about
the role of Foxa1 in oxidative-stress-induced apoptosis. In this study, hydrogen 
peroxide (H(2)O(2))-induced apoptosis, upregulation of Foxa1, and the role of
Foxa1 in the regulation of bcl2 gene expression were studied in A549 type II
pneumocytes. H(2)O(2) upregulated Foxa1 mRNA and protein in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Overexpression of Foxa1 promoted apoptosis, whereas Foxa1 
deficiency, induced by antisense oligonucleotides, decreased A549 cell apoptosis 
induced by H(2)O(2), as shown by flow cytometry. Moreover, Foxa1 overexpression
decreased the expression of bcl2, while Foxa1 depletion increased the expression 
of bcl2. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed that Foxa1 bound to bcl2 promoter, and H(2)O(2) promoted its DNA binding
activity. Luciferase reporter showed that Foxa1 also decreased the transcription 
activity of bcl2 promoter under normal conditions and oxidative stress. These
results indicate that Foxa1 plays a pro-apoptotic role by inhibiting the
expression of anti-apoptotic gene bcl2.

PMCID: PMC2728276
PMID: 19127412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;27(3):662-9. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0313.

Regulation of surfactant protein B gene expression in bone marrow-derived cells.

Field-Corbett C(1), English K, O'Dea S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Biology Department, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Ireland.

While investigating the differentiation potential of bone marrow-derived cells,
we previously demonstrated upregulated expression of the lung-related surfactant 
protein B (SP-B) gene in hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) when they were
cocultured with macerated lung tissue. During coculture, HPCs differentiated
toward a dendritic-like myeloid cell phenotype (hematopoietic progenitor
cell-derived dendritic-like cells [HPC-DCs]). However, immature dendritic cells
(iDCs) cocultured under identical conditions did not express SP-B mRNA before or 
after coculture. We have now further examined the regulation of SP-B expression
in HPC-DCs and iDCs. Of the transcription factors involved in SP-B gene
expression, neither cell type expressed TTF-1, HNF3alpha, or HNF3beta, but both
cell types expressed Sp1 and Sp3. Sp1 binding to the SP-B promoter was
investigated in these cells. Three novel Sp1 binding motifs were identified in
the mouse SP-B promoter. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, it was demonstrated
that Sp1 was bound to all three sites in HPC-DCs after coculture with lung
tissue, but not in iDCs. We hypothesized that although genes from multiple
lineages may be active in HPCs, gene silencing events, such as methylation, may
subsequently occur to suppress expression of these genes in more mature myeloid
cells, such as iDCs. Treatment with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine
resulted in expression of the SP-B gene in iDCs. These data indicate that
tissue-specific transcription factors are not required to express the
lung-related gene SP-B in hematopoietic progenitor cells. Furthermore, silencing 
events, such as methylation, may occur to suppress lung-related gene expression
as progenitor cells become committed toward more mature hematopoietic cell
phenotypes.

PMID: 19096034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Mar;87(3):299-306. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0425-0. Epub
2008 Dec 11.

Transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)gamma co-activator-1beta is involved in the regulation of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in INS-1E cells.

Oberkofler H(1), Hafner M, Felder T, Krempler F, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Private
Medical University Salzburg, Müllner Hauptstr., Austria. h.oberkofler@salk.at

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1 (PGC-1) alpha and
-beta play pivotal roles in the regulation of intermediary metabolism. We have
previously shown that PGC-1alpha-mediated upregulation of beta-cell sterol
element binding protein (SREBP) gene expression impairs insulin secretion via
increased transcription of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2). PGC-1beta, in contrast to
PGC-1alpha, directly binds to and acts as a co-activator of SREBPs and the
forkhead transcription factor 2A (FOXA2) involved in pancreas development and
function. To address a possible role of PGC-1beta in beta-cell function, we
determined islet gene expression levels of PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, SREBPs, FOXA2, 
FOXO1, UCP2 as well as granuphilin, a critical component of the insulin secretory
machinery, in Zucker diabetic fatty rats (ZDF). In comparison to controls, mRNA
levels of all genes studied except for FOXA2 and FOXO1 were increased in islets
of obese, fa/fa ZDF rats. The transcriptional activities of the UCP2 and
granuphilin promoters were assessed in INS-1E cells in response to PGC-1beta
overexpression and small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing.
PGC-1beta as well as SREBP-1c and -2 increased transcription from the UCP2
promoter in INS-1E cells. Transient transfection of PGC-1beta-specific siRNAs
significantly decreased SREBP-2-mediated transcriptional activation of the UCP2
gene. Furthermore PGC-1beta, SREBP-1c, and FOXA2 overexpression augmented
granuphilin promoter activity, whereas siRNA-mediated gene knockdown of PGC-1beta
reduced the effects of SREBP-1c and FOXA2 on granuphilin gene transcription and
significantly increased glucose-stimulated insulin release from INS-1E cells. Our
results support a role of PGC-1beta in the regulation of insulin secretion via
upregulation of UCP2 and granuphilin gene expression.

PMID: 19082571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003645. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Genomic androgen receptor-occupied regions with different functions, defined by
histone acetylation, coregulators and transcriptional capacity.

Jia L(1), Berman BP, Jariwala U, Yan X, Cogan JP, Walters A, Chen T, Buchanan G, 
Frenkel B, Coetzee GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The androgen receptor (AR) is a steroid-activated transcription
factor that binds at specific DNA locations and plays a key role in the etiology 
of prostate cancer. While numerous studies have identified a clear connection
between AR binding and expression of target genes for a limited number of loci,
high-throughput elucidation of these sites allows for a deeper understanding of
the complexities of this process.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have mapped 189 AR occupied regions (ARORs)
and 1,388 histone H3 acetylation (AcH3) loci to a 3% continuous stretch of human 
genomic DNA using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) microarray analysis. Of 62
highly reproducible ARORs, 32 (52%) were also marked by AcH3. While the number of
ARORs detected in prostate cancer cells exceeded the number of nearby
DHT-responsive genes, the AcH3 mark defined a subclass of ARORs much more highly 
associated with such genes -- 12% of the genes flanking AcH3+ARORs were
DHT-responsive, compared to only 1% of genes flanking AcH3-ARORs. Most ARORs
contained enhancer activities as detected in luciferase reporter assays. Analysis
of the AROR sequences, followed by site-directed ChIP, identified binding sites
for AR transcriptional coregulators FoxA1, CEBPbeta, NFI and GATA2, which had
diverse effects on endogenous AR target gene expression levels in siRNA knockout 
experiments.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that only some ARORs function under the
given physiological conditions, utilizing diverse mechanisms. This diversity
points to differential regulation of gene expression by the same transcription
factor related to the chromatin structure.

PMCID: PMC2577007
PMID: 18997859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Biochem J. 2009 Jan 15;417(2):611-20. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080999.

Insulin and epidermal growth factor suppress basal glucose-6-phosphatase
catalytic subunit gene transcription through overlapping but distinct mechanisms.

Onuma H(1), Oeser JK, Nelson BA, Wang Y, Flemming BP, Scheving LA, Russell WE,
O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, TN 37232, U.S.A.

The G6Pase (glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit) catalyses the final step in 
the gluconeogenic and glycogenolytic pathways, the hydrolysis of
glucose-6-phosphate to glucose. We show here that, in HepG2 hepatoma cells, EGF
(epidermal growth factor) inhibits basal mouse G6Pase fusion gene transcription. 
Several studies have shown that insulin represses basal mouse G6Pase fusion gene 
transcription through FOXO1 (forkhead box O1), but Stoffel and colleagues have
recently suggested that insulin can also regulate gene transcription through
FOXA2 (forkhead box A2) [Wolfrum, Asilmaz, Luca, Friedman and Stoffel (2003)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100, 11624-11629]. A combined GR (glucocorticoid
receptor)-FOXA2 binding site is located between -185 and -174 in the mouse G6Pase
promoter overlapping two FOXO1 binding sites located between (-188 and -182) and 
(-174 and -168). Selective mutation of the FOXO1 binding sites reduced the effect
of insulin, whereas mutation of the GR/FOXA2 binding site had no effect on the
insulin response. In contrast, selective mutation of the FOXO1 and GR/FOXA2
binding sites both reduced the effect of EGF. The effect of these mutations was
additive, since the combined mutation of both FOXO1 and GR/FOXA2 binding sites
reduced the effect of EGF to a greater extent than the individual mutations.
These results suggest that, in HepG2 cells, GR and/or FOXA2 are required for the 
inhibition of basal G6Pase gene transcription by EGF but not insulin. EGF also
inhibits hepatic G6Pase gene expression in vivo, but in cultured hepatocytes EGF 
has the opposite effect of stimulating expression, an observation that may be
explained by a switch in ErbB receptor sub-type expression following hepatocyte
isolation.

PMCID: PMC2929524
PMID: 18847435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;22(11):2393-406. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0100. Epub 2008
Sep 25.

Unique ERalpha cistromes control cell type-specific gene regulation.

Krum SA(1), Miranda-Carboni GA, Lupien M, Eeckhoute J, Carroll JS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, D730, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Estrogens play an important role in normal physiology and in a variety of
pathological states involving diverse tissues including breast and bone. The
mechanism by which estrogens exert cell type- and disease-specific effects,
however, remains to be explained. We have compared the gene expression profile of
the MCF7 breast cancer cell line with that of the osteoblast-like cell line
U2OS-ERalpha by expression microarrays. We find that fewer than 10% of the
17beta-estradiol (E2)-regulated genes are common to both cell types. We have
validated this in primary calvarial osteoblasts. To dissect the mechanism
underlying the cell type-specific E2 regulation of gene expression in MCF7 and
U2OS-ERalpha cells, we compared the ERalpha binding sites on DNA in the two cell 
types by performing chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) on genomic tiling arrays
(ChIP-on-chip). Consistent with the distinct patterns of E2-regulated gene
expression in these two cell lines, we find that the vast majority of ERalpha
binding sites are also cell type specific and correlate both in position and
number with cell type-specific gene regulation. Interestingly, although the
forkhead factor FoxA1 plays a critical role in defining the ERalpha cistrome in
MCF7 cells, it is not expressed in U2OS-ERalpha cells, and forkhead motifs are
not enriched in the ERalpha cistrome in these cells. Finally, the ERalpha
cistromes are correlated with cell type-specific epigenetic histone
modifications. These results support a model for the cell type-specific action of
E2 being driven primarily through specific ERalpha occupancy of epigenetically
marked cis-regulatory regions of target genes.

PMCID: PMC2582540
PMID: 18818283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Genome Biol. 2008;9(9):R137. doi: 10.1186/gb-2008-9-9-r137. Epub 2008 Sep 17.

Model-based analysis of ChIP-Seq (MACS).

Zhang Y(1), Liu T, Meyer CA, Eeckhoute J, Johnson DS, Bernstein BE, Nusbaum C,
Myers RM, Brown M, Li W, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute and Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We present Model-based Analysis of ChIP-Seq data, MACS, which analyzes data
generated by short read sequencers such as Solexa's Genome Analyzer. MACS
empirically models the shift size of ChIP-Seq tags, and uses it to improve the
spatial resolution of predicted binding sites. MACS also uses a dynamic Poisson
distribution to effectively capture local biases in the genome, allowing for more
robust predictions. MACS compares favorably to existing ChIP-Seq peak-finding
algorithms, and is freely available.

PMCID: PMC2592715
PMID: 18798982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Jan;62(1):6-12. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.059899. Epub 2008 Sep
15.

Oestrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer: towards bridging histopathological and
molecular classifications.

Badve S(1), Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and Internal Medicine,
Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. sbadve@iupui.edu

The oestrogen receptor (ER) pathway is key for survival and progression in a
significant proportion of breast cancers. The ER can be activated by oestrogen or
activated due to "crosstalk" with growth factor receptor pathways. Activated ER
signals through transcriptional and non-transcriptional mechanisms.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC), in spite of the shortcomings, remains the method of
choice as it provides for in situ assessment of ER expression within the tumour
cells. This capability is lost in tissue grinding methods that assess
oestrogen-binding activity or messenger RNAs in tumours. IHC is also not
influenced by the presence of non-tumoural cells or low amounts of tumour cells
within samples examined. It is clear that ER-positive tumours do not represent a 
single entity. Irrespective of the terminology used, low-grade ER-positive (also 
known as luminal A) tumours need to be differentiated from high-grade/highly
proliferative ER-positive tumours. This can be done in a variety of ways
including but not limited to analysis of FOXA1 and GATA-3 by IHC, and limited
molecular profiling by Oncotype DX, MGH2-gene signature, intrinsic gene signature
or MapQuant Dx. Several areas of ER biology are still poorly understood; these
include: its function in the cytoplasm/plasma membrane, its role in the
differentiation to proliferation switch, and pathways associated with resistance 
to hormonal therapy. A detailed understanding of these areas will permit better
classification and a personalised approach to management of ER-positive breast
cancers.

PMID: 18794199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Urol. 2008 Oct;180(4 Suppl):1784-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.03.098. Epub 2008 
Aug 21.

Temporal-spatial protein expression in bladder tissue derived from embryonic stem
cells.

Thomas JC(1), Oottamasathien S, Makari JH, Honea L, Sharif-Afshar AR, Wang Y,
Adams C, Wills ML, Bhowmick NA, Adams MC, Brock JW 3rd, Hayward SW, Matusik RJ,
Pope JC 4th.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Division
of Pediatric Urology, Monroe Carell Jr. Vanderbilt Children's Hospital,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. john.thomas@vanderbilt.edu

PURPOSE: Identifying developmental proteins could lead to markers of bladder
progenitor cells, which could be used to investigate bladder diseases. We
recently reported a novel embryonic stem cell model in which to study
differential protein expression patterns during bladder development. Differential
and temporal expressions of the endodermal proteins known as forkhead box (Foxa1 
and Foxa2) were observed. In the current study we further delineated these
protein expression patterns.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Epithelium was removed from the underlying mesenchyma from
embryonic day 18 rat bladders. Heterospecific recombinant xenografts were created
by combining embryonic stem cells plus embryonic bladder mesenchyma and placed
beneath the renal capsule of mouse hosts. Grafts were harvested at 16, 18, 21,
28, 35 and 42 days, and evaluated with hematoxylin and eosin, trichrome staining,
and immunohistochemistry for uroplakin, smooth muscle alpha-actin, p63, Foxa1,
Foxa2 and androgen receptor.
RESULTS: At 16 days uroplakin was detectable and it seemed to correlate with the 
loss of Foxa2, while Foxa1 remained at all time points. Androgen receptor was
first noted in stroma at day 16. It localized to urothelial nuclei at day 21 and 
was undetectable at 42 days. Adjacent to the urothelium alpha-smooth muscle actin
was seen on day 16 and it was localized in bundles to the periphery of the graft 
at later time points. Staining for basilar urothelium with p63 confirmed basilar 
orientation at all time points.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the temporal spatial expression of various genes in early 
bladder development. This suggests that some proteins may be potential markers of
bladder progenitor cells. Characterizing these markers may potentially identify
bladder progenitor cells that have been directed toward a lineage path destined
to become urothelial cells. Ultimately these multipotential progenitor cells
could be isolated and used to study and treat diseases that affect the bladder.

PMID: 18721943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jan;16(1):103-14. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2008.116. Epub 2008
Aug 8.

FOXA1 and IRF-1 intermediary transcriptional regulators of PPARgamma-induced
urothelial cytodifferentiation.

Varley CL(1), Bacon EJ, Holder JC, Southgate J.

Author information: 
(1)Jack Birch Unit of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Department of Biology, University
of York, York YO10 5YW, UK.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) is a
ligand-activated transcription factor that has been implicated in the induction
of differentiation of various cell types, including human uroepithelial cells.
PPARgamma-mediated differentiation of normal human urothelial (NHU) cells in
vitro requires coinhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling
and is characterised by de novo expression of late/terminal
differentiation-associated genes, including uroplakins (UPK), over a 6-day
period. We used gene microarrays to identify intermediary transcription factors
induced in direct response to PPARgamma activation of EGFR-inhibited NHU cells.
FOXA1 and IRF-1 contained consensus cognate binding sites in UPK1a, UPK2, and
UPK3a promoters and transcripts were induced within 12 h of PPARgamma activation;
transcription complex formation was confirmed by electromobility shift assays. In
urothelium in situ, both FOXA1 and IRF-1 were nuclear and expressed in a
differentiation-associated pattern. Knockdown by transient siRNA of either FOXA1 
or IRF-1 abrogated PPARgamma-induced uroplakin expression in vitro. This is the
first evidence that ligand activation of PPARgamma induces expression of
intermediary transcription factors that mediate an epithelial differentiation
programme and represents a new paradigm for understanding differentiation,
regenerative repair and inflammation in epithelial tissues.

PMID: 18688264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Eur J Cancer. 2008 Jul;44(11):1541-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2008.04.020. Epub 2008
Jun 4.

Forkhead-box A1 (FOXA1) expression in breast cancer and its prognostic
significance.

Habashy HO(1), Powe DG, Rakha EA, Ball G, Paish C, Gee J, Nicholson RI, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Nottingham
University Hospitals NHS Trust, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

The forkhead-box A1 (FOXA1) controls downstream transcription of oestrogen
receptor (ER)-regulated genes. In this study, the biological and prognostic value
of FOXA1 expression was assessed immunohistochemically in a large and
well-characterised series of invasive breast carcinoma with a long term follow-up
using tissue microarray. FOXA1 expression was associated with steroid hormone
receptors (ERalpha, PgR and AR), other variables of good prognosis such as
smaller tumour size, lower histological grade, luminal cytokeratins (CK18 and
CK7/8), BRCA1 and E-cadherin. Its expression showed an inverse relation with
basal CKs (CK14 and CK5/6) and P-cadherin. We found an association between high
FOXA1 expression and a better survival in the whole series however; multivariate 
analysis showed that FOXA1 was not an independent prognostic marker. In
conclusion, our results show that FOXA1 protein is associated with markers of
good prognosis supporting its role as a growth repressor in breast cancer. In
this series, FOXA1 was found not to be of an independent prognostic significance 
in breast cancer and as such its immunohistochemical assessment alone does not
appear to have relevance in routine practice to stratify ER-positive
(luminal-like) tumours into clinically significant subgroups.

PMID: 18538561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Cancer. 2008 Jun 4;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-49.

Meta-analysis of human cancer microarrays reveals GATA3 is integral to the
estrogen receptor alpha pathway.

Wilson BJ(1), Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Room H5-45, McGill University Health Centre, 687
Pine Avenue West, Montréal, Québec, H3A 1A1, Canada. brian.wilson2@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor GATA3 has recently been shown to be
necessary for mammary gland morphogenesis and luminal cell differentiation. There
is also an increasing body of data linking GATA3 to the estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) pathway. Among these it was shown that GATA3 associates with the
promoter of the ERalpha gene and ERalpha can reciprocally associate with the
GATA3 gene. GATA3 has also been directly implicated in a differentiated phenotype
in mouse models of mammary tumourigenesis. The purpose of our study was to
compare coexpressed genes, by meta-analysis, of GATA3 and relate these to a
similar analysis for ERalpha to determine the depth of overlap.
RESULTS: We have used a newly described method of meta-analysis of multiple
cancer studies within the Oncomine database, focusing here predominantly upon
breast cancer studies. We demonstrate that ERalpha and GATA3 reciprocally have
the highest overlap with one another. Furthermore, we show that when both
coexpression meta-analysis lists for ERalpha and GATA3 are compared there is a
significant overlap between both and, like ERalpha, GATA3 coexpresses with
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2 (TFF1), TFF3, FOXA1, BCL2, ERBB4, XBP1,
NRIP1, IL6ST, keratin 18(KRT18) and cyclin D1 (CCND1). Moreover, as these data
are derived from human tumour samples this adds credence to previous cell-culture
or murine based studies.
CONCLUSION: GATA3 is hypothesized to be integral to the ERalpha pathway given the
following: (1) The large overlap of coexpressed genes as seen by meta-analysis,
between GATA3 and ERalpha, (2) The highest coexpressing gene for GATA3 was
ERalpha and vice-versa, (3) GATA3, like ERalpha, coexpresses with many well-known
ERalpha pathway partners such as pS2.

PMCID: PMC2430971
PMID: 18533032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Neoplasia. 2008 Jun;10(6):542-8.

A functionally significant cross-talk between androgen receptor and ErbB2
pathways in estrogen receptor negative breast cancer.

Naderi A(1), Hughes-Davies L.

Author information: 
(1)Diamantina Institute for Cancer, Immunology and Metabolic Medicine, Cancer
Biology Program, University of Queensland, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane 
Qld 4102, Australia. a.naderi@uq.edu.au

Recent studies have identified novel subgroups in ER-negative breast cancer based
on the expression pattern of androgen receptor (AR). One subtype (molecular
apocrine) has an over-expression of steroid-response genes and ErbB2. Using
breast cancer cell lines with molecular apocrine features, we demonstrate a
functional cross-talk between AR and ErbB2 pathways. We show that stimulation of 
AR and ErbB2 pathways leads to the cross-regulation of gene expression for AR,
ErbB2, FOXA1, XBP1, TFF3, and KLK3. As opposed to the physiologic transient
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) observed with
the testosterone treatment, we demonstrate that the addition of ErbB2 inhibition 
leads to a persistent phosphorylation of ERK1/2, which negatively regulates the
downstream signaling and cell growth. This suggests a mechanism for the
cross-talk involving the ERK pathway. Moreover, testosterone stimulates the
proliferation of molecular apocrine breast cell lines, and this effect can be
reversed using antiandrogen flutamide and anti-ErbB2 AG825. Conversely, the
growth stimulatory effect of heregulin can also be inhibited with flutamide,
suggesting a cross-talk between the AR and ErbB2 pathways affecting cell
proliferation. Importantly, there is a synergy with the combined use of flutamide
and AG825 on cell proliferation and apoptosis, which indicates a therapeutic
advantage in the combined blockage of AR and ErbB2 pathways.

PMCID: PMC2386539
PMID: 18516291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Differentiation. 2008 Jul;76(6):682-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-0436.2008.00276.x.
Epub 2008 May 7.

Prostate epithelial cell fate.

Matusik RJ(1), Jin RJ, Sun Q, Wang Y, Yu X, Gupta A, Nandana S, Case TC, Paul M, 
Mirosevich J, Oottamasathien S, Thomas J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, A-1302
Medical Center North, 1161 21st Ave South, Nashville, TN 37232 2765, USA.
robert.matusik@vanderbilt.edu

Androgen receptor (AR) within prostatic mesenchymal cells, with the absence of AR
in the epithelium, is still sufficient to induce prostate development. AR in the 
luminal epithelium is required to express the secretory markers associated with
differentiation. Nkx3.1 is expressed in the epithelium in early prostatic
embryonic development and expression is maintained in the adult. Induction of the
mouse prostate gland by the embryonic mesenchymal cells results in the
organization of a sparse basal layer below the luminal epithelium with rare
neuroendocrine cells that are interdispersed within this basal layer. The human
prostate shows similar glandular organization; however, the basal layer is
continuous. The strong inductive nature of embryonic prostatic and bladder
mesenchymal cells is demonstrated in grafts where embryonic stem (ES) cells are
induced to differentiate and organize as a prostate and bladder, respectively.
Further, the ES cells can be driven by the correct embryonic mesenchymal cells to
form epithelium that differentiates into secretory prostate glands and
differentiated bladders that produce uroplakin. This requires the ES cells to
mature into endoderm that gives rise to differentiated epithelium. This process
is control by transcription factors in both the inductive mesenchymal cells (AR) 
and the responding epithelium (FoxA1 and Nkx3.1) that allows for organ
development and differentiation. In this review, we explore a molecular mechanism
where the pattern of transcription factor expression controls cell determination,
where the cell is assigned a developmental fate and subsequently cell
differentiation, and where the assigned cell now emerges with it's own unique
character.

PMID: 18462434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell. 2008 Mar 21;132(6):958-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.01.018.

FoxA1 translates epigenetic signatures into enhancer-driven lineage-specific
transcription.

Lupien M(1), Eeckhoute J, Meyer CA, Wang Q, Zhang Y, Li W, Carroll JS, Liu XS,
Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Complex organisms require tissue-specific transcriptional programs, yet little is
known about how these are established. The transcription factor FoxA1 is thought 
to contribute to gene regulation through its ability to act as a pioneer factor
binding to nucleosomal DNA. Through genome-wide positional analyses, we
demonstrate that FoxA1 cell type-specific functions rely primarily on
differential recruitment to chromatin predominantly at distant enhancers rather
than proximal promoters. This differential recruitment leads to cell
type-specific changes in chromatin structure and functional collaboration with
lineage-specific transcription factors. Despite the ability of FoxA1 to bind
nucleosomes, its differential binding to chromatin sites is dependent on the
distribution of histone H3 lysine 4 dimethylation. Together, our results suggest 
that methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 is part of the epigenetic signature that 
defines lineage-specific FoxA1 recruitment sites in chromatin. FoxA1 translates
this epigenetic signature into changes in chromatin structure thereby
establishing lineage-specific transcriptional enhancers and programs.

PMCID: PMC2323438
PMID: 18358809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1108-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.158. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Forkhead box transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are important regulators of
Muc2 mucin expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

van der Sluis M(1), Vincent A, Bouma J, Korteland-Van Male A, van Goudoever JB,
Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The mucin Muc2 is the main component of the intestinal mucus layer and thus plays
important roles in intestinal protection. Therefore, it is important to
understand its regulation during goblet cell differentiation. Foxa1 and Foxa2
forkhead box transcription factors (TFs) participate in transcriptional programs 
governing intestinal cell differentiation. Using immunohistochemistry, we showed 
a spatio-temporal pattern of expression of both TFs in developing and adult mouse
intestine and their expression in Muc2-expressing intestinal cells.
Down-regulation of Foxa1 and Foxa2 by RNA interference in cultured intestinal
cells decreased Muc2 mRNA level by half, and abolished Muc2 protein expression.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays showed that these two TFs
directly bind to the Muc2 promoter. Co-transfection experiments indicated that
both TFs activate the Muc2 promoter and that mutations of three Foxa cis-elements
inhibit Muc2 transactivation. In conclusion, this work identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2
as important regulators of Muc2 expression in the intestine.

PMID: 18336786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Cell Sci. 2008 Apr 1;121(Pt 7):1002-13. doi: 10.1242/jcs.019315. Epub 2008 Mar 
4.

Phenotype reversion in fetal human liver epithelial cells identifies the role of 
an intermediate meso-endodermal stage before hepatic maturation.

Inada M(1), Follenzi A, Cheng K, Surana M, Joseph B, Benten D, Bandi S, Qian H,
Gupta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park 
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Understanding the biological potential of fetal stem/progenitor cells will help
define mechanisms in liver development and homeostasis. We isolated epithelial
fetal human liver cells and established phenotype-specific changes in gene
expression during continuous culture conditions. Fetal human liver epithelial
cells displayed stem cell properties with multilineage gene expression, extensive
proliferation and generation of mesenchymal lineage cells, although the initial
epithelial phenotype was rapidly supplanted by meso-endodermal phenotype in
culture. This meso-endodermal phenotype was genetically regulated through
cytokine signaling, including transforming growth factor beta, bone morphogenetic
protein, fibroblast growth factor and other signaling pathways. Reactivation of
HNF3alpha (FOXA1) transcription factor, a driver of hepatic specification in the 
primitive endoderm, indicated that the meso-endodermal phenotype represented an
earlier developmental stage of cells. We found that fetal liver epithelial cells 
formed mature hepatocytes in vivo, including after genetic manipulation using
lentiviral vectors, offering convenient assays for analysis of further cell
differentiation and fate. Taken together, these studies demonstrate plasticity in
fetal liver epithelial stem cells, offer paradigms for defining mechanisms
regulating lineage switching in stem cells, and provide potential avenues for
regulating cell phenotypes for applications of stem cells, such as for cell
therapy.

PMCID: PMC2695499
PMID: 18319302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Nucl Recept Signal. 2008 Feb 15;6:e005. doi: 10.1621/nrs.06005.

A global view of transcriptional regulation by nuclear receptors: gene
expression, factor localization, and DNA sequence analysis.

Kininis M(1), Kraus WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Graduate Field of Genetics and
Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.

Recent genomic analyses of transcription factor binding, histone modification,
and gene expression have provided a global view of transcriptional regulation by 
nuclear receptors (NRs) that complements an existing large body of literature on 
gene-specific studies. The picture emerging from these genomic studies indicates 
that NRs bind at promoter-proximal and promoter-distal enhancers in conjunction
with other transcription factors (e.g., activator protein-1, Sp1 and FOXA1). This
binding promotes the recruitment of coregulators that mediate the
posttranslational modification of histones at promoters and enhancers.
Ultimately, signaling through liganded NRs stimulates changes in the occupancy of
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) or the activation of preloaded Pol II at target
promoters. Chromosomal looping and/or Pol II tracking may underlie
promoter-enhancer communication. Interestingly, the direct target genes of NR
signaling represent a limited subset of all the genes regulated by NR ligands,
with the rest being regulated through secondary effects. As suggested by previous
gene-specific analyses, NR-mediated outcomes are highly cell type- and
promoter-specific, highlighting the complexity of transcriptional regulation by
NRs and the value of genomic analyses for identifying commonly shared patterns.
Overall, NRs share common themes in their patterns of localization and
transcriptional regulation across mammalian genomes. In this review, we provide
an overview of recent advances in the understanding of NR-mediated transcription 
garnered from genomic analyses of gene expression, factor localization, and
target DNA sequences.

PMCID: PMC2254333
PMID: 18301785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 24;358(4):353-61. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa071074.

HLA-mismatched renal transplantation without maintenance immunosuppression.

Kawai T(1), Cosimi AB, Spitzer TR, Tolkoff-Rubin N, Suthanthiran M, Saidman SL,
Shaffer J, Preffer FI, Ding R, Sharma V, Fishman JA, Dey B, Ko DS, Hertl M, Goes 
NB, Wong W, Williams WW Jr, Colvin RB, Sykes M, Sachs DH.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Jan 24;358(4):407-11.

Five patients with end-stage renal disease received combined bone marrow and
kidney transplants from HLA single-haplotype mismatched living related donors,
with the use of a nonmyeloablative preparative regimen. Transient chimerism and
reversible capillary leak syndrome developed in all recipients. Irreversible
humoral rejection occurred in one patient. In the other four recipients, it was
possible to discontinue all immunosuppressive therapy 9 to 14 months after the
transplantation, and renal function has remained stable for 2.0 to 5.3 years
since transplantation. The T cells from these four recipients, tested in vitro,
showed donor-specific unresponsiveness and in specimens from allograft biopsies, 
obtained after withdrawal of immunosuppressive therapy, there were high levels of
P3 (FOXP3) messenger RNA (mRNA) but not granzyme B mRNA.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMCID: PMC2819046
PMID: 18216355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 7;367(2):481-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.12.162. Epub 2008 Jan 4.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha (HNF-3alpha) negatively regulates androgen
receptor transactivation in prostate cancer cells.

Lee HJ(1), Hwang M, Chattopadhyay S, Choi HS, Lee K.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, 300 Yongbong-dong, Puk-ku, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of
Korea.

The androgen receptor (AR) is involved in the development and progression of
prostate cancers. However, the mechanisms by which this occurs remain
incompletely understood. In previous reports, hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha
(HNF-3alpha) has been shown to be expressed in the epithelia of the prostate
gland, and has been determined to regulate the transcription of prostate-specific
genes. In this study, we report that HNF-3alpha functions as a novel corepressor 
of AR in prostatic cells. HNF-3alpha represses AR transactivation on target
promoters containing the androgen response element (ARE) in a dose-dependent
manner. HNF-3alpha interacts physically with AR, and negatively regulates AR
transactivation via competition with AR coactivators, including GRIP1.
Furthermore, HNF-3alpha overexpression reduces the androgen-induced expression of
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in LNCaP cells. Taken together, our findings
indicate that HNF-3alpha is a novel corepressor of AR, and predict its effects on
the proliferation of prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 18178153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cancer Res. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):106-14. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5647.

Estrogen induces repression of the breast cancer and salivary gland expression
gene in an estrogen receptor alpha-dependent manner.

Bretschneider N(1), Brand H, Miller N, Lowery AJ, Kerin MJ, Gannon F, Denger S.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
Nancy.Bretschneider@embl.de

The focus of this study is on the expression and regulation of the
estrogen-regulated breast cancer and salivary gland expression (BASE) gene that
may function as a breast cancer marker. In MCF7 cells, BASE is repressed by
estrogen in an estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha)-dependent manner. Promoter
analysis of the BASE gene led to the identification of a 2-kb upstream enhancer
that harbors binding sites for ER alpha and FoxA1. The recruitment of both ER
alpha and FoxA1 to this region was shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis. Furthermore, mutation studies and knockdown experiments show a clear
separation between gene expression mediated by FoxA1 and ER alpha-dependent gene 
regulation. Additionally, we provide information on BASE expression in human
breast tumor samples.

PMID: 18172302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Pathol. 2008 Jan;172(1):236-46. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Dissociation of epithelial and neuroendocrine carcinoma lineages in the
transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model of prostate cancer.

Chiaverotti T(1), Couto SS, Donjacour A, Mao JH, Nagase H, Cardiff RD, Cunha GR, 
Balmain A.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

The transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model is widely used in
prostate cancer research because of rapid tumor onset and progression. The
transgenic mouse is on a C57BL/6 (B6) background and expresses SV40 T-antigen
under the probasin promoter. The strong genetic component of susceptibility to
prostate cancer in humans prompted us to investigate the effect of mouse strain
background (FVB and B6) on incidence, progression, and pathology of prostate
cancer in this model. Because TRAMP lesions are unique but differ from
conventional prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia because the epithelium and
stroma are affected diffusely, we designated them as "atypical hyperplasia of
Tag." Although the incidence and severity of atypical hyperplasia of Tag is
similar, FVB-TRAMP mice live significantly shorter lives than B6-TRAMP mice
because of the rapid development and progression of neuroendocrine carcinomas.
This is associated with an increased frequency of neuroendocrine precursor
lesions in young TRAMP mice, detectable at 4 weeks after birth. These lesions
show properties of bipotential stem cells and co-express markers of epithelial
(E-cadherin) and neuroendocrine (synaptophysin) lineages, as well as the
transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2. Transplantation studies using TRAMP
prostatic ducts suggested that neuroendocrine carcinomas arise independently from
atypical hyperplasias or other epithelial lesions. Adenocarcinomas were not seen 
in our cohort. Thus, neuroendocrine carcinomas are the principal malignancy in
this model and may develop from bipotential progenitor cells at an early stage of
prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2189611
PMID: 18156212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Pharmacol Sci. 2007 Dec;105(4):334-41. Epub 2007 Dec 1.

Pravastatin induces rat aortic endothelial cell proliferation and migration via
activation of PI3K/Akt/mTOR/p70 S6 kinase signaling.

Nakao T(1), Shiota M, Tatemoto Y, Izumi Y, Iwao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Osaka City University Medical School, Asahimachi, 
Osaka, Japan. nakao-t@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp

The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) have been shown to exert several
vascular protective effects that are not related to changes in cholesterol
profile, and these effects of statins are partly caused by the activation of
angiogenesis. Endothelial cell (EC) proliferation and migration are crucial
events for angiogenesis and statins are known to enhance these events. However,
the molecular mechanism by which statins promote EC proliferation and migration
is not fully understood. In this study, we show Akt and its downstream target
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) play an important role in
pravastatin-induced EC proliferation and migration. We found that pravastatin
significantly enhanced the proliferation and migration of rat aortic endothelial 
cells (rAECs). The addition of pravastatin to rAECs resulted in rapid
phosphorylation of Akt and p70 S6 kinase (p70S6K). LY294002, a specific inhibitor
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), blocked both Akt and p70S6K
phosphorylation, whereas rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of mTOR, suppressed only
p70S6K phosphorylation induced by pravastatin. Furthermore, both LY294002 and
rapamycin inhibited pravastatin-induced rAEC proliferation and migration. Taken
together, our findings indicate that pravastatin activates PI3K/Akt/mTOR /p70S6K 
signaling in this sequential manner and this pathway contributes to
pravastatin-induced rAEC proliferation and migration.

PMID: 18057776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 25;365(4):711-7. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

FoxA1 as a lineage-specific oncogene in luminal type breast cancer.

Yamaguchi N(1), Ito E, Azuma S, Honma R, Yanagisawa Y, Nishikawa A, Kawamura M,
Imai J, Tatsuta K, Inoue J, Semba K, Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Consolidated Research Institute for Advanced Science and Medical Care, Waseda 
University, 513 Wasedatsurumaki-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0041, Japan.

The forkhead transcription factor FoxA1 is thought to be involved in mammary
tumorigenesis. However, the precise role of FoxA1 in breast cancer development is
controversial. We examined expression of FoxA1 in 35 human breast cancer cell
lines and compared it with that of ErbB2, a marker of poor prognosis in breast
cancer. We found that FoxA1 is expressed at high levels in all ErbB2-positive
cell lines and a subset of ErbB2-negative cell lines. Down-regulation of FoxA1 by
RNA interference significantly suppressed proliferation of ErbB2-negative and
FoxA1-positive breast cancer cell lines. Down-regulation of FoxA1 also enhanced
the toxic effect of Herceptin on ErbB2-positive cell lines through induction of
apoptosis. Taken together with previous data that FoxA1 is a marker of luminal
cells in mammary gland, our present results suggest that FoxA1 plays an important
role as a lineage-specific oncogene in proliferation of cancer cells derived from
mammary luminal cells.

PMID: 18039470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Clin Pathol. 2008 Mar;61(3):327-32. Epub 2007 Nov 23.

Forkhead box A1 expression in breast cancer is associated with luminal subtype
and good prognosis.

Thorat MA(1), Marchio C, Morimiya A, Savage K, Nakshatri H, Reis-Filho JS, Badve 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, IU School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

AIMS: Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) is a forkhead family transcription factor expressed
in breast cancer cells. It is essential for optimal expression of approximately
50% of oestrogen receptor (ER)-related genes. This study explored the FOXA1
relationship with luminal and basal breast cancer subtypes, proliferation
markers, and survival in breast cancer patients who had received similar
treatment.
METHODS: A tissue microarray comprising tumours from 245 invasive breast cancer
patients with 67 months of median follow-up was analysed for FOXA1 expression by 
immunohistochemistry. Interpretable FOXA1 expression, obtained in 184 patients,
was analysed along with other variables such as tumour grade, size, nodal status,
ER, progesterone receptor, HER2/neu, proliferation and basal markers.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression (score >3) was seen in 139 of 184 breast cancers. It
correlated positively with ERalpha (p<0.0001), progesterone receptor (p<0.0001), 
and luminal subtype (p<0.0001); negatively with basal subtype (p<0.0001),
proliferation markers and high histological grade (p = 0.0327). Univariate
analysis showed nodal status, tumour grade, ER, progesterone receptor, FOXA1,
basal markers and p53 as significant predictors of overall survival. Multivariate
analysis showed that only nodal status (p = 0.0006) and ER (p = 0.0017) were
significant predictors of OS. In luminal subtype patient subgroup, FOXA1
expression was associated with better survival (p = 0.0284) on univariate
analysis.
CONCLUSION: Based on this study in patients treated with surgery followed by
adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy, FOXA1 expression is associated with
good prognosis. It correlates with luminal subtype breast cancer, and could
possibly serve as a clinical marker for luminal subtype A. Prognostic ability of 
FOXA1 in these low-risk breast cancers may prove to be useful in treatment
decision making.

PMID: 18037662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(1):179-88. Epub 2007 Nov 14.

SMAD3 prevents binding of NKX2.1 and FOXA1 to the SpB promoter through its MH1
and MH2 domains.

Minoo P(1), Hu L, Zhu N, Borok Z, Bellusci S, Groffen J, Kardassis D, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Will Rogers Institute
Pulmonary Research Center, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. minoo@usc.edu

Mechanisms of gene repression by transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) are
not well understood. TGF-beta represses transcription of pulmonary surfactant
protein-B gene in lung epithelial cells. Repression is mediated by SMAD3 through 
interactions with NKX2.1 and FOXA1, two key transcription factors that are
positive regulators of SpB transcription. In this study, we found that SMAD3
interacts through its MAD domains, MH1 and MH2 with NKX2.1 and FOXA1 proteins.
The sites of interaction on NKX2.1 are located within the NH2 and COOH domains,
known to be involved in transactivation function. In comparison, weaker
interaction of FOXA1 winged helix, and the NH(2)-terminal domains was documented 
with SMAD3. Both in vitro studies and in vivo ChIP assays show that interaction
of SMAD3 MH1 and MH2 domains with NKX2.1 and FOXA1 results in reduced binding of 
NKX2.1 and FOXA1 to their cognate DNA-binding sites, and diminished promoter
occupancy within the SpB promoter. Thus, these studies reveal for the first time 
a mechanism of TGF-beta-induced SpB gene repression that involves interactions
between specific SMAD3 domains and the corresponding functional sites on NKX2.1
and FOXA1 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2248754
PMID: 18003659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cell. 2007 Oct 26;28(2):291-303.

Repression by Groucho/TLE/Grg proteins: genomic site recruitment generates
compacted chromatin in vitro and impairs activator binding in vivo.

Sekiya T(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497, USA.

Groucho-related (Gro/TLE/Grg) corepressors meditate embryonic segmentation,
dorsal-ventral patterning, neurogenesis, and Notch and Wnt signaling. Although
Gro/TLE/Grgs disrupt activator complexes and recruit histone deacetylases (HDAC),
activator complexes can be disrupted in various ways, HDAC recruitment does not
account for full corepressor activity, and a direct role for Gro/TLE/Grg binding 
and altering chromatin structure has not been explored. Using diverse chromatin
substrates in vitro, we show that Grg3 creates higher-order, condensed complexes 
of polynucleosome arrays. Surprisingly, such complexes are in an open, exposed
configuration. We find that chromatin binding enables Grg3 recruitment by a
transcription factor and the creation of a closed, poorly accessible domain
spanning three to four nucleosomes. Targeted recruitment of Grg3 blankets a
similar-sized region in vivo, impairing activator recruitment and repressing
transcription. These activities of a Groucho protein represent a newly discovered
mechanism which differs from that of other classes of corepressors.

PMCID: PMC2083644
PMID: 17964267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;27(20):7302-14. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

The forkhead factor FoxE1 binds to the thyroperoxidase promoter during thyroid
cell differentiation and modifies compacted chromatin structure.

Cuesta I(1), Zaret KS, Santisteban P.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28029,
Spain.

The Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factors play diverse roles in
differentiation, development, hormone responsiveness, and aging. A pioneer
activity of the Forkhead factors in developmental processes has been reported,
but how this may apply to other contexts of Forkhead factor regulation remains
unexplored. In this study, we address the pioneer activity of the
thyroid-specific factor FoxE1 during thyroid differentiation. In response to
hormone induction, FoxE1 binds to the compacted chromatin of the inactive
thyroperoxidase (TPO) promoter, which coincides with the appearance of strong
DNase I hypersensitivity at the FoxE1 binding site. In vitro, FoxE1 can bind to
its site even when this is protected by a nucleosome, and it creates a local
exposed domain specifically on H1-compacted TPO promoter-containing nucleosome
arrays. Furthermore, nuclear factor 1 binds to the TPO promoter simultaneously
with FoxE1, and this binding has an additive effect on FoxE1-mediated chromatin
structure alteration. On the basis of our findings, we propose that FoxE1 is a
pioneer factor whose primary mechanistic role in mediating the hormonal
regulation of the TPO gene is to enable other regulatory factors to access the
chromatin. The presented model extends the reported pioneer activity of the
Forkhead factors to processes involved in hormone-induced differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2168900
PMID: 17709379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 1;13(15 Pt 1):4415-21.

FOXA1 expression in breast cancer--correlation with luminal subtype A and
survival.

Badve S(1), Turbin D, Thorat MA, Morimiya A, Nielsen TO, Perou CM, Dunn S,
Huntsman DG, Nakshatri H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
USA.

PURPOSE: FOXA1, a forkhead family transcription factor, is essential for optimum 
expression of approximately 50% of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha):estrogen
responsive genes. FOXA1 is expressed in breast cancer cells. It segregates with
genes that characterize the luminal subtypes in DNA microarray analyses. The
utility of FOXA1 as a possible independent prognostic factor has not been
determined in breast cancers.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A tissue microarray comprising tumors from 438 patients
with 15.4 years median follow-up was analyzed for FOXA1 expression by
immunohistochemistry. Interpretable FOXA1 expression obtained in 404 patients was
analyzed along with other prognostic factors like tumor grade, size, nodal
status, ER, progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2/neu.
RESULTS: FOXA1 expression (score >3) was seen in 300 of 404 breast cancers and it
correlated with ER (P = 0.000001), PR (P = 0.00001), and luminal A subtype (P =
0.000001). Loss of expression was noted with worsening tumor grade (P = 0.001).
Univariate analysis showed nodal status (P = 0.0000012), tumor size (P =
0.00001), FOXA1 (P = 0.0004), and ER (P = 0.012) to be predictors of breast
cancer-specific survival. Multivariate analysis showed only nodal status (P =
0.001) and tumor size (P = 0.039) to be significant prognostic factors, whereas
FOXA1 (P = 0.060) and ER (P = 0.131) were not significant. In luminal subtype A
patient subgroup, FOXA1 expression was associated with better cancer-specific
survival (P = 0.024) and in ER-positive subgroup, it was better predictor of
cancer-specific survival (P = 0.009) than PR (P = 0.213).
CONCLUSION: FOXA1 expression correlates with luminal subtype A breast cancer and 
it is significant predictor of cancer-specific survival in patients with
ER-positive tumors. Prognostic ability of FOXA1 in these low-risk breast cancers 
may prove to be useful in clinical treatment decisions.

PMID: 17671124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cancer Res. 2007 Jul 1;67(13):6477-83.

Positive cross-regulatory loop ties GATA-3 to estrogen receptor alpha expression 
in breast cancer.

Eeckhoute J(1), Keeton EK, Lupien M, Krum SA, Carroll JS, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor GATA-3 is required for normal mammary gland development,
and its expression is highly correlated with estrogen receptor alpha (ER alpha)
in human breast tumors. However, the functional role of GATA-3 in ER
alpha-positive breast cancers is yet to be established. Here, we show that GATA-3
is required for estradiol stimulation of cell cycle progression in breast cancer 
cells. The role of GATA-3 in estradiol signaling requires the direct positive
regulation of the expression of the ER alpha gene itself by GATA-3. GATA-3 binds 
to two cis-regulatory elements located within the ER alpha gene, and this is
required for RNA polymerase II recruitment to ER alpha promoters. Reciprocally,
ER alpha directly stimulates the transcription of the GATA-3 gene, indicating
that these two factors are involved in a positive cross-regulatory loop.
Moreover, GATA-3 and ER alpha regulate their own expression in breast cancer
cells. Hence, this transcriptional coregulatory mechanism accounts for the robust
coexpression of GATA-3 and ER alpha in human breast cancers. In addition, these
results highlight the crucial role of GATA-3 for the response of ER
alpha-positive breast cancers to estradiol. Moreover, they identify GATA-3 as a
critical component of the master cell-type-specific transcriptional network
including ER alpha and FoxA1 that dictates the phenotype of hormone-dependent
breast cancer.

PMID: 17616709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2761-9. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate multiple phases of midbrain dopaminergic neuron
development in a dosage-dependent manner.

Ferri AL(1), Lin W, Mavromatakis YE, Wang JC, Sasaki H, Whitsett JA, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The role of transcription factors in regulating the development of midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons is intensively studied owing to the involvement of
these neurons in diverse neurological disorders. Here we demonstrate novel roles 
for the forkhead/winged helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 in the
specification and differentiation of mDA neurons by analysing the phenotype of
Foxa1 and Foxa2 single- and double-mutant mouse embryos. During specification,
Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate the extent of neurogenesis in mDA progenitors by
positively regulating Ngn2 (Neurog2) expression. Subsequently, Foxa1 and Foxa2
regulate the expression of Nurr1 (Nr4a2) and engrailed 1 in immature neurons and 
the expression of aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase in
mature neurons during early and late differentiation of midbrain dopaminergic
neurons. Interestingly, genetic evidence indicates that these functions require
different gene dosages of Foxa1 and Foxa2. Altogether, our results demonstrate
that Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate multiple phases of midbrain dopaminergic neuron
development in a dosage-dependent manner.

PMID: 17596284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22638-50. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

The human mucin MUC4 is transcriptionally regulated by caudal-related homeobox,
hepatocyte nuclear factors, forkhead box A, and GATA endodermal transcription
factors in epithelial cancer cells.

Jonckheere N(1), Vincent A, Perrais M, Ducourouble MP, Male AK, Aubert JP, Pigny 
P, Carraway KL, Freund JN, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U560, Place de Verdun, Lille, F-59045, France.

The human gene MUC4 encodes a large transmembrane mucin that is developmentally
regulated and expressed along the undifferentiated pseudostratified epithelium,
as early as 6.5 weeks during fetal development. Immunohistochemical analysis of
Muc4 expression in developing mouse lung and gastrointestinal tract showed a
different spatio-temporal pattern of expression before and after
cytodifferentiation. The molecular mechanisms governing MUC4 expression during
development are, however, unknown. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), forkhead box
A (FOXA), GATA, and caudal-related homeobox transcription factors (TFs) are known
to control cell differentiation of gut endoderm derived-tissues during embryonic 
development. They also control the expression of cell- and tissue-specific genes 
and may thus control MUC4 expression. To test this hypothesis, we studied and
deciphered the molecular mechanisms responsible for MUC4 transcriptional
regulation by these TFs. Experiments using small interfering RNA, cell
co-transfection, and site-directed mutagenesis indicated that MUC4 is regulated
at the transcriptional level by CDX-1 and -2, HNF-1 alpha and -1 beta, FOXA1/A2, 
HNF-4 alpha and -4 gamma, and GATA-4, -5, and -6 factors in a cell-specific
manner. Binding of TFs was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
gel-shift assays. Altogether, these results demonstrate that MUC4 is a target
gene of endodermal TFs and thus point out an important role for these TFs in
regulating MUC4 expression during epithelial differentiation during development, 
cancer, and repair.

PMID: 17553805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS Genet. 2007 Jun;3(6):e87. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Whole-genome cartography of estrogen receptor alpha binding sites.

Lin CY(1), Vega VB, Thomsen JS, Zhang T, Kong SL, Xie M, Chiu KP, Lipovich L,
Barnett DH, Stossi F, Yeo A, George J, Kuznetsov VA, Lee YK, Charn TH, Palanisamy
N, Miller LD, Cheung E, Katzenellenbogen BS, Ruan Y, Bourque G, Wei CL, Liu ET.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore.

Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation-paired end diTag cloning and sequencing
strategy, we mapped estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) binding sites in MCF-7
breast cancer cells. We identified 1,234 high confidence binding clusters of
which 94% are projected to be bona fide ERalpha binding regions. Only 5% of the
mapped estrogen receptor binding sites are located within 5 kb upstream of the
transcriptional start sites of adjacent genes, regions containing the proximal
promoters, whereas vast majority of the sites are mapped to intronic or distal
locations (>5 kb from 5' and 3' ends of adjacent transcript), suggesting
transcriptional regulatory mechanisms over significant physical distances. Of all
the identified sites, 71% harbored putative full estrogen response elements
(EREs), 25% bore ERE half sites, and only 4% had no recognizable ERE sequences.
Genes in the vicinity of ERalpha binding sites were enriched for regulation by
estradiol in MCF-7 cells, and their expression profiles in patient samples
segregate ERalpha-positive from ERalpha-negative breast tumors. The expression
dynamics of the genes adjacent to ERalpha binding sites suggest a direct
induction of gene expression through binding to ERE-like sequences, whereas
transcriptional repression by ERalpha appears to be through indirect mechanisms. 
Our analysis also indicates a number of candidate transcription factor binding
sites adjacent to occupied EREs at frequencies much greater than by chance,
including the previously reported FOXA1 sites, and demonstrate the potential
involvement of one such putative adjacent factor, Sp1, in the global regulation
of ERalpha target genes. Unexpectedly, we found that only 22%-24% of the bona
fide human ERalpha binding sites were overlapping conserved regions in whole
genome vertebrate alignments, which suggest limited conservation of functional
binding sites. Taken together, this genome-scale analysis suggests complex but
definable rules governing ERalpha binding and gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC1885282
PMID: 17542648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19385-98. Epub 2007 May 18.

Forkhead proteins are critical for bone morphogenetic protein-2 regulation and
anti-tumor activity of resveratrol.

Su JL(1), Yang CY, Zhao M, Kuo ML, Yen ML.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, College of Medicine, China Medical
University, Taichung 404, Taiwan.

Osteoporosis is a major public health problem and the most obvious preventive
strategy, hormone replacement therapy, has lost favor due to recent findings of
the Women's Health Initiative regarding increased risks of breast cancer and
cardiovascular disease. Resveratrol, a naturally occurring compound possessing
estrogenic activity, is thought to have considerable potential for therapy of
osteoporosis. In the present study, resveratrol was found to exhibit
bone-protective effects equivalent to those exerted by hormone replacement
therapy and decrease the risk of breast cancer in the in vivo and in vitro
models. Forkhead proteins were found to be essential for both effects of
resveratrol. The bone-protective effect was attributable to induction of bone
morphogenetic protein-2 through Src kinase-dependent estrogen receptor activation
and FOXA1 is required for resveratrol-induced estrogen receptor-dependent bone
morphogenetic protein-2 expression. The tumor-suppressive effects of resveratrol 
were the consequence of Akt inactivation-mediated FOXO3a nuclear accumulation and
activation. Resveratrol is therefore anticipated to be highly effective in
management of postmenopausal osteoporosis without an increased risk of breast
cancer.

PMID: 17513867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Dev Biol. 2007 Jun 15;306(2):636-45. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Impaired male fertility and atrophy of seminiferous tubules caused by
haploinsufficiency for Foxa3.

Behr R(1), Sackett SD, Bochkis IM, Le PP, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School, 415 Curie
Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6145, USA.

Foxa1, 2 and 3 (formerly HNF-3alpha, -beta and -gamma) constitute a sub-family of
winged helix transcription factors with multiple roles in mammalian organ
development. While all three Foxa mRNAs are present in endoderm derivatives
including liver and pancreas, only Foxa3 is expressed in the testis. Here we
demonstrate by genetic lineage tracing that Foxa3 is expressed in postmeiotic
germ and interstitial Leydig cells. The germinal epithelium of Foxa3-deficient
testes is characterized by a loss of germ cells secondary to an increase in germ 
cell apoptosis that ultimately leads to a Sertoli cell-only syndrome. Remarkably,
not only the Foxa3(-/-) mice but also Foxa3(+/-) mice exhibited loss of germ
cells. This cellular phenotype caused significantly reduced fertility and testis 
weight of both Foxa3(-/-) and Foxa3(+/-) mice. Using microarray analysis, we
found a dramatic downregulation of the zinc finger protein 93 and the testicular 
tumor-associated paraneoplastic Ma antigen (PNMA) and increased expression of a
number of genes including zinc finger protein 94 and several kallikrein 1-related
peptidases which could account for at least part of the observed phenotype. In
summary, we have identified Foxa3 as a transcriptional regulator with a dominant 
phenotype in germ cell maintenance and suggest FOXA3 as a potential candidate
gene for subfertility in man.

PMCID: PMC1952241
PMID: 17488644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):550-5. Epub 2007 May 2.

PHA-4/Foxa mediates diet-restriction-induced longevity of C. elegans.

Panowski SH(1), Wolff S, Aguilaniu H, Durieux J, Dillin A.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Molecular and Cell Biology
Laboratory, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):536-7.
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1729-30.

Reduced food intake as a result of dietary restriction increases the lifespan of 
a wide variety of metazoans and delays the onset of multiple age-related
pathologies. Dietary restriction elicits a genetically programmed response to
nutrient availability that cannot be explained by a simple reduction in
metabolism or slower growth of the organism. In the nematode worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans, the transcription factor PHA-4 has an essential role in the embryonic
development of the foregut and is orthologous to genes encoding the mammalian
family of Foxa transcription factors, Foxa1, Foxa2 and Foxa3. Foxa family members
have important roles during development, but also act later in life to regulate
glucagon production and glucose homeostasis, particularly in response to fasting.
Here we describe a newly discovered, adult-specific function for PHA-4 in the
regulation of diet-restriction-mediated longevity in C. elegans. The role of
PHA-4 in lifespan determination is specific for dietary restriction, because it
is not required for the increased longevity caused by other genetic pathways that
regulate ageing.

PMID: 17476212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochimie. 2007 May;89(5):574-80. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

cyclicAMP and glucocorticoid responsiveness of the rat carbamoylphosphate
synthetase gene requires the interplay of upstream regulatory units.

Schoneveld OJ(1), Hoogenkamp M, Stallen JM, Gaemers IC, Lamers WH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Amsterdam, AMC Liver Center, Meibergdreef 69-71, 1105 Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

Many genes involved in metabolic processes are regulated by glucocorticoids
and/or cyclicAMP. The hepatic expression of the urea cycle enzyme
carbamoylphosphate-synthetase-I gene (CPS) is regulated at the transcriptional
level by both factors. Here, we report that the 5' half of the distal enhancer is
necessary and sufficient for full cyclicAMP responsiveness. The
cyclicAMP-responsive element (CRE), and FoxA- and C/EBP-binding sites are
indispensible for cyclicAMP responsiveness, indicating that these elements make
up a cyclicAMP-responsive unit (CRU). In addition to this CRU, the CPS regulatory
regions contain two glucocorticoid-response elements (GRE): one in the 3' region 
of the distal enhancer and one in the proximal enhancer. In presence of the
cyclicAMP-responsive region in the distal enhancer, only one of the GREs is
required for glucocorticoid-inducible CPS expression, with both GREs acting in an
additive fashion to fully confer the inducing effect of glucocorticoids. In
contrast, the simultaneous presence of both GREs is required in the absence of
the cyclicAMP-responsive region. In this configuration, the distal GRE fully
depends on its neighbouring FoxA and C/EBP REs for activity and is, therefore, a 
glucocorticoid-responsive unit. In conclusion, we show here that the CPS CRU is a
bifunctional unit that elicits the cyclicAMP response and, in addition, functions
as a glucocorticoid accessory unit to establish a glucocorticoid response from
otherwise silent proximal or distal GRUs. Therefore, cyclicAMP and glucocorticoid
pathways can induce CPS transcription via overlapping sets of response elements.

PMID: 17397987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2007 Apr;11(4):507-14.

FOXA1 as a therapeutic target for breast cancer.

Nakshatri H(1), Badve S.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Departments of Surgery, Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Walther Oncology Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.
hnakshat@iupui.edu

Gene expression profiling studies have classified breast cancer into five
intrinsic subtypes with distinct prognostic significance: luminal type A, luminal
type B, normal-like, HER-2-positive and basal type. These studies have also
uncovered novel diagnostic markers and molecular targets. FOXA1, a winged-helix
transcription factor belonging to the forkhead family, is one among them as it is
expressed predominantly in luminal type A breast cancer, which is characterized
by the presence of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) with favorable prognosis.
FOXA1 is a 'pioneer' factor that binds to chromatinized DNA, opens the chromatin 
and enhances binding of ERalpha to its target genes. It is essential for the
expression of approximately 50% of ERalpha:estrogen-regulated genes. Thus, a
network comprising FOXA1, ERalpha and estrogen constitutes a major proliferation 
and survival signal for luminal type A breast cancer. However, by controlling
differentiation and by regulating the expression of cell cycle inhibitor p27kip1 
and the cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin, FOXA1 may prevent metastatic
progression of luminal type A breast cancer. This article reviews possible roles 
of FOXA family transcription factors in breast cancer initiation, hormone
dependency and speculates on the potential of FOXA1 as a therapeutic target.

PMID: 17373880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Cancer. 2007 Mar 7;6:19.

Hedgehog pathway activity in the LADY prostate tumor model.

Gipp J(1), Gu G, Crylen C, Kasper S, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Surgery, Division of
Urology, Clinical Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53792, USA. gipp@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Robust Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated as a common
feature of human prostate cancer and an important stimulus of tumor growth. The
role of Hh signaling has been studied in several xenograft tumor models, however,
the role of Hh in tumor development in a transgenic prostate cancer model has
never been examined.
RESULTS: We analyzed expression of Hh pathway components and conserved Hh target 
genes along with progenitor cell markers and selected markers of epithelial
differentiation during tumor development in the LADY transgenic mouse model.
Tumor development was associated with a selective increase in Ihh expression. In 
contrast Shh expression was decreased. Expression of the Hh target Patched (Ptc) 
was significantly decreased while Gli1 expression was not significantly altered. 
A survey of other relevant genes revealed significant increases in expression of 
Notch-1 and Nestin together with decreased expression of HNF3a/FoxA1, NPDC-1 and 
probasin.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows no evidence for a generalized increase in Hh
signaling during tumor development in the LADY mouse. It does reveal a selective 
increase in Ihh expression that is associated with increased expression of
progenitor cell markers and decreased expression of terminal differentiation
markers. These data suggest that Ihh expression may be a feature of a progenitor 
cell population that is involved in tumor development.

PMCID: PMC1820793
PMID: 17343742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Oncogene. 2007 Aug 9;26(36):5204-13. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Fog2 excision in mice leads to premature mammary gland involution and reduced
Esr1 gene expression.

Manuylov NL(1), Smagulova FO, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

The critical role for GATA family proteins in maintaining the normal
(non-transformed) cell state is corroborated by the recent findings of mutations 
or methylation in GATA genes both in primary cancers and tumor lines including
breast. Previously, microarray profiling studies determined that the highest
expression of both GATA3 and ESR1 (estrogen receptor alpha) is seen in tumors
associated with the most favorable survival outcomes, whereas the lowest
expression of GATA3 is detected in tumor subtypes showing the worst outcomes. At 
this time, genes and pathways that are regulated by GATA3 in the mammary gland
are not well defined. We have previously established a requirement for FOG
(Friend Of GATA) cofactors during mouse development. Here we report that in the
murine mammary gland Fog2 gene expression is upregulated upon pregnancy and
lactation with prominent expression in the epithelial cells of the gland during
post-lactational regression. Mammary-specific deletion of Fog2 identified a role 
for this gene during gland involution; excision of the Fog2 gene leads to the
accelerated involution of the gland despite diminished levels of the remodeling
enzymes. Importantly, the levels of several genes linked to the control of
cancerous transformation in the breast (Esr1, Prg and Foxa1) are significantly
reduced upon Fog2 excision. This implicates FOG2 in the maintenance of epithelial
cell differentiation in the mammary gland and in performing a protective role in 
breast cancer.

PMID: 17310981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nature. 2007 Feb 15;445(7129):724-6.

Developmental biology: cell fate in the mammary gland.

Tong Q, Hotamisligil GS.

PMID: 17301782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):556-66. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Directed differentiation of embryonic stem cells into bladder tissue.

Oottamasathien S(1), Wang Y, Williams K, Franco OE, Wills ML, Thomas JC, Saba K, 
Sharif-Afshar AR, Makari JH, Bhowmick NA, DeMarco RT, Hipkens S, Magnuson M,
Brock JW 3rd, Hayward SW, Pope JC 4th, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, and
Division of Pediatric Urology, Vanderbilt Children's Hospital Nashville, TN
37232-2765, USA. siam.oottamasathien@vanderbilt.edu

Manipulatable models of bladder development which interrogate specific pathways
are badly needed. Such models will allow a systematic investigation of the
multitude of pathologies which result from developmental defects of the urinary
bladder. In the present communication, we describe a model in which mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells are directed to differentiate to form bladder tissue by
specific interactions with fetal bladder mesenchyme. This model allows us to
visualize the various stages in the differentiation of urothelium from ES cells, 
including the commitment to an endodermal cell lineage, with the temporal profile
characterized by examining the induction of specific endodermal transcription
factors (Foxa1 and Foxa2). In addition, final functional urothelial
differentiation was characterized by examining uroplakin expression. It is well
established that ES cells will spontaneously develop teratomas when grown within 
immunocompromised mouse hosts. We determined the specific mesenchymal to ES cell 
ratios necessary to dictate organ-specific differentiation while completely
suppressing teratomatous growth. Embryonic mesenchyme is well established as an
inductive tissue which dictates organ-specific programming of epithelial tissues.
The present study demonstrates that embryonic bladder mesenchyme can also steer
ES cells towards developing specific endodermal derived urothelium. These
approaches allow us to capture specific stages of stem cell differentiation and
to better define stem cell hierarchies.

PMCID: PMC1994155
PMID: 17289017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(6):2155-65. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Physical and functional interactions between homeodomain NKX2.1 and winged
helix/forkhead FOXA1 in lung epithelial cells.

Minoo P(1), Hu L, Xing Y, Zhu NL, Chen H, Li M, Borok Z, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. minoo@usc.edu

NKX2.1 is a homeodomain transcription factor that controls development of the
brain, lung, and thyroid. In the lung, Nkx2.1 is expressed in a proximo-distal
gradient and activates specific genes in phenotypically distinct epithelial cells
located along this axis. The mechanisms by which NKX2.1 controls its target genes
may involve interactions with other transcription factors. We examined whether
NKX2.1 interacts with members of the winged-helix/forkhead family of FOXA
transcription factors to regulate two spatially and cell type-specific genes, SpC
and Ccsp. The results show that NKX2.1 interacts physically and functionally with
FOXA1. The nature of the interaction is inhibitory and occurs through the NKX2.1 
homeodomain in a DNA-independent manner. On SpC, which lacks a FOXA1 binding
site, FOXA1 attenuates NKX2.1-dependent transcription. Inhibition of FOXA1 by
small interfering RNA increased SpC mRNA, demonstrating the in vivo relevance of 
this finding. In contrast, FOXA1 and NKX2.1 additively activate transcription
from Ccsp, which includes both NKX2.1 and FOXA1 binding sites. In electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, the GST-FOXA1 fusion protein interferes with the formation
of NKX2.1 transcriptional complexes by potentially masking the latter's
homeodomain DNA binding function. These findings suggest a novel mode of
selective gene regulation by proximo-distal gradient distribution of and
functional interactions between forkhead and homeodomain transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1820505
PMID: 17220277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Mol Biol. 2007 Feb 23;366(3):720-4. Epub 2006 Dec 5.

Specific interactions of the wing domains of FOXA1 transcription factor with DNA.

Cirillo LA(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

FOX (forkhead box) transcription factors have diverse regulatory roles in
development, signaling, and longevity, as well as being able to bind stably to
target sites in silent chromatin. Crystal structure analysis showed that the FOXA
DNA binding domain folds into a helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif flanked on either
side by "wings" of polypeptide chain. The wings have the potential to interact
with the DNA minor groove along the long axis of the DNA helix, flanking the HTH 
interactions with the major groove. Diverse FOX family homologs exist, and
structural studies with certain DNA target sites suggest that neither of the wing
regions are well ordered or provide a stable contribution to DNA target site
binding. However, FOXA1 binds certain DNA target sites with high affinity, and as
a monomer. To determine whether the wing domains contribute to stable DNA
binding, we assessed complexes of FOXA with high and lower affinity DNA target
sites by hydroxyl radical footprinting and site-directed mutagenesis. The data
revealed clear protections predicted for wing interactions at the high affinity
target, but less so at the lower affinity target, indicating that the wing
domains stably interact with high affinity DNA sites for FOXA proteins.

PMCID: PMC1793999
PMID: 17189638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Int J Cancer. 2007 Mar 1;120(5):1013-22.

FOXA1: Growth inhibitor and a favorable prognostic factor in human breast cancer.

Wolf I(1), Bose S, Williamson EA, Miller CW, Karlan BY, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. wolfi@inter.net.il

The transcription factor Forkhead-box A1 (Foxa1), a member of the FOX class of
transcription factors, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of lung,
esophageal and prostate cancers. We have recently identified transcriptional
activation of p27 by FOXA1. In this study, we analyzed the activities and
expression pattern of FOXA1 in breast cancer. Forced expression of FOXA1
inhibited clonal growth of breast cancer cell lines, and FOXA1 levels inversely
correlated with growth stimuli. In the estrogen receptor (ER)-positive MCF-7
cells, FOXA1 increased p27 promoter activity and inhibited the ER pathway
activity. Analysis of FOXA1 expression in breast tissue arrays revealed
significantly higher expression in pure ductal carcinomas in situ compared to
invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC); and in IDC, high expression of FOXA1 was
associated with favorable prognostic factors. Yet, FOXA1 expression was noted in 
a subset of the ER-negative tumors. Taken together, our findings suggest a growth
inhibitory role for FOXA1, and identify it as a novel, potential prognostic
factor in breast cancer.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17163418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2006 Dec;13(4):1109-20.

Identification of novel genes that co-cluster with estrogen receptor alpha in
breast tumor biopsy specimens, using a large-scale real-time reverse
transcription-PCR approach.

Tozlu S(1), Girault I, Vacher S, Vendrell J, Andrieu C, Spyratos F, Cohen P,
Lidereau R, Bieche I.

Author information: 
(1)Centre René Huguenin, FNCLCC, St-Cloud F-92210, France.

The estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
and clinical behavior of breast cancer. To obtain further insights into the
molecular basis of estrogen-dependent forms of this malignancy, we used real-time
quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR to compare the mRNA expression of 560
selected genes in ERalpha-positive and ERalpha-negative breast tumors. Fifty-one 
(9.1%) of the 560 genes were significantly upregulated in ERalpha-positive breast
tumors compared with ERalpha-negative breast tumors. In addition to well-known
ERalpha-induced genes (PGR, TFF1/PS2, BCL2, ERBB4, CCND1, etc.) and genes
recently identified by cDNA microarray-based approaches (GATA3, TFF3, MYB, STC2, 
HPN/HEPSIN, FOXA1, XBP1, SLC39A6/LIV-1, etc.), an appreciable number of novel
genes were identified, many of, which were weakly expressed. This validates the
use of large-scale real-time RT-PCR as a method complementary to cDNA microarrays
for molecular tumor profiling. Most of the new genes identified here encoded
secreted proteins (SEMA3B and CLU), growth factors (BDNF, FGF2 and EGF), growth
factor receptors (IL6ST, PTPRT, RET, VEGFR1 and FGFR2) or metabolic enzymes
(CYP2B6, CA12, ACADSB, NAT1, LRBA, SLC7A2 and SULT2B1). Importantly, we also
identified a large number of genes encoding proteins with either pro-apoptotic
(PUMA, NOXA and TATP73) or anti-apoptotic properties (BCL2, DNTP73 and TRAILR3). 
Surprisingly, only a small proportion of the 51 genes identified in breast tumor 
biopsy specimens were confirmed to be ERalpha-regulated and/or E2-regulated in
vitro (cultured cell lines). Therefore, this study identified a limited number of
genes and signaling pathways, which better delineate the role of ERalpha in
breast cancer. Some of the genes identified here could be useful for diagnosis or
for predicting endocrine responsiveness, and could form the basis for novel
therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 17158757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Cell. 2006 Dec 1;127(5):1041-55.

GATA-3 maintains the differentiation of the luminal cell fate in the mammary
gland.

Kouros-Mehr H(1), Slorach EM, Sternlicht MD, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and The Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors plays fundamental roles in cell-fate
specification. However, it is unclear if these genes are necessary for the
maintenance of cellular differentiation after development. We identified GATA-3
as the most highly enriched transcription factor in the mammary epithelium of
pubertal mice. GATA-3 was found in the luminal cells of mammary ducts and the
body cells of terminal end buds (TEBs). Upon conditional deletion of GATA-3, mice
exhibited severe defects in mammary development due to failure in TEB formation
during puberty. After acute GATA-3 loss, adult mice exhibited undifferentiated
luminal cell expansion with basement-membrane detachment, which led to
caspase-mediated cell death in the long term. Further, FOXA1 was identified as a 
downstream target of GATA-3 in the mammary gland. This suggests that GATA-3
actively maintains luminal epithelial differentiation in the adult mammary gland,
which raises important implications for the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2646406
PMID: 17129787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 12;352(2):456-62. Epub 2006 Nov 16.

Microarray analysis of gene expression in Men1 knockout embryoid body reveals
genetic events involved in early mouse embryonic development.

Zhang HL(1), Luo TH, Feng L, Zhao Y, Li WY, Xu J, Zhang Q, Xu LH, Zheng S, Li G, 
Luo M.

Author information: 
(1)Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases,
Shanghai Clinical Center for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, State Key
Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Jiaotong University Medical School,
Shanghai 200025, PR China.

The Men1 gene has been identified as the gene responsible for MEN1, a hereditary 
syndrome transmitted with an autosomal dominant trait. Disruption of the Men1
gene results in defects of multiple organs development, including the nervous
system, heart, liver, cranium, and face. In this study, we used embryoid bodies
(EBs) formed from wild-type and Men1-/- ES cells as a model system to investigate
effect of Men1 gene on the embryo development. We characterized in detail gene
expression profile of these Men1-/- EBs by microarray techniques and identified a
series of putative menin targeted genes, including genes involved in development 
of bone (e.g., Postn, Runx2, and Msx2), liver (e.g., KDR), blood (e.g., Hox9 and 
Kitl), and pancreatic islet (e.g., Sox4, Foxa1, Btc, Igf2, and Nfatc1). Further
studies may shed light onto the underlying mechanisms of the interplay between
menin and these genes.

PMID: 17125736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Dec;63(24):2922-38.

Transcriptional control in the mammalian liver: liver development, perinatal
repression, and zonal gene regulation.

Spear BT(1), Jin L, Ramasamy S, Dobierzewska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.
bspear@uky.edu

Liver function is crucial for maintaining metabolic homeostasis in mammals.
Numerous genes must be properly regulated for the liver to develop and perform a 
variety of activities. Several recent gene-knockout studies in mice have
clarified the roles of GATA6, HNF4alpha, and Foxa1/Foxa2 in early stages of liver
formation. After the liver forms, transcriptional changes continue to occur;
during the perinatal period, certain genes such as alpha-fetoprotein and H19 are 
silenced, others are activated, and position-dependent (or zonal) regulation is
established. Zhx2 was recently identified as one factor involved in postnatal
repression of alpha-fetoprotein and other genes. Furthermore, several studies
indicate that negative regulation is involved in the zonal control of glutamine
synthetase. Finally, exciting new evidence indicates that signaling through the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is also involved in zonal regulation in the adult liver.

PMID: 17041810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2006 Oct;53(5):873-87, viii.

Transcriptional regulation of perinatal lung maturation.

Whitsett JA(1), Matsuzaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
3333 Burnet Avenue Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Respiration at birth depends on maturation changes in lung tissue architecture,
cell differentiation, and gene expression. At the transcriptional level,
maturation is controlled by the actions of a group of transcription factors
mediating gene expression in the lung. A network of transcription factors
regulates gene expression in the respiratory epithelium, which then influences
cell maturation throughout the lung. Glucocorticoids (via the glucocorticoid
receptor), acting primarily in the pulmonary mesenchyme, influence maturation in 
the respiratory epithelium. Elucidation of the intersecting pathways controlling 
perinatal lung function may provide opportunities to induce pulmonary maturation 
in preterm infants at risk for respiratory distress syndrome before birth, and
will help identify genes and processes important for various aspects of lung
function.

PMID: 17027615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Int J Cancer. 2006 Dec 15;119(12):2974-9.

Identification and meta-analysis of a small gene expression signature for the
diagnosis of estrogen receptor status in invasive ductal breast cancer.

Schneider J(1), Ruschhaupt M, Buness A, Asslaber M, Regitnig P, Zatloukal K,
Schippinger W, Ploner F, Poustka A, Sültmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany.

In breast cancer, the determination of estrogen receptor (ER) expression is
crucial for the decision on therapeutic strategies. Current ER expression
analysis is based on immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of ER on formalin fixed
tissue sections. However, low levels of ER expression frequently escape detection
because of varying sensitivities of routine histopathological laboratories.
Moreover, in estimating ER by IHC the receptor protein only is tested instead of 
the complex underlying ER pathway, which reflects its biological activity. To
overcome this limitation, we have used the microarray technology to study 56
samples of invasive ductal carcinoma. We infer a robust and reliable signature of
10 genes, which is associated with ER expression and presumably therapeutically
relevant biological processes. In a meta-analysis, the signature was tested on 3 
further independent microarray gene expression data sets, covering different
laboratories, array platforms, and clinics. The classification based on the
signature showed a very low misclassification rate. In summary, the expression of
few genes is sufficient to determine ER status. Future decisions on antiestrogen 
based therapy in breast cancer could be based on this signature rather than on
immunostaining alone.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17019712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Diabetes. 2006 Oct;55(10):2730-6.

Foxa1-deficient mice exhibit impaired insulin secretion due to uncoupled
oxidative phosphorylation.

Vatamaniuk MZ(1), Gupta RK, Lantz KA, Doliba NM, Matschinsky FM, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 
19104-6145, USA.

Foxa1 (formerly hepatic nuclear factor 3alpha) belongs to the family of Foxa
genes that are expressed in early development and takes part in the
differentiation of endoderm-derived organs and the regulation of glucose
homeostasis. Foxa1-/- pups are growth retarded and hypoglycemic but glucose
intolerant in response to an intraperitoneal glucose challenge. However, the
mechanism of glucose intolerance in this model has not been investigated. Here,
we show that Foxa1-/- islets exhibit decreased glucose-stimulated insulin release
in islet perifusion experiments and have significantly reduced pancreatic insulin
and glucagon content. Moreover, Foxa1-/- beta-cells exhibit attenuated calcium
influx in response to glucose and glyburide, suggesting an insulin secretion
defect either at the level or upstream of the ATP-sensitive K+ channel.
Intracellular ATP levels after incubation with 10 mmol/l glucose were about 2.5
times lower in Foxa1-/- islets compared with controls. This diminished ATP
synthesis could be explained by increased expression of the mitochondrial
uncoupling protein uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) in Foxa1-deficient islets,
resulting in partially uncoupled mitochondria. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays indicate that UCP2 is a direct transcriptional target of Foxa1 in vivo.
Thus, we have identified a novel function for Foxa1 in the regulation of
oxidative phosphorylation in pancreatic beta-cells.

PMID: 17003337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2597-609. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Calcineurin/Nfat signaling is required for perinatal lung maturation and
function.

Davé V(1), Childs T, Xu Y, Ikegami M, Besnard V, Maeda Y, Wert SE, Neilson JR,
Crabtree GR, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. davev0@cchmc.org

Pulmonary surfactant proteins and lipids are required for lung function after
birth. Lung immaturity and resultant surfactant deficiency cause respiratory
distress syndrome, a common disorder contributing to morbidity and mortality in
preterm infants. Surfactant synthesis increases prior to birth in association
with formation of the alveoli that mediate efficient gas exchange. To identify
mechanisms controlling perinatal lung maturation, the Calcineurin b1 (Cnb1) gene 
was deleted in the respiratory epithelium of the fetal mouse. Deletion of Cnb1
caused respiratory failure after birth and inhibited the structural maturation of
the peripheral lung. Synthesis of surfactant and a lamellar body-associated
protein, ABC transporter A3 (ABCA3), was decreased prior to birth. Nuclear factor
of activated T cells (Nfat) calcineurin-dependent 3 (Nfatc3), a transcription
factor modulated by calcineurin, was identified as a direct activator of Sftpa,
Sftpb, Sftpc, Abca3, Foxa1, and Foxa2 genes. The calcineurin/Nfat pathway
controls the morphologic maturation of lungs prior to birth and regulates
expression of genes involved in surfactant homeostasis that are critical for
adaptation to air breathing.

PMCID: PMC1570374
PMID: 16998587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Genes Dev. 2006 Sep 15;20(18):2513-26.

A cell-type-specific transcriptional network required for estrogen regulation of 
cyclin D1 and cell cycle progression in breast cancer.

Eeckhoute J(1), Carroll JS, Geistlinger TR, Torres-Arzayus MI, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Estrogen stimulates the proliferation of the most common type of human breast
cancer that expresses estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) through the activation of
the cyclin D1 (CCND1) oncogene. However, our knowledge of ERalpha transcriptional
mechanisms remains limited. Hence, it is still elusive why ERalpha ectopically
expressed in ER-negative breast cancer cells (BCC) is functional on ectopic
reporter constructs but lacks activity on many endogenous target genes, including
CCND1. Here, we show that estradiol (E2) stimulation of CCND1 expression in BCC
depends on a novel cell-type-specific enhancer downstream from the CCND1 coding
region, which is the primary ERalpha recruitment site in estrogen-responsive
cells. The pioneer factor FoxA1 is specifically required for the active chromatin
state of this enhancer and as such is crucial for both CCND1 expression and
subsequent cell cycle progression. Interestingly, even in BCC, CCND1 levels and
proliferation are tightly controlled by E2 through the establishment of a
negative feedforward loop involving the induction of NFIC, a putative tumor
suppressor capable of directly repressing CCND1 transcription. Taken together,
our results reveal an estrogen-regulated combinatorial network including
cell-specific cis- and trans-regulators of CCND1 expression where ERalpha
collaborates with other transcription factors associated with the ER-positive
breast cancer phenotype, including FoxA1 and NFIC.

PMCID: PMC1578675
PMID: 16980581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Bull Cancer. 2006 Sep;93(9):883-7.

[Decoding the mode of action of the estrogen receptor through functional
genomics].

[Article in French]

Laganière J(1), Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de recherches en oncologie moléculaire, Centre universitaire de santé
McGill, 687, avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Estradiol is a potent growth factor of breast cancer cells and inhibition of its 
activity has been a basis for the treatment of this disease for a long time.
Estradiol exerts its action mainly through a nuclear receptor (ERalpha) that
recognizes specific sites in the genome and regulates the transcription of
neighboring genes. The identification of the repertoire of estrogen responsive
genes is considered an essential step for our comprehension of the biological
functions of the hormone and of the molecular mechanisms by which ERalpha control
gene expression. The technology combining immunoprecipitation of DNA fragments
and hybridization to DNA chips currently allows the rapid identification of
transcription factor binding sites on a whole-genome level. The recent
utilization of this technology has not only led to the identification of numerous
ERalpha target genes in breast cancer cells, but has also revealed that the
receptor requires the presence of another transcription factor, known as FOXA1,
to activate a specific subset of these genes. These studies have thus shown that 
factors like FOXA1 can be utilized to compartmentalize the action of the hormone,
suggesting new opportunities to target more precisely the action of nuclear
receptors for the prevention and treatment of hormone-dependent cancer.

PMID: 16980231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Urol. 2006 Oct;176(4 Pt 2):1701-5.

Global gene expression patterns in mouse wolffian duct development.

Mingin G(1), Stahl DA, Chacko J, Koul H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Urosciences, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver,
Colorado, USA.

PURPOSE: We identified genes responsible for terminal differentiation of the
mouse ureter.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We isolated the wolffian ducts of Black Swiss mice from
embryonic days 12.5 to 14.5. These ducts were processed for total RNA extraction.
RNA was amplified and converted to biotinylated cDNA, which was hybridized to
Affymetrix(R) mouse 430 microarray GeneChips. Data were analyzed using Affymetrix
software provided by the core facility at our institution. Data were confirmed by
semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Of 42,000 evaluable transcripts 412 were up-regulated and 133 were
down-regulated more than 1.5-fold between embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5. Of
up-regulated genes 17 were up-regulated more than 3-fold. Of these genes 5 were
selected for further study and they were identified as having roles in cell
growth/regulation in general. Increased expression of Foxa1 was seen at embryonic
day 14.5 in the distal ureter and urogenital sinus.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge this is the first report of differential gene
expression patterns in the developing mouse wolffian duct. Our results diverge
from expression patterns reported in the kidney. This information will enable
future comparisons between WT and transgenic mice with an abnormal phenotype.

PMID: 16945627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2006 Sep;16(6):e7-8. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Transcription factors of beta-cell differentiation and maturation in isolated
human islets: effects of high glucose, high free fatty acids and type 2 diabetes.

Lupi R, Bugliani M, Del Guerra S, Del Prato S, Marchetti P, Boggi U, Filipponi F,
Mosca F.

PMID: 16935697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Oct;63(19-20):2317-28.

The Foxa family of transcription factors in development and metabolism.

Friedman JR(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Abramson Research Center, Room
1007B, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The Foxa subfamily of winged helix/forkhead box (Fox) transcription factors has
been the subject of genetic and biochemical study for over 15 years. During this 
time its three members, Foxa1, Foxa2 and Foxa3, have been found to play important
roles in multiple stages of mammalian life, beginning with early development,
continuing during organogenesis, and finally in metabolism and homeostasis in the
adult. Foxa2 is required for the formation of the node and notochord, and in its 
absence severe defects in gastrulation, neural tube patterning, and gut
morphogenesis result in embryonic lethality. Foxa1 and Foxa2 cooperate to
establish competence in foregut endoderm and are required for normal development 
of endoderm-derived organs such as the liver, pancreas, lungs, and prostate. In
post-natal life, members of the Foxa family control glucose metabolism through
the regulation of multiple target genes in the liver, pancreas, and adipose
tissue. Insight into the unique molecular basis of Foxa function has been
obtained from recent genetic and genomic data, which identify the Foxa proteins
as 'pioneer factors' whose binding to promoters and enhancers enable chromatin
access for other tissue-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 16909212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Dec;94(2):330-41; discussion 235-9. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Sequential exposure to cytokines reflecting embryogenesis: the key for in vitro
differentiation of adult bone marrow stem cells into functional hepatocyte-like
cells.

Snykers S(1), Vanhaecke T, Papeleu P, Luttun A, Jiang Y, Vander Heyden Y,
Verfaillie C, Rogiers V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, B-1090 Brussels,
Belgium. sarah.snykers@vub.ac.be

Differentiation of adult bone marrow stem cells (BMSC) into hepatocyte-like cells
is commonly performed by continuous exposure to a cytokines-cocktail. Here, it is
shown that the differentiation efficacy in vitro can be considerably enhanced by 
sequential addition of liver-specific factors (fibroblast growth factor-4,
hepatocyte growth factor, insulin-transferrin-sodium selenite, and dexamethasone)
in a time-dependent order that closely resembles the secretion pattern during in 
vivo liver embryogenesis. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis and immunocytochemistry
showed that, upon sequential exposure to liver-specific factors, different stages
of hepatocyte differentiation, as seen during liver embryogenesis, can be
mimicked. Indeed, expression of the early hepatocyte markers alpha-fetoprotein
and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)3beta decreased as differentiation progressed,
whereas levels of the late liver-specific markers albumin (ALB), cytokeratin
(CK)18, and HNF1alpha were gradually upregulated. In contrast, cocktail treatment
did not significantly alter the expression pattern of the hepatic markers.
Moreover, sequentially exposed cells featured highly differentiated hepatic
functions, including ALB secretion, glycogen storage, urea production, and
inducible cytochrome P450-dependent activity, far more efficiently compared to
the cocktail condition. In conclusion, sequential induction of the
differentiation process, analogous to in vivo liver development, is crucial for
in vitro differentiation of adult rat BMSC into functional hepatocyte-like cells.
This model may not only be applicable for in vitro studies of endoderm
differentiation but it also provides a "virtually unlimited" source of functional
hepatocytes, suitable for preclinical pharmacological research and testing, and
cell and organ development.

PMID: 16840566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;20(10):2418-31. Epub 2006 Jun 1.

The role of forkhead box A2 to restrict androgen-regulated gene expression of
lipocalin 5 in the mouse epididymis.

Yu X(1), Suzuki K, Wang Y, Gupta A, Jin R, Orgebin-Crist MC, Matusik R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Murine epididymal retinoic acid-binding protein [or lipocalin 5 (Lcn5)] is
synthesized and secreted by the principal cells of the mouse middle/distal caput 
epididymidis. A 5-kb promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene can dictate
androgen-dependent and epididymis region-specific gene expression in transgenic
mice. Here, we reported that the 1.8-kb Lcn5 promoter confers epididymis
region-specific gene expression in transgenic mice. To decipher the mechanism
that directs transcription, 14 chimeric constructs that sequentially removed 100 
bp of 1.8-kb Lcn5 promoter were generated and transfected into epididymal cells
and nonepididymal cells. Transient transfection analysis revealed that 1.3 kb
promoter fragment gave the strongest response to androgens. Between the 1.2-kb to
1.3-kb region, two androgen receptor (AR) binding sites were identified. Adjacent
to AR binding sites, a Foxa2 [Fox (Forkhead box) subclass A] binding site was
confirmed by gel shift assay. Similar Foxa binding sites were also found on the
promoters of human and rat Lcn5, indicating the Foxa binding site is conserved
among species. We previously reported that among the three members of Foxa
family, Foxa1 and Foxa3 were absent in the epididymis whereas Foxa2 was detected 
in epididymal principal cells. Here, we report that Foxa2 displays a
region-specific expression pattern along the epididymis: no staining observed in 
initial segment, light staining in proximal caput, gradiently heavier staining in
middle and distal caput, and strongest staining in corpus and cauda, regions with
little or no expression of Lcn5. In transient transfection experiments, Foxa2
expression inhibits AR induction of the Lcn5 promoter, which is consistent with
the lack of expression of Lcn5 in the corpus and cauda. We conclude that Foxa2
functions as a repressor that restricts AR regulation of Lcn5 to a
segment-specific pattern in the epididymis.

PMID: 16740652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Oncogene. 2006 Jun 29;25(28):3994-4008. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

An estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer subset characterized by a hormonally 
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen.

Doane AS(1), Danso M, Lal P, Donaton M, Zhang L, Hudis C, Gerald WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10021, USA.

Little is known of the underlying biology of estrogen receptor-negative,
progesterone receptor-negative (ER(-)/PR(-)) breast cancer (BC), and few targeted
therapies are available. Clinical heterogeneity of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors suggests
that molecular subsets exist. We performed genome-wide expression analysis of 99 
primary BC samples and eight BC cell lines in an effort to reveal distinct
subsets, provide insight into their biology and potentially identify new
therapeutic targets. We identified a subset of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors with
paradoxical expression of genes known to be either direct targets of ER,
responsive to estrogen, or typically expressed in ER(+) BC. Differentially
expressed genes included SPDEF, FOXA1, XBP1, CYB5, TFF3, NAT1, APOD, ALCAM and AR
(P<0.001). A classification model based on the expression signature of this tumor
class identified molecularly similar BCs in an independent human BC data set and 
among BC cell lines (MDA-MB-453). This cell line demonstrated a proliferative
response to androgen in an androgen receptor-dependent and ER-independent manner.
In addition, the androgen-induced transcriptional program of MDA-MB-453
significantly overlapped the molecular signature of the unique ER(-)/PR(-)
subclass of human tumors. This subset of BCs, characterized by a hormonally
regulated transcriptional program and response to androgen, suggests the
potential for therapeutic strategies targeting the androgen signaling pathway.

PMID: 16491124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Exp Neurol. 2006 Apr;198(2):427-37. Epub 2006 Feb 10.

Identification of novel genes regulated in the developing human ventral
mesencephalon.

Jørgensen JR(1), Juliusson B, Henriksen KF, Hansen C, Knudsen S, Petersen TN,
Blom N, Seiger A, Wahlberg LU.

Author information: 
(1)NsGene A/S, Baltorpvej 154, DK-2750 Ballerup, Denmark. JRJ@nsgene.dk

In the human embryo, from approximately 6 weeks gestational age (GA),
dopaminergic (DA) neurons can be found in the ventral mesencephalon (VM). More
specifically, the post-mitotic neurons are located in the ventral part of the
tegmentum (VT), whereas no mature DA neurons are found in the neighboring dorsal 
part. We used Affymetrix HG-U133 GeneChip technology to compare genome-wide
expression profiles of ventral and dorsal tegmentum from 8 weeks GA human
embryos, in order to identify genes involved in specification, differentiation,
and survival of mesencephalic DA (mDA) neurons. Known mDA marker genes including 
ALDH1A1, DAT1, VMAT2, TH, CALB1, NURR1, FOXA1, GIRK2, PITX3, RET, and DRD2 topped
the list of 96 genes from HG-U133A with higher expression in VT, validating the
experimental set-up. In addition, 28 probes from HG-U133B were identified whereof
most are annotated to UniGene clusters with no gene associated or to genes of
unknown function. Of these, the fifteen most regulated transcripts, representing 
changes down to 56% could be verified by quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR) on a 
developmental series of subdissected human embryonic and fetal brain material,
resulting in not only a regional but also a temporal expression profile. This
revealed a distinct DA-associated profile for in particular a putative
transcription factor (FLJ45455) and the uncharacterized transmembrane proteins
KIAA1145 and SLC10A4. The data presented here may help to device cell replacement
and regenerative therapies for Parkinson's disease (PD).

PMID: 16473350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Dec;1061:77-93.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 interact with the androgen receptor to regulate prostate and
epididymal genes differentially.

Yu X(1), Gupta A, Wang Y, Suzuki K, Mirosevich J, Orgebin-Crist MC, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Previous studies from our group have shown that Foxa1 is expressed in the
prostate and interacts with the androgen receptor (AR) to regulate
prostate-specific genes such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and probasin
(PB). We report here that Foxa2 but not Foxa1 is expressed in the epididymis.
Further, Foxa2 interacts with the AR to regulate the mouse epididymal retinoic
acid binding protein (mE-RABP) gene, an epididymis-specific gene. Binding of
Foxa2 to the mE-RABP promoter was confirmed by gel-shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Overexpression of Foxa2 suppresses androgen
activation of the mE-RABP promoter while overexpression of Foxa2 with
prostate-specific promoters activates gene expression in an androgen-independent 
manner. GST pull-down assays determined that both Foxa1 and Foxa2 physically
interact with the DNA binding domain of the AR. The interaction between Foxa
proteins and AR was further confirmed by gel-shift assays where Foxa protein was 
recruited to AR binding oligomers even when Foxa binding sites were not present, 
and AR was recruited to Foxa binding oligomers even in the absence of an AR
binding site. Given that Foxa1 and Foxa2 proteins are expressed differentially in
the prostate and epididymis, these data suggest that the Foxa proteins have
distinct effects on AR-regulated genes in different male reproductive accessory
organs.

PMID: 16467259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;20(8):1707-14. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

Estrogen receptor target gene: an evolving concept.

Carroll JS(1), Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Estrogen receptor (ER) functions as a transcription factor to induce gene
expression events sufficient for cell division and breast cancer progression. A
significant body of work exists on the identification of ER gene targets and the 
cofactors that contribute to these transcription events, yet surprisingly little 
is known of the cis-regulatory elements involved. In this review, we investigate 
the advances in technology that contribute to a comprehensive understanding of ER
target genes and explore recent work identifying cis-regulatory domains that
augment transcription of these targets. Specifically, we find that ER association
with gene targets results from an association with the pioneer factor FoxA1,
responsible for recruitment of ER to the genome. Recruitment of ER to the genome 
does not occur at promoter proximal regions, but instead involves distal enhancer
elements that function to tether the ER complex to the target gene promoters.
These advances in technology permit a more detailed investigation of ER activity 
and may aid in the development of superior drug interventions.

PMID: 16396959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Oncogene. 2006 Mar 2;25(9):1391-9.

BRCA1 and FOXA1 proteins coregulate the expression of the cell cycle-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1).

Williamson EA(1), Wolf I, O'Kelly J, Bose S, Tanosaki S, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. ewilliamson@salud.unm.edu

We have previously shown that the breast cancer susceptibility gene, BRCA1, can
transcriptionally activate the p27(Kip1) promoter. The BRCA1-responsive element
was defined as a 35 bp region from position -545 to -511. We next determined that
within this region is also a potential binding site for the transcription factor 
Forkhead box (FOX)A1. RNA and protein analysis as well as immunohistochemistry
showed that expression of FOXA1 correlated with the expression of the estrogen
receptor in a panel of breast cancer cell lines and tissues. In transient
transfection reporter assays, FOXA1 could activate the p27(Kip1) promoter.
Cotransfection of BRCA1 and FOXA1 resulted in a synergistic activation of the
p27(Kip1) promoter. Mutation of the FOXA1 DNA-binding site in the p27(Kip1)
promoter-luciferase construct significantly diminished the activity of FOXA1
alone or in combination with BRCA1. Cotransfection of FOXA1 and BRCA1 resulted in
a greater amount of each protein compared to transfection of each expression
vector alone. The half-life of FOXA1 was increased when coexpressed with BRCA1.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis demonstrated that FOXA1 could bind 
to a wild-type oligonucleotide containing the FOXA1 binding site in the p27(Kip1)
promoter, but this binding was lost upon mutation of this FOXA1 binding site. The
protein-DNA binding complex could be supershifted with an antibody directed
against FOXA1. The activity of the p27(Kip1) promoter as well as FOXA1 expression
was reduced in cells treated with BRCA1 siRNA, thus silencing the expression of
BRCA1 protein. In summary, we identified a FOXA1 binding site within the
BRCA1-responsive element of the p27(Kip1) promoter and showed that FOXA1
activated the promoter alone and in conjunction with BRCA1. Furthermore, we
identified high expression of FOXA1 in breast cancer cell lines and tissues,
discovered a role for BRCA1 in the regulation of p27(Kip1) transcription and a
possible interaction with BRCA1.

PMID: 16331276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Carcinog. 2005 Dec;44(4):223-32.

Species-specific effects of the hepatocarcinogens
3'-methyl-4-dimethyl-aminoazobenzene and ortho-aminoazotoluene in mouse and rat
liver.

Merkulova TI(1), Kropachev KY, Timofeeva OA, Vasiliev GV, Levashova ZB,
Ilnitskaya SI, Kobzev VF, Pakharukova MY, Bryzgalov LO, Kaledin VI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression Control, Institute of Cytology and Genetics of
the Siberian Division of Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

The effects of rat-specific hepatocarcinogen 3'-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazobenzene 
(3'-MeDAB), mouse-specific hepatocarcinogen ortho-aminoazotoluene (OAT),
non-species-specific hepatocarcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DENA), and
non-carcinogenic 4'-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazobenzene (4'-MeDAB) on glucocorticoid
induction of tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) and DNA-binding activity of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family of transcription factors were
investigated with carcinogen-susceptible and -resistant animals. Species-specific
hepatocarcinogens 3'-MeDAB and OAT strongly inhibited glucocorticoid induction of
TAT in the liver of susceptible but not resistant animals. DENA, which is highly 
carcinogenic for the liver of both rats and mice inhibited glucocorticoid
induction of TAT in both species, while non-carcinogenic 4'-MeDAB was absolutely 
ineffective both in rats and mice. The inhibition of TAT activity by the
carcinogens was due to reduced levels of TAT mRNA, which is most likely to be a
result of the reduced rate of transcription initiation of the TAT gene. In all
cases, the TAT inhibition was accompanied by significant reduction of DNA-binding
activity of the HNF3 transcription factor, which is known to be critical to
glucocorticoid regulation of TAT gene. We also demonstrated that the described
species-specific effects of OAT and of 3'-MeDAB on HNF3 DNA-binding activity may 
be initiated not only by administration in vivo, but also by their direct
administration to homogenate, intact nuclei or nuclear lysate, but not to nuclear
extract fraction, obtained by precipitation with 0.32 g/mL of ammonium sulfate
(Fraction I). We showed, that a factor responsible for this effect might be
precipitated in 0.32-0.47 g/mL interval of ammonium sulfate concentration. In
contrast, non-specific hepatocarcinogen DENA was effective upon being added
directly to Fraction I, implying a different mechanism of its action.

PMID: 16267830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Feb;34(2):151-7. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Transdifferentiation of ciliated cells during repair of the respiratory
epithelium.

Park KS(1), Wells JM, Zorn AM, Wert SE, Laubach VE, Fernandez LG, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Since the lung is repeatedly subjected to injury by pathogens and toxicants,
maintenance of pulmonary homeostasis requires rapid repair of its epithelial
surfaces. Ciliated bronchiolar epithelial cells, previously considered as
terminally differentiated, underwent squamous cell metaplasia within hours after 
bronchiolar injury with naphthalene. Expression of transcription factors active
in morphogenesis and differentiation of the embryonic lung, including
beta-catenin, Foxa2, Foxj1, and Sox family members (Sox17 and Sox2), was
dynamically regulated during repair and redifferentiation of the bronchiolar
epithelium after naphthalene injury. Squamous cells derived from ciliated cells
spread beneath injured Clara cells within 6-12 h after injury, maintaining the
integrity of the epithelium. Dynamic changes in cell shape and gene expression,
indicating cell plasticity, accompanied the transition from squamous to cuboidal 
to columnar cell types as differentiation-specific cell markers typical of the
mature airway were restored. Similar dynamic changes in the expression of these
transcription factors occurred in ciliated and Clara cells during regeneration of
the lung after unilateral pneumonectomy. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that ciliated epithelial cells spread and transdifferentiate into
distinct epithelial cell types to repair the airway epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2644179
PMID: 16239640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):598-607. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha binding at P sequences of the human growth
hormone locus is associated with pituitary repressor function.

Norquay LD(1), Yang X, Jin Y, Detillieux KA, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, 730 William Avenue,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3J7.

The human GH family consists of five genes, including the placental chorionic
somatomammotropins (CS), within a single locus on chromosome 17. Based on
nuclease sensitivity, the entire GH/CS locus is accessible in pituitary
chromatin, yet only GH-N is expressed. Previously, we reported a P sequence
element (263P) capable of repressing placental CS-A promoter activity in
transfected pituitary (GC) cells, and our data indicated a possible role for
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) and regulatory factor X1 in this repression. In this
study we show the formation of two independent pituitary complexes in vitro: a
repressor complex containing NF-1 and a nonfunctional complex containing
regulatory factor X1. In vitro repressor function is stabilized by the presence
of P sequence element C (PSE-C), downstream of the previously characterized PSE-A
and PSE-B. Repressor function is also dependent on an intact Pit-1 binding site
in the CS-A promoter. EMSAs with PSE-C reveal binding of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3/forkhead (HNF-3/fkh) family of transcription factors in rat pituitary GC
cells. This observation is extended to human pituitary tissue, where HNF-3alpha's
association with P sequences is confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Furthermore, protein-protein interactions between HNF-3alpha and NF-1 family
members are demonstrated. These results identify HNF-3alpha as an additional
member of the pituitary P sequence regulatory complex, implicating it in
tissue-specific expression of the human GH/CS family.

PMID: 16239259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Genes Immun. 2006 Jan;7(1):11-8.

Evaluation of AGR2 and AGR3 as candidate genes for inflammatory bowel disease.

Zheng W(1), Rosenstiel P, Huse K, Sina C, Valentonyte R, Mah N, Zeitlmann L,
Grosse J, Ruf N, Nürnberg P, Costello CM, Onnie C, Mathew C, Platzer M, Schreiber
S, Hampe J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel,
Germany.

Linkage analyses have implicated chromosome 7p21.3 as a susceptibility region for
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Recently, the mouse phenotype with diarrhea and
goblet cell dysfunction caused by anterior gradient protein 2 dysfunction was
reported (European patent WO2004056858). The genes encoding for the human
homologues AGR2 and AGR3 are localized on chromosome 7p21.3. The gene structures 
were verified and mutation detection was performed in 47 IBD patients. A total of
30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested for association to
ulcerative colitis (UC, N = 317) and Crohn's disease (CD, N = 631) in a German
cohort and verified in a UK cohort of 384 CD and 311 UC patients. An association 
signal was identified in the 5' region of the AGR2 gene (most significant SNP
hcv1702494, nominal P(TDT) = 0.011, P(case/control) = 0.0007, OR = 1.34, combined
cohort). The risk haplotype carried an odds ratio of 1.43 in the German
population (P = 0.002). AGR2 was downregulated in UC patients as compared to
normal controls (P < 0.001) and a trend toward lower expression was seen in
carriers of the risk alleles. Luciferase assays of the AGR2 promoter showed
regulation by the goblet cell-specific transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2. In 
summary, AGR2 represents an interesting new avenue into the etiopathophysiology
of IBD and the maintenance of epithelial integrity.

PMID: 16222343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Nov;289(5):L750-9.

Stage-specific regulation of respiratory epithelial cell differentiation by
Foxa1.

Besnard V(1), Wert SE, Kaestner KH, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Foxa1 is a member of the winged helix family of transcription factors that is
expressed in epithelial cells of the conducting airways and in alveolar type II
cells of the lung. To determine the role of Foxa1 during lung morphogenesis,
histology and gene expression were assessed in lungs from Foxa1-/- gene-targeted 
mice from embryonic day (E) 16.5 to postnatal day (PN) 13. Deletion of Foxa1
perturbed maturation of the respiratory epithelium at precise times during lung
morphogenesis. While dilatation of peripheral lung saccules was delayed in
Foxa1-/- mice at E16.5, sacculation was unperturbed later in development
(E17.5-E18.5). At PN5, alveolarization was markedly delayed in Foxa1-/- mice;
however, by PN13 lung histology was comparable to wild-type controls. Clara cell 
secretory protein (CCSP), prosurfactant protein (SP)-C, and SP-B protein content 
and immunostaining were decreased in Foxa1-/- mice between E16.5 and E18.5 but
normalized after birth. Timing and sites of expression of thyroid transcription
factor-1, Foxj1, and beta-tubulin were unaltered in lungs of Foxa1-/- mice. In
vitro, Foxa1 regulated the activity of CCSP and SP-A, SP-B, SP-C, and SP-D
promoters as assessed by luciferase reporter assays in HeLa, H441, and MLE15
cells. Although Foxa1 regulates respiratory epithelial differentiation and
structural maturation of the lung at precise developmental periods, the delay in 
maturation is subsequently compensated at times to enable respiratory function
and restore normal lung structure after birth.

PMID: 16214823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Feb;290(2):L351-8. Epub 2005 Sep 23.

Ceramide decreases surfactant protein B gene expression via downregulation of
TTF-1 DNA binding activity.

Sparkman L(1), Chandru H, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Center at Tyler, TX
75708-3154, USA.

Ceramide, a sphingolipid, is an important signaling molecule in the inflammatory 
response. Mediators of acute lung injury such as TNF-alpha, platelet-activating
factor, and Fas/Apo ligand stimulate sphingomyelin hydrolysis to increase
intracellular ceramide levels. Surfactant protein B (SP-B), a hydrophobic protein
of pulmonary surfactant, is essential for surfactant function and lung stability.
In this study we investigated the effects of ceramide on SP-B gene expression in 
H441 lung epithelial cells. Ceramide decreased SP-B mRNA levels in control and
dexamethasone-treated cells after 24-h incubation and inhibition of SP-B mRNA was
associated with inhibition of immunoreactive SP-B. In transient transfections
assays, ceramide inhibited SP-B promoter activity, indicating that the inhibitory
effects are exerted at the transcriptional level. Deletion mapping experiments
showed that the ceramide-responsive region is located within the -233/-80-bp
region of human SP-B promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift and reporter assays
showed that ceramide reduced the DNA binding activity and transactivation
capability of thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1/Nkx2.1), a key factor for
SP-B promoter activity. Collectively these data showed that ceramide inhibits
SP-B gene expression by reducing the DNA biding activity of TTF-1/Nkx2.1
transcription factor. Protein kinase C inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide and the
protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein partially reversed ceramide
inhibition, indicating that protein kinases play important roles in the ceramide 
inhibition of SP-B gene expression. Chemical inhibitors of de novo ceramide
synthesis and sphingomyelin hydrolysis had no effect on TNF-alpha inhibition of
SP-B promoter activity and mRNA levels, suggesting that ceramide does not play a 
role in the inhibition.

PMID: 16183668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cell Cycle. 2005 Sep;4(9):1146-8. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

The making of the liver: developmental competence in foregut endoderm and
induction of the hepatogenic program.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. Kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

The making of the vertebrate liver occurs in a two step process, beginning with
the establishment of competence in the foregut endoderm to respond to signals
from cardiac mesoderm, followed by the induction of liver-specific gene
expression. Two winged helix transcription factors, Foxa1 and Foxa2, act in
concert in hepatic specification. In a mouse model engineered to lack both of
these genes in the foregut endoderm, no liver bud is formed and expression of
even the earliest known hepatoblast markers does not occur. Furthermore, foregut 
endoderm derived from double mutant embryos is not responsive to inductive
signals in vitro. The Foxa1/Foxa2 model is the first of a completely "liver-less 
mouse" and provides strong evidence for the competence model of hepatic
induction.

PMID: 16123587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 16;102(33):11651-6. Epub 2005 Aug 8.

From the Cover: Location analysis of estrogen receptor alpha target promoters
reveals that FOXA1 defines a domain of the estrogen response.

Laganière J(1), Deblois G, Lefebvre C, Bataille AR, Robert F, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Department of Medicine, McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada H3A 1A1.

Nuclear receptors can activate diverse biological pathways within a target cell
in response to their cognate ligands, but how this compartmentalization is
achieved at the level of gene regulation is poorly understood. We used a
genome-wide analysis of promoter occupancy by the estrogen receptor alpha
(ERalpha) in MCF-7 cells to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the
action of 17beta-estradiol (E2) in controlling the growth of breast cancer cells.
We identified 153 promoters bound by ERalpha in the presence of E2. Motif-finding
algorithms demonstrated that the estrogen response element (ERE) is the most
common motif present in these promoters whereas conventional chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed E2-modulated recruitment of coactivator AIB1
and RNA polymerase II at these loci. The promoters were linked to known ERalpha
targets but also to many genes not directly associated with the estrogenic
response, including the transcriptional factor FOXA1, whose expression correlates
with the presence of ERalpha in breast tumors. We found that ablation of FOXA1
expression in MCF-7 cells suppressed ERalpha binding to the prototypic TFF1
promoter (which contains a FOXA1 binding site), hindered the induction of TFF1
expression by E2, and prevented hormone-induced reentry into the cell cycle.
Taken together, these results define a paradigm for estrogen action in breast
cancer cells and suggest that regulation of gene expression by nuclear receptors 
can be compartmentalized into unique transcriptional domains by means of
licensing of their activity to cofactors such as FOXA1.

PMCID: PMC1183449
PMID: 16087863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Cell. 2005 Jul 15;122(1):33-43.

Chromosome-wide mapping of estrogen receptor binding reveals long-range
regulation requiring the forkhead protein FoxA1.

Carroll JS(1), Liu XS, Brodsky AS, Li W, Meyer CA, Szary AJ, Eeckhoute J, Shao W,
Hestermann EV, Geistlinger TR, Fox EA, Silver PA, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, 44 Binney Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Estrogen plays an essential physiologic role in reproduction and a pathologic one
in breast cancer. The completion of the human genome has allowed the
identification of the expressed regions of protein-coding genes; however, little 
is known concerning the organization of their cis-regulatory elements. We have
mapped the association of the estrogen receptor (ER) with the complete
nonrepetitive sequence of human chromosomes 21 and 22 by combining chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with tiled microarrays. ER binds selectively to a
limited number of sites, the majority of which are distant from the transcription
start sites of regulated genes. The unbiased sequence interrogation of the
genuine chromatin binding sites suggests that direct ER binding requires the
presence of Forkhead factor binding in close proximity. Furthermore, knockdown of
FoxA1 expression blocks the association of ER with chromatin and estrogen-induced
gene expression demonstrating the necessity of FoxA1 in mediating an estrogen
response in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 16009131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Eur J Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;84(5):555-66.

Homeobox B3, FoxA1 and FoxA2 interactions in epithelial lung cell differentiation
of the multipotent M3E3/C3 cell line.

Yoshimi T(1), Nakamura N, Shimada S, Iguchi K, Hashimoto F, Mochitate K,
Takahashi Y, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo
192-0392, Japan. vzz05106@nifty.com

HOM/C homeobox (Hox) and forkhead box (Fox) factors are reported to be expressed 
in the foregut endoderm and are subsequently detected in a spatio-temporal
pattern during lung development. Some of these factors were reported to influence
the expression of lung marker proteins or to modulate lung development. To
clarify the molecular mechanisms for generating functional lung cells from
progenitor cell populations, we introduced the forkhead box factors, FoxA1 and
FoxA2, and the homeobox factor, HoxB3, into the differentiation process in a
multipotent hamster lung epithelial M3E3/C3 cell line. Ectopic expression of
FoxA2 promoted differentiation to Clara-like cells with up-regulation of the
expression of the lung marker proteins, Clara cell-specific 10-kDa protein and
surfactant protein-B. In contrast, FoxA1 repressed the differentiation. HoxB3
transfection induced FoxA2 expression transiently at the pre-differentiation
stage. The endogenous HoxB3 expression level decreased at later stages of
Clara-like cell differentiation, and the attenuation was enhanced by FoxA2
transfection. HoxB3 is a putative upstream regulator that enhances FoxA2
expression at the pre-differentiation stage. In addition, we found that the
expression of HoxA4, HoxA5, and HoxC9 increased differentially during Clara-like 
cell differentiation. These results suggest that HoxB3 may be a putative positive
regulator of FoxA2 expression at the pre-differentiation stage, and those
interactions of Fox factors and Hox factors could participate in Clara cell
differentiation.

PMID: 16003909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Prostate. 2006 Jul 1;66(10):1013-28.

Expression and role of Foxa proteins in prostate cancer.

Mirosevich J(1), Gao N, Gupta A, Shappell SB, Jove R, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center, AA-1302 Medical Center North, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

The molecular mechanism(s) for prostate cancer progression to androgen
independence are poorly understood. We have recently shown that Foxa1 and Foxa2
proteins are differentially expressed in epithelial cells during murine prostate 
development, growth, and adult function. Currently, the role of Foxa proteins in 
prostate cancer development and progression is unknown. Foxa protein expression
was investigated in the LPB-Tag LADY mouse prostate cancer models, in human
prostate cancer specimens, and various prostate cancer cell lines using Western
blot and immunostaining analysis. In vitro transient transfection, studies were
performed to investigate Foxa/prostate-specific gene regulation. Foxa1 was
strongly expressed in areas of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) in both 
the androgen dependent 12T-7f and in the metastatic, androgen independent 12T-10 
LADY models. Prominent Foxa1 and Foxa2 expression was observed in 12T-10 invasive
undifferentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas, in the hormone independent and
metastasizing 12T-10 derived, NE-10 allograft tumors, and in all metastatic
lesions isolated from 12T-10 mice. Foxa1 protein expression was always observed
in human prostate carcinomas, regardless of Gleason grade score, while Foxa2 was 
only detected in neuroendocrine small cell carcinomas and in some high Gleason
score adenocarcinomas. Foxa proteins were also differentially expressed in three 
prostate cancer cell lines. Importantly, in vitro functional assays demonstrated 
that Foxa2 could activate androgen-dependent prostate-specific genes in an
androgen receptor and ligand-independent manner. These results suggest that Foxa 
proteins are important in prostate carcinogenesis. In particular, Foxa2 may be
involved in progression of prostate cancer to androgen independence. As such,
Foxa proteins may represent novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16001449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3431-43. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Forkhead box A1 regulates prostate ductal morphogenesis and promotes epithelial
cell maturation.

Gao N(1), Ishii K, Mirosevich J, Kuwajima S, Oppenheimer SR, Roberts RL, Jiang M,
Yu X, Shappell SB, Caprioli RM, Stoffel M, Hayward SW, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

We have previously shown that a forkhead transcription factor Foxa1 interacts
with androgen signaling and controls prostate differentiated response. Here, we
show the mouse Foxa1 expression marks the entire embryonic urogenital sinus
epithelium (UGE), contrasting with Shh and Foxa2, which are restricted to the
basally located cells during prostate budding. The Foxa1-deficient mouse prostate
shows a severely altered ductal pattern that resembles primitive epithelial cords
surrounded by thick stromal layers. Characterization of these mutant cells
indicates a population of basal-like cells similar to those found in the
embryonic UGE, whereas no differentiated or mature luminal epithelial cells are
found in Foxa1-deficient epithelium. These phenotypic changes are accompanied
with molecular aberrations, including focal epithelial activation of Shh and
elevated Foxa2 and Notch1 in the null epithelium. Perturbed epithelial-stromal
interactions induced by Foxa1-deficient epithelium is evident, as demonstrated by
the expansion of surrounding smooth muscle and elevated levels of stromal factors
(Bmp4, Fgf7, Fgf10 and Gli). The prostatic homeobox protein Nkx3.1, a known
proliferation inhibitor, was downregulated in Foxa1-deficient epithelial cells,
while several prostate-specific androgen-regulated markers, including a novel
Foxa1 target, are absent in the null prostate. These data indicate that Foxa1
plays a pivotal role in controlling prostate morphogenesis and cell
differentiation.

PMID: 15987773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Nature. 2005 Jun 16;435(7044):944-7.

The initiation of liver development is dependent on Foxa transcription factors.

Lee CS(1), Friedman JR, Fulmer JT, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The specification of the vertebrate liver is thought to occur in a two-step
process, beginning with the establishment of competence within the foregut
endoderm for responding to organ-specific signals, followed by the induction of
liver-specific genes. On the basis of expression and in vitro studies, it has
been proposed that the Foxa transcription factors establish competence by opening
compacted chromatin structures within liver-specific target genes. Here we show
that Foxa1 and Foxa2 (forkhead box proteins A1 and A2) are required in concert
for hepatic specification in mouse. In embryos deficient for both genes in the
foregut endoderm, no liver bud is evident and expression of the hepatoblast
marker alpha-fetoprotein (Afp) is lost. Furthermore, Foxa1/Foxa2-deficient
endoderm cultured in the presence of exogenous fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) 
fails to initiate expression of the liver markers albumin and transthyretin.
Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for the establishment of competence within the
foregut endoderm and the onset of hepatogenesis.

PMID: 15959514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem J. 2005 Aug 1;389(Pt 3):831-41.

Characterization of a novel Foxa (hepatocyte nuclear factor-3) site in the
glucagon promoter that is conserved between rodents and humans.

Sharma SK(1), Leinemann U, Ratke R, Oetjen E, Blume R, Dickel C, Knepel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Göttingen, D-37099
Göttingen, Germany.

The pancreatic islet hormone glucagon stimulates hepatic glucose production and
thus maintains blood glucose levels in the fasting state. Transcription factors
of the Foxa [Fox (forkhead box) subclass A; also known as HNF-3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-3)] family are required for cell-specific activation of the
glucagon gene in pancreatic islet alpha-cells. However, their action on the
glucagon gene is poorly understood. In the present study, comparative sequence
analysis and molecular characterization using protein-DNA binding and transient
transfection assays revealed that the well-characterized Foxa-binding site in the
G2 enhancer element of the rat glucagon gene is not conserved in humans and that 
the human G2 sequence lacks basal enhancer activity. A novel Foxa site was
identified that is conserved in rats, mice and humans. It mediates activation of 
the glucagon gene by Foxa proteins and confers cell-specific promoter activity in
glucagon-producing pancreatic islet alpha-cell lines. In contrast with previously
identified Foxa-binding sites in the glucagon promoter, which bind nuclear Foxa2,
the novel Foxa site was found to bind preferentially Foxa1 in nuclear extracts of
a glucagon-producing pancreatic islet alpha-cell line, offering a mechanism that 
explains the decrease in glucagon gene expression in Foxa1-deficient mice. This
site is located just upstream of the TATA box (between -30 and -50), suggesting a
role for Foxa proteins in addition to direct transcriptional activation, such as 
a role in opening the chromatin at the start site of transcription of the
glucagon gene.

PMCID: PMC1180734
PMID: 15828872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Apr 1;304(2):593-603. Epub 2004 Dec 30.

FoxA1 binding to the MMTV LTR modulates chromatin structure and transcription.

Holmqvist PH(1), Belikov S, Zaret KS, Wrange O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, The Medical Nobel Institute, Box
285, Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Novel binding sites for the forkhead transcription factor family member Forkhead 
box A (FoxA), previously referred to as Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 3 (HNF3), were 
found within the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (MMTV LTR). The
effect of FoxA1 on MMTV LTR chromatin structure, and expression was evaluated in 
Xenopus laevis oocytes. Mutagenesis of either of the two main FoxA binding sites 
showed that the distal site, -232/-221, conferred FoxA1-dependent partial
inhibition of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) driven MMTV transcription. The
proximal FoxA binding segment consisted of two individual FoxA sites at -57/-46
and -45/-34, respectively, that mediated an increased basal MMTV transcription.
FoxA1 binding altered the chromatin structure of both the inactive- and the
hormone-activated MMTV LTR. Hydroxyl radical foot printing revealed
FoxA1-mediated changes in the nucleosome arrangement. Micrococcal nuclease
digestion showed the hormone-dependent sub-nucleosome complex, containing
approximately 120 bp of DNA, to be expanded by FoxA1 binding to the proximal
segment into a larger complex containing approximately 200 bp. The potential
function of the FoxA1-mediated expression of the MMTV provirus for maintenance of
expression in different tissues is discussed.

PMID: 15748903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Mar;25(6):2147-57.

Transcription factor interactions and chromatin modifications associated with
p53-mediated, developmental repression of the alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Nguyen TT(1), Cho K, Stratton SA, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Genes and
Development, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses of developmentally
staged solid tissues isolated from wild-type and p53-null mice to determine
specific histone N-terminal modifications, histone-modifying proteins, and
transcription factor interactions at the developmental repressor region (-850)
and core promoter of the hepatic tumor marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene. Both 
repression of AFP during liver development and silencing in the brain, where AFP 
is never expressed, are associated with dimethylation of histone H3 lysine 9
(DiMetH3K9) and the presence of heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1). These
heterochromatic markers remain localized to AFP during developmental repression
but spread to the upstream albumin gene during silencing. Developmentally
regulated decreases in levels of acetylated H3 (AcH3K9) and H4 (AcH4) and of di- 
and trimethylated H3K4 (DiMetH3K4 and TriMetH3K4) occur at both the core promoter
and distal repressor regions of AFP. Hepatic expression of AFP correlates with
FoxA interaction at the repressor region and the binding of RNA polymerase II and
TATA-binding protein to the core promoter. p53 acts as a developmental repressor 
of AFP in the liver by binding to chromatin, excluding FoxA interaction and
targeting mSin3A/HDAC1 to the distal repressor region. p53-null mice exhibit
developmentally delayed AFP repression, concomitant with acetylation of H3K9,
methylation of H3K4, and loss of DiMetH3K9, mSin3A/HDAC1, and HP1 interactions.

PMCID: PMC1061614
PMID: 15743813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16763-71. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

A hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 site in the fibrinogen beta promoter is important
for interleukin 6-induced expression, and its activity is influenced by the
adjacent -148C/T polymorphism.

Verschuur M(1), de Jong M, Felida L, de Maat MP, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology, Leiden
University Medical Center, P. O. Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, Gaubius Laboratory,
TNO Quality of Life, P. O. Box 2215, 2301 CE Leiden, The Netherlands.

An elevated plasma fibrinogen level is an independent risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. Therefore, an understanding of the regulation of
fibrinogen expression is important. Inflammation and genetic variation of the
fibrinogen beta gene regulate plasma fibrinogen levels, and there are indications
that inflammation and genetic variation interact. The aim of our study was to
gain more understanding of the regulation of the inflammatory response of the
fibrinogen beta gene and to determine the effects of genetic variation.
Luciferase reporter gene assays in hepatoma cells, mutation analysis, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to investigate the
transcriptional regulation of the fibrinogen beta promoter. We identified a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) site located just upstream of previously
identified interleukin-6 (IL6)-responsive sequences. This HNF-3 site is essential
for a full response of the promoter to IL6, which is a new function for HNF-3.
The activity of the CCAAT box/enhancer-binding protein site (located 18
nucleotides downstream of the HNF-3 site and important to the IL6 response)
depends on the integrity of the HNF-3 site and vice versa, explaining the
necessity of HNF-3 in the IL6 response of the fibrinogen beta promoter.
Furthermore, small interfering RNA to HNF-3 reduces the fibrinogen beta mRNA
levels. The rare T allele of the -148C/T polymorphism, which is present between
the binding sites of HNF-3 and CCAAT box/enhancer-binding protein, interferes
with this mechanism, and this polymorphism is in our assay system the only
genetic determinant of IL6-induced promoter activity among six polymorphisms in
the fibrinogen beta promoter.

PMID: 15737987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncogene. 2005 Feb 24;24(9):1580-8.

Distinct gene expression patterns associated with FLT3- and NRAS-activating
mutations in acute myeloid leukemia with normal karyotype.

Neben K(1), Schnittger S, Brors B, Tews B, Kokocinski F, Haferlach T, Müller J,
Hahn M, Hiddemann W, Eils R, Lichter P, Schoch C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics (B060), Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), constitutive activation of the FLT3 receptor
tyrosine kinase, either by internal tandem duplications (FLT3-ITD) of the
juxtamembrane region or by point mutations in the second tyrosine kinase domain
(FLT3-TKD), as well as point mutations of the NRAS gene (NRAS-PM) are among the
most frequent somatic gene mutations. To elucidate whether these mutations cause 
aberrant signal transduction in AML, we used gene expression profiling in a
series of 110 newly diagnosed AML patients with normal karyotype. The different
algorithms used for data analysis revealed highly concordant sets of genes,
indicating that the identified gene signatures are specific for each analysed
subgroup. Whereas samples with FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD could be separated with up
to 100% accuracy, this did not apply for NRAS-PM and wild-type samples,
suggesting that only FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD are associated with an apparent
signature in AML. The set of discriminating genes included several known genes,
which are involved in cell cycle control (CDC14A, WEE1), gene transcription
(HOXB5, FOXA1), and signal transduction (SMG1). In conclusion, we showed that
unique gene expression patterns can be correlated with FLT3-ITD and FLT3-TKD.
This might lead to the identification of further pathogenetic relevant candidate 
genes particularly in AML with normal karyotype.

PMID: 15674343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13809-16. Epub 2005 Jan 24.

Compensatory roles of Foxa1 and Foxa2 during lung morphogenesis.

Wan H(1), Dingle S, Xu Y, Besnard V, Kaestner KH, Ang SL, Wert S, Stahlman MT,
Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3039, USA.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are closely related family members of the Foxa group of
transcription factors that are coexpressed in subsets of respiratory epithelial
cells throughout lung morphogenesis. Shared patterns of expression, conservation 
of DNA binding, and transcriptional activation domains indicate that they may
serve complementary functions in the regulation of gene expression during lung
morphogenesis. Whereas branching morphogenesis of the fetal lung occurs normally 
in the Foxa2Delta/Delta and Foxa1-/- mice, deletion of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 (in
Foxa2Delta/Delta, Foxa1-/- mice) inhibited cell proliferation, epithelial cell
differentiation, and branching. Dilation of terminal lung tubules and decreased
branching were observed as early as embryonic day 12.5. Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulated
Shh (sonic hedgehog) and Shh-dependent genes in the respiratory epithelial cells 
that influenced the expression of genes in the pulmonary mesenchyme that are
required for branching morphogenesis. Epithelial cell differentiation, as
indicated by lack of expression of surfactant protein B, surfactant protein C,
the Clara cell secretory protein, and Foxj1, was inhibited. Foxa family members
regulate signaling and transcriptional programs required for morphogenesis and
cell differentiation during formation of the lung.

PMID: 15668254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Endocrinol. 2005 Jan;184(1):95-105.

Growth hormone regulates the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 gamma and 
other liver-enriched transcription factors in the bovine liver.

Eleswarapu S(1), Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) regulates the expression of many genes in the liver, and for 
some genes this regulation may be mediated through liver-enriched transcription
factors (LETFs). As part of the long-term goal to investigate the role of LETFs
in GH regulation of gene expression in the liver, in this study we determined the
effect of GH administration on the expression of 10 LETFs, including hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3gamma,
HNF-4alpha, HNF-6, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, C/EBPbeta, and
albumin D-element binding protein (DBP) in the bovine liver. Eighteen
non-lactating and non-pregnant Angus cows were assigned randomly to three groups 
(n=6 per group) and each cow received a single intramuscular injection of 500 mg 
slow-release recombinant bovine GH. Liver biopsy samples were taken from group 1 
cows 6 h after GH administration, from group 2 cows 24 h after GH administration,
and from group 3 cows 1 week after GH administration. Liver biopsies were also
collected from group 3 cows 1 day before GH administration, serving as pre-GH
controls. The LETF mRNAs in these liver samples were quantified using
ribonuclease protection assays with probes generated from bovine LETF cDNAs
cloned by standard reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The levels of
HNF-3gamma and HNF-6 mRNAs were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h and 1 week
after GH administration than in the untreated cows or the cows 6 h after GH
administration. The levels of HNF-4alpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 1
week after GH administration than in the other three groups of cows. The levels
of C/EBPalpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h after GH administration
than in the untreated cows or the cows 6 h after GH administration. The levels of
HNF-3alpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 6 h after GH administration but
were lower (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h or 1 week after GH administration compared 
with those in the untreated cows. The levels of DBP mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in
the cows 6 h after GH administration but were lower (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h
after GH administration compared with those in the untreated cows. The levels of 
HNF-1alpha, HNF-3alpha, and C/EBPbeta mRNAs were not different (P>0.05) between
groups. The expression of HNF-1beta mRNA was not detectable. Thus, the expression
of six LETFs including HNF-3gamma , HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, HNF-6, C/EBPalpha, and
DBP mRNAs in the bovine liver is regulated by GH, and these six LETFs may play a 
role in mediating GH regulation of gene expression in the liver. Among the 10
LETFs, the response of HNF-3gamma to GH is most significant. Cloning and
sequencing the promoter region of this gene revealed multiple putative binding
elements for signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5),
suggesting that GH regulation of HNF-3gamma expression in the liver may be
mediated through direct binding of STAT5 to the HNF-3gamma promoter.

PMID: 15642787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Clin Sci (Lond). 2005 Mar;108(3):195-204.

Winged-helix transcription factors and pancreatic development.

Lantz KA(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School, 560
Clinical Research Building, 415 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The forkhead gene family, named after the founding gene member in Drosophila, is 
characterized by a unique DNA-binding domain. This so-called forkhead box encodes
a winged-helix DNA-binding motif, the name of which describes the structure of
the domain when bound to DNA. The three Fox (forkhead box) group A genes, Foxa1, 
Foxa2 and Foxa3, are expressed in embryonic endoderm, the germ layer that gives
rise to the digestive system, and contribute to the specification of the pancreas
and the regulation of glucose homoeostasis. Deletion of the Foxa2 gene in
pancreatic beta-cells in mice results in a phenotype resembling PHHI (persistent 
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia of infancy). Molecular analyses have demonstrated
that Foxa2 is an important regulator of the genes encoding Sur1, Kir6.2 and Schad
(short chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase), mutation of which causes PHHI in
humans. Foxa1 was shown to be an essential activator of glucagon gene expression 
in vivo. An additional winged-helix protein, Foxo1, contributes to pancreatic
beta-cell function by regulating the Pdx1 gene, which is required for pancreatic 
development in cooperation with Foxa2.

PMID: 15631623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):193-208.

Immunohistochemical localization of Foxa1 and Foxa2 in mouse embryos and adult
tissues.

Besnard V(1), Wert SE, Hull WM, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Members of the Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factors family Foxa1 (Hnf-3
alpha), Foxa2 (Hnf-3 beta) are known to influence gene expression in endodermally
derived tissues including lung, liver, pancreas, stomach, and intestine. In the
present study, we have generated highly specific antibodies for Foxa1 and Foxa2
and determined their expression patterns in the developing and adult mouse. Foxa1
and Foxa2 were detected in the nuclei of tissues derived from both foregut and
hindgut endoderm (liver, lung, pancreas, stomach, intestine, prostate and
bladder). Foxa2 and Foxa1 were also detected in organs deriving from ectodermal
(several brain structures and olfactory epithelium) and mesodermal origins
(kidney, vagina and uterus, seminal and coagulating glands) during development.
Colocalization and distinct sites of expression of Foxa1 and Foxa2 indicate
unique as well as overlapping roles of Foxa1 or Foxa2 during morphogenesis and in
the function of different adult organs.

PMID: 15567715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Hepatology. 2004 Dec;40(6):1266-74.

Transcription factor HNF-6/OC-1 inhibits the stimulation of the HNF-3alpha/Foxa1 
gene by TGF-beta in mouse liver.

Plumb-Rudewiez N(1), Clotman F, Strick-Marchand H, Pierreux CE, Weiss MC,
Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Institute of Cellular Pathology and
Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

A network of liver-enriched transcription factors controls differentiation and
morphogenesis of the liver. These factors interact via direct, feedback, and
autoregulatory loops. Previous work has suggested that hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF)-6/OC-1 and HNF-3alpha/FoxA1 participate coordinately in this hepatic
network. We investigated how HNF-6 controls the expression of Foxa1. We observed 
that Foxa1 expression was upregulated in the liver of Hnf6(-/-) mouse embryos and
in bipotential mouse embryonic liver (BMEL) cell lines derived from embryonic
Hnf6(-/-) liver, suggesting that HNF-6 inhibits the expression of Foxa1. Because 
no evidence for a direct repression of Foxa1 by HNF-6 was found, we postulated
the existence of an indirect mechanism. We found that the expression of a
mediator and targets of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling 
was increased both in Hnf6(-/-) liver and in Hnf6(-/-) BMEL cell lines. Using
these cell lines, we demonstrated that TGF-beta signaling was increased in the
absence of HNF-6, and that this resulted from upregulation of TGF-beta receptor
II expression. We also found that TGF-beta can stimulate the expression of Foxa1 
in Hnf6(+/+) cells and that inhibition of TGF-beta signaling in Hnf6(-/-) cells
down-regulates the expression of Foxa1. In conclusion, we propose that Foxa1
upregulation in the absence of HNF-6 results from increased TGF-beta signaling
via increased expression of the TGF-beta receptor II. We further conclude that
HNF-6 inhibits Foxa1 by inhibiting the activity of the TGF-beta signaling
pathway. This identifies a new mechanism of interaction between liver-enriched
transcription factors whereby one factor indirectly controls another by
modulating the activity of a signaling pathway.

PMID: 15562441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Dokl Biochem Biophys. 2004 Jul-Aug;397:251-3.

The unknown nuclear protein that decreases HNF3 activity ensures species
specificity of action of hepatocarcinogenic amino azo dyes.

Kropachev KY(1), Pakharukova MY, Bryzgalov LO, Kaledin VI, Kobzev VF, Merkulova
TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Division, Russian Academy of
Sciences, pr Akademika Lavrent'eva 10, Novosibirsk, 630090 Russia.

PMID: 15523837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Prostate. 2005 Mar 1;62(4):339-52.

Expression of Foxa transcription factors in the developing and adult murine
prostate.

Mirosevich J(1), Gao N, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center, Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Foxa family (a1, a2, and a3) of proteins are transcription
factors that are central to endodermal development. Recently, Foxa1 has been
shown to regulate the transcription of several murine and human prostate specific
genes involved in differentiated function by interacting with DNA promoter
sequences and androgen receptors. Currently, the developmental expression pattern
of Foxa proteins in the murine prostate is unknown.
METHODS: Male CD-1 mice (embryonic, prepubertal, pubertal, and adult) were used
for immunohistochemical analysis of Foxa1, a2, and a3. Immunofluorescence was
also performed for androgen receptor and cytokeratin 14 expression. Prostate
tissue from pre-pubertal, pubertal, and adult mice were analyzed by Western blot 
and RT-PCR analysis for Foxa1, a2, and a3 expression.
RESULTS: Strong Foxa1 immunoreactivity was observed in epithelial cells
throughout prostate development, growth, and adult differentiation. Prominent
Foxa2 protein expression was only observed in the early stages of prostate
development and was exclusively localized to epithelial cells of the forming
buds. RT-PCR analysis identified low Foxa2 mRNA expression levels in the ventral 
and dorsolateral lobes of the adult prostate, with Foxa2 epithelial cell
expression being localized to periurethral regions of the murine adult prostatic 
complex. Foxa3 expression was not observed in the murine prostate.
CONCLUSIONS: Foxa proteins represent epithelial cell markers in the murine
prostate gland. The early expression of Foxa1 and a2 proteins in prostate
formation suggests that these proteins play an important role in normal prostate 
development, in addition to differentiated secretory function.

PMID: 15389796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;18(12):2880-94. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

Orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner represses hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3/Foxa transactivation via inhibition of its DNA binding.

Kim JY(1), Kim HJ, Kim KT, Park YY, Seong HA, Park KC, Lee IK, Ha H, Shong M,
Park SC, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea.

Small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) is an atypical orphan nuclear receptor and
acts as a coregulator of various nuclear receptors. Herein, we examined a novel
cross talk between SHP and a forkhead transcription factor HNF3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3/Foxa. Transient transfection assay demonstrated that SHP
inhibited the transcriptional activity of all three isoforms of HNF3, HNF3alpha, 
beta, and gamma. In vivo and in vitro protein interaction studies showed that SHP
physically interacted with HNF3. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of SHP
significantly decreased the mRNA levels of glucose-6-phosphase (G6Pase),
cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK) in HepG2 cells and rat primary hepatocytes. Moreover, the mRNA level of
G6Pase was notably increased by down-regulation of SHP with small interfering
RNA. Interestingly, HNF3 transactivity was still repressed by SHPDelta128-139
that fails to repress nuclear receptors. Mapping of interaction domain revealed
that SHP interacted with forkhead DNA binding domain of HNF3alpha. Gel mobility
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that SHP inhibits DNA
binding of HNF3. These results suggest that SHP is involved in the regulation of 
G6Pase, CYP7A1, and PEPCK gene expression via novel mechanism of inhibition of
HNF3 activity and expand the role of SHP as a coregulator of other family of
transcription factors in addition to nuclear receptors.

PMID: 15358835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Aug 12;1679(2):195-9.

Promoter variant-dependent expression of the STAT5A gene in bovine liver.

Flisikowski K(1), Starzynski RR, Zwierzchowski L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding
Polish Academy of Sciences, Postepu 1, Jastrzebiec, 05-552 Wólka Kosowska,
Poland. kflisikowski@yahoo.co.uk

Using PCR-heteroduplex and sequencing we identified A/G substitution at position 
-488 in the promoter region of the bovine STAT5A gene. With reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) and other means we showed that the STAT5A expression
level in the liver was higher in cattle with AA than GG genotype. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that the A-->G transition at position -488
increased the STAT5A gene promoter binding capacity for liver nuclear proteins
[possibly hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-3].

Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 15297151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 1;279(40):41936-41. Epub 2004 Jul 13.

Mild nephrogenic diabetes insipidus caused by Foxa1 deficiency.

Behr R(1), Brestelli J, Fulmer JT, Miyawaki N, Kleyman TR, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Foxa1 is a member of the winged helix family of transcription factors and is
expressed in the collecting ducts of the kidney. We investigated its potential
contribution to renal physiology in Foxa1-deficient mice on a defined genetic
background. Foxa1(-/-) mice are dehydrated and exhibit electrolyte imbalance as
evidenced by elevated hematocrit and plasma urea levels, hypernatremia, and
hyperkalemia. This phenotype is the consequence of decreased urine osmolality
secondary to renal vasopressin resistance. Mutations of the human genes encoding 
the vasopressin 2 receptor and aquaporin 2 cause nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; 
however, expression of these genes is maintained or increased, respectively, in
Foxa1(-/-) mice. Likewise, expression of the genes encoding the Na-K-2Cl
cotransporter (NKCC2), the potassium channel ROMK, the chloride channel CLCNKB,
barttin (BSND), and the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR), each of which is
important in sodium reabsorption in the loop of Henle, is maintained or even
increased in Foxa1-deficient mice. Thus, we have shown that Foxa1(-/-) mice
represent a new model of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus with unique molecular
etiology, and we have identified the first transcription factor whose mutation
leads to a defect in renal water homeostasis in vivo.

PMID: 15252040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2004 Nov;31(5):491-500. Epub 2004 Jul 8.

Characterization of ciliated bronchial epithelium 1, a ciliated cell-associated
gene induced during mucociliary differentiation.

Yoshisue H(1), Puddicombe SM, Wilson SJ, Haitchi HM, Powell RM, Wilson DI, Pandit
A, Berger AE, Davies DE, Holgate ST, Holloway JW.

Author information: 
(1)Infection, Inflammation, and Repair Division, University of Southampton School
of Medicine, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.
hyoshisu@soton.ac.uk

Lung epithelial structure is altered in asthma; however, the precise mechanisms
underlying epithelial repair, including differentiation from basal to columnar
epithelial cells, are not well defined. In the course of random sequencing of a
cDNA library from human lung biopsies, we have identified a novel gene, ciliated 
bronchial epithelium 1 (CBE1). Expression of CBE1 was induced during in vitro
differentiation of bronchial epithelial cells. Synchronous expression with tektin
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/forkhead homologue 4, down-regulation by
interleukin-13, and its tissue distribution strongly suggested that CBE1 is
associated with ciliated cells. Two isoforms of the 0.7-kb full-length cDNA were 
identified, resulting in open reading frames with different carboxyl termini,
with no homology to known proteins. Expression of CBE1 in ciliated epithelial
cells was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. Quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis using bronchial biopsies showed 
no difference of expression of CBE1 between normal subjects and subjects with
asthma. Expression studies showed that CBE1 is nuclear- or perinuclear-localized,
depending on cell type. Regulated expression during differentiation and the
subcellular localization of CBE1 suggest that it may play an important role in
the differentiation and/or function of ciliated cells in human airways.

PMID: 15242845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem J. 2004 Sep 1;382(Pt 2):463-70.

Structural requirements of the glucocorticoid-response unit of the
carbamoyl-phosphate synthase gene.

Schoneveld OJ(1), Gaemers IC, Das AT, Hoogenkamp M, Renes J, Ruijter JM, Lamers
WH.

Author information: 
(1)AMC Liver Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 69-71, 1105 BK, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The GRU (glucocorticoid-response unit) within the distal enhancer of the gene
encoding carbamoyl-phosphate synthase, which comprises REs (response elements)
for the GR (glucocorticoid receptor) and the liver-enriched transcription factors
FoxA (forkhead box A) and C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein), and a binding
site for an unknown protein denoted P3, is one of the simplest GRUs described. In
this study, we have established that the activity of this GRU depends strongly on
the positioning and spacing of its REs. Mutation of the P3 site within the 25 bp 
FoxA-GR spacer eliminated GRU activity, but the requirement for P3 could be
overcome by decreasing the length of this spacer to < or =12 bp, by optimizing
the sequence of the REs in the GRU, and by replacing the P3 sequence with a
C/EBPbeta sequence. With spacers of < or =12 bp, the activity of the GRU depended
on the helical orientation of the FoxA and GR REs, with highest activities
observed at 2 and 12 bp respectively. Elimination of the 6 bp C/EBP-FoxA spacer
also increased GRU activity 2-fold. Together, these results indicate that the
spatial positioning of the transcription factors that bind to the GRU determines 
its activity and that the P3 complex, which binds to the DNA via a 75 kDa
protein, functions to facilitate interaction between the FoxA and glucocorticoid 
response elements when the distance between these transcription factors means
that they have difficulties contacting each other.

PMCID: PMC1133802
PMID: 15196051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3069-80. Epub 2004 May 26.

Sox17 and beta-catenin cooperate to regulate the transcription of endodermal
genes.

Sinner D(1), Rankin S, Lee M, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Developmental
Biology and The Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Recent studies have led to a model of the molecular pathway that specifies the
endoderm during vertebrate gastrulation. The HMG box transcription factor Sox17
is a key component of this pathway and is essential for endoderm formation;
however, the molecular events controlled by Sox17 are largely unknown. We have
identified several direct transcriptional targets of Sox17, including Foxa1 and
Foxa2. We show that beta-catenin, a component of Wnt signaling pathway,
physically interacts with Sox17 and potentiates its transcriptional activation of
target genes. We identify a motif in the C terminus of Sox17, which is conserved 
in all the SoxF subfamily of Sox proteins, and this motif is required for the
ability of Sox17 to both transactivate target genes and bind beta-catenin.
Nuclear beta-catenin is present in endoderm cells of the gastrula, and depletion 
of beta-catenin from embryos results in a repression of Sox17 target genes. These
data suggest that in a mechanism analogous to Tcf/Lef interacting with
beta-catenin, Sox17 and beta-catenin interact to transcribe endodermal target
genes.

PMID: 15163629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Apr 30;219(1-2):1-7.

About GATA3, HNF3A, and XBP1, three genes co-expressed with the oestrogen
receptor-alpha gene (ESR1) in breast cancer.

Lacroix M(1), Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Jean-Claude Heuson de Cancérologie Mammaire, Institut Jules
Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 127 Boulevard de Waterloo, B-1000
Bruxelles, Belgium. marc.lacroix@ulb.ac.be

In breast tumours and breast cancer cell (BCC) lines, microarray analyses have
revealed that a series of genes are expressed in close association with the
oestrogen receptor-alpha (ER-alpha) gene, ESR1. Three of them, GATA3, HNF3A (also
known as FOXA1), and XBP1 encode transcription factors. Here, we present these
factors and we discuss their potential involvement in the ER-alpha-mediated
actions in BCC. We notably show the relations that exist, or that might exist,
between these factors and the oestrogen-inducible trefoil factor TFF1.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15149721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(11):5848-55.

Integrase-specific enhancement and suppression of retroviral DNA integration by
compacted chromatin structure in vitro.

Taganov KD(1), Cuesta I, Daniel R, Cirillo LA, Katz RA, Zaret KS, Skalka AM.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Institute for Cancer Research, 333 Cottman Ave.,
Philadelphia, PA 19111-2497, USA.

Integration of viral DNA into the host chromosome is an obligatory step in
retroviral replication and is dependent on the activity of the viral enzyme
integrase. To examine the influence of chromatin structure on retroviral DNA
integration in vitro, we used a model target comprising a 13-nucleosome extended 
array that includes binding sites for specific transcription factors and can be
compacted into a higher-ordered structure. We found that the efficiency of in
vitro integration catalyzed by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
integrase was decreased after compaction of this target with histone H1. In
contrast, integration by avian sarcoma virus (ASV) integrase was more efficient
after compaction by either histone H1 or a high salt concentration, suggesting
that the compacted structure enhances this reaction. Furthermore, although
site-specific binding of transcription factors HNF3 and GATA4 blocked ASV DNA
integration in extended nucleosome arrays, local opening of H1-compacted
chromatin by HNF3 had no detectable effect on integration, underscoring the
preference of ASV for compacted chromatin. Our results indicate that chromatin
structure affects integration site selection of the HIV-1 and ASV integrases in
opposite ways. These distinct properties of integrases may also affect target
site selection in vivo, resulting in an important bias against or in favor of
integration into actively transcribed host DNA.

PMCID: PMC415796
PMID: 15140982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Virchows Arch. 2004 Jul;445(1):45-53. Epub 2004 May 11.

Type-II pneumocyte differentiation in pulmonary sclerosing hemangioma:
ultrastructural differentiation and immunohistochemical distribution of
lineage-specific transcription factors (TTF-1, HNF-3 alpha, and HNF-3 beta) and
surfactant proteins.

Yamazaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saiseikai Central Hospital, l-4-17 Mita, Minatoku,
108-0073, Tokyo, Japan. KazutoYamazaki@aol.com

Sclerosing hemangioma (PSH) is a rare pulmonary tumor, in which two types of
tumor cells could be histologically discerned--surface and stromal tumor cells.
Nine tumor-tissue specimens from six female Japanese patients were studied,
focusing on the distribution of several transcription factors related to lung
epithelial development and surfactant proteins and comparing the ultrastructural 
features of the tumor cells. The immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the
surfactant proteins of surfactant apoprotein A, surfactant protein B, and
prosurfactant protein C were distributed in many of the surface-lining cells and 
in a small number of stromal-tumor cells. In addition, the nuclei of the tumor
cells stained positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF)-1, hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha, and HNF-3 beta. In situ hybridization staining for 
TTF-1 showed similar positive signals. Ultrastructurally, two types of tumor
cells showed similar features, but stromal tumor cells lost the definitive
apico-lateral differentiation compared with the surface tumor cells and showed
restricted surface differentiation between the adjacent tumor cells, forming
small lumina accompanied by microvilli and occasional multi-vesicle or
multi-lamellar bodies. Conclusively, the real tumoral population being
undifferentiated stromal cells, the lining cells are fully differentiated type-II
pneumonocytes. PSH is a proliferation of rather fetal type-II pneumonocytes
(pneumocytoma or pneumoblastoma?).

PMID: 15138814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004 May;32(5):525-35.

Role of Sp1, C/EBP alpha, HNF3, and PXR in the basal- and xenobiotic-mediated
regulation of the CYP3A4 gene.

Bombail V(1), Taylor K, Gibson GG, Plant N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7XH, Surrey, United Kingdom.

Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is the major cytochrome P450 present in adult human 
liver and is involved in the metabolism of over 50% of therapeutic compounds
currently in use. Since expression levels of CYP3A4 are regulated by many of
these compounds, this raises the potential for drug-drug interactions and
subsequent altered efficacy or toxicity of the individual compounds at the dose
prescribed. Hence, understanding the molecular mechanisms of CYP3A4 regulation is
of key importance in predicting and understanding such interactions. To examine
this we have used DNase I footprinting and bioinformatic analysis to identify
putative transcription factor binding sites within the 250 base pairs of promoter
proximal to the transcription start site. We identified several protected
fragments within this region that corresponded to putative binding sites for Sp1,
AP2, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBPalpha), and hepatic nuclear factor-3
(HNF3), as well as confirming previously identified C/EBPalpha, pregnane X
receptor (PXR), and HNF3 binding sites. Sequential site-directed mutagenesis of
C/EBPalpha, Sp1, HNF3, and PXR binding sites was next used to examine the role of
these sites in basal CYP3A4 expression. Disruption of the C/EBPalpha, HNF3, and
PXR binding sites all affected basal expression. Finally, the role of these sites
was examined in activation of CYP3A4 expression by rifampicin, metyrapone,
clotrimazole, and phenobarbital. Disruption of any of these sites either led to
an altered pattern of activation by the xenobiotic, as altered maximal
activation, or altered the EC(50) value of activation. Such effects were
xenobiotic-specific, with each disrupted site playing a role in the activation of
some of the xenobiotics.

PMID: 15100175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):F936-44. Epub 2004 Mar 2.

In vitro characterization of aldosterone and cAMP effects in mouse distal
convoluted tubule cells.

González-Núñez D(1), Morales-Ruiz M, Leivas A, Hebert SC, Poch E.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nefrología, and Labrotorio de Hormonología, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Hospital Clinic, Universidad de 
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

The distal nephron plays a capital role in the fine regulation of sodium
reabsorption. Compared with the cortical collecting duct, much less information
is available on the hormonal regulation of sodium transporter genes in the distal
convoluted tubule (DCT), where the thiazide-sensitive Na(+)-Cl(-) cotransporter
(NCC) is the major entry pathway for Na(+). The purpose of this study was to
characterize the in vitro effects of aldosterone (Aldo; 1 microM) and cAMP
(8-BrcAMP; 0.5 mM) on mouse DCT (mDCT) by using an immortalized mDCT cell line.
Western blot analysis and semiquantitative RT-PCR were performed to analyze the
expression of genes involved in sodium transport. The mDCTcell line expressed the
11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 gene and both the mineralocorticoid
and glucocorticoid receptor genes, suggesting Aldo responsiveness. In this sense,
we found that mDCT cells expressed the amiloride-sensitive Na(+) channel (ENaC)
and responded to Aldo by upregulating the alpha-subunit protein. Similarly,
alpha(1) Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase protein was upregulated by Aldo and 8-BrcAMP. In
addition, the Aldo intermediate gene sgk1 mRNA was increased in response to both 
Aldo and 8-BrcAMP, and the transcription factor HNF-3 alpha mRNA was induced by
8-BrcAMP. With respect to NCC regulation, although Aldo induced NCC protein
levels in mice in vivo, neither Aldo nor 8-BrcAMP significantly induced the NCC
mRNA or protein levels in mDCT cells. These results suggest that in mDCT, Aldo
and cAMP modulate some downstream mediators and effectors in vitro but do not
influence the expression of NCC in this cell model.

PMID: 15075189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Hepatology. 2004 Apr;39(4):1038-47.

Progression of HCC in mice is associated with a downregulation in the expression 
of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Lazarevich NL(1), Cheremnova OA, Varga EV, Ovchinnikov DA, Kudrjavtseva EI,
Morozova OV, Fleishman DI, Engelhardt NV, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunochemistry, Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin
Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) play a critical role in development of the
liver. Their roles during liver tumorigenesis and progression of hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) are, however, poorly understood. To address the role of HNFs in 
tumor progression, we generated a new experimental model in which a highly
differentiated slow-growing transplantable mouse HCC (sgHCC) rapidly gives rise
in vivo to a highly invasive fast-growing dedifferentiated variant (fgHCC). This 
in vivo model has allowed us to investigate the fundamental mechanisms underlying
HCC progression. A complete loss of cell polarity, a decrease in cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion, elevation of telomerase activity, and
extinction of liver-specific gene expression accompanies tumor progression.
Moreover, cells isolated from fgHCCs acquired the ability to proliferate rapidly 
in culture. These alterations were coupled with a reduced expression of several
liver transcription factors including HNF4, a factor essential for hepatocyte
differentiation. Forced re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in cultured fgHCC cells
reversed the progressive phenotype and induced fgHCC cells to re-establish an
epithelium and reform cell-ECM contacts. Moreover, fgHCC cells that expressed
HNF4alpha1 also re-established expression of the profile of liver transcription
factors and hepatic genes that are associated with a differentiated hepatocyte
phenotype. Importantly, re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in fgHCC reduced the
proliferation rate in vitro and diminished tumor formation in congenic recipient 
mice. In conclusion, loss of HNF4 expression is an important determinant of HCC
progression. Forced expression of this factor can promote reversion of tumors
toward a less invasive highly differentiated slow-growing phenotype.

PMID: 15057908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genomics. 2004 Apr;83(4):694-705.

Striking differences between the mouse and the human alpha-fetoprotein enhancers.

Long L(1), Davidson JN, Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, College of
Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

The alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is expressed abundantly in the fetal liver and
transcriptionally repressed in the adult liver, but can be reactivated during
liver regeneration and in liver tumors. Previous studies identified three
enhancers, E1, E2, and E3, upstream of the mouse and rat Afp genes and a single
enhancer upstream of the human gene. We have compared the sequences upstream of
the rodent and primate AFP genes. Our analysis demonstrates that the previously
identified human enhancer is the counterpart to mouse E2. This comparison also
reveals that a functional primate counterpart to the rodent E1 is absent due to a
deletion that removes the core region of this enhancer. Furthermore, our studies 
identify a novel human enhancer corresponding to rodent E3. Despite the overall
similarity of E3 between human and mouse, we found differences in transcription
factor binding sites between these species. A C/EBP binding site is conserved but
two other motifs in rodent E3, one that binds orphan nuclear receptors and a
second that binds FoxA proteins, are not conserved in humans. The human
counterpart to the rodent FoxA site can bind COUP-TF factors. Despite the overall
sequence similarity in E3 between mice and humans, the difference in factor
binding sites in E3, as well as the absence of E1 in primates, indicates that
different mechanisms regulate AFP transcription in these different species.

PMID: 15028291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Thromb Haemost. 2003 Dec;90(6):1029-39.

Characterization of the human protein S gene promoter: a possible role of
transcription factors Sp1 and HNF3 in liver.

Tatewaki H(1), Tsuda H, Kanaji T, Yokoyama K, Hamasaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka-city
812-8582, Japan.

Protein S is a vitamin-K-dependent plasma glycoprotein that serves as a cofactor 
for activated protein C in the protein C anticoagulation pathway, which regulates
blood coagulation by inactivating factors Va and VIIIa. Mechanisms regulating the
expression of the protein S gene remain unknown to date. The aim of this study
was to characterize the cis-acting DNA elements of the human protein S gene in
liver. We found that liver cell lines (HepG2 and PLC) transcribed the human
protein S gene to mRNA, whereas non-liver cell lines (HEK293 and HeLa cells)
either transcribed the gene weakly or not at all. Isolation and analysis of
tissue-specific gene expression in HepG2 and HeLa cells of the 5'-flanking region
from -6183 to +294 of the protein S gene indicated that the consensus binding
motifs to HNF3 and Sp1 or MAZ transcription factors in the flanking region are
essential for protein S gene expression. Exogenous expression of the Sp1 gene
augmented the protein S-reporter gene expression in HepG2 or PLC cells but had no
effect in HeLa cells. Taken together, we would conclude that transcription
factors of HNF3, MAZ, and Sp1 are required for high-level expression of the
protein S gene in hepatic cells, but in non-hepatic cells such as HeLa cells, an 
unknown factor(s) binds to the Sp1 region and disturbs the action of Sp1 and MAZ.

PMID: 14652633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 17;310(2):667-74.

A comprehensive search for HNF-3alpha-regulated genes in mouse hepatoma cells by 
60K cDNA microarray and chromatin immunoprecipitation/PCR analysis.

Tomaru Y(1), Kondo S, Suzuki M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-Cho, Tsurumi-Ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

To characterize the regulatory pattern by a specific transcription regulatory
factor, we used a combination of expression analysis with the mouse cDNA
microarray composed of 60,000 cDNA clones and cross-linking/chromatin
immunoprecipitation (X-ChIP) followed by comparative PCR. Overexpression of mouse
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha (HNF-3alpha) in a mouse hepatoma cell line
resulted in accompanied perturbed expression of more than 1500 genes. Search for 
HNF-3alpha consensus recognition sequences in the upstream regions of their
coding sequences, which were mapped on the mouse genome, enabled us to mine 300
genes as the potential HNF-3alpha-regulated genes and classify 135 annotated ones
into several functional categories. Further X-ChIP/PCR analysis demonstrated in
vivo binding of HNF-3alpha to the 5(')-flanking sequences of 25 members selected 
out of these genes. Besides known HNF-3alpha-regulated genes such as albumin and 
alpha-fetoprotein genes, the genes newly identified as the HNF-3alpha-regulated
ones include three encoding CDP-diacylglycerol-inositol
3-phosphatidyltransferase, phosphatidylserine decarboxylase, and phospholipase
A2, which are located en suite in the lipid metabolic pathway in liver. The
potential usefulness of the present approach to extensive characterization of
gene expression framework directed by a specific transcription regulatory factor 
is discussed.

PMID: 14521963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11624-9. Epub 2003 Sep 19.

Insulin regulates the activity of forkhead transcription factor Hnf-3beta/Foxa-2 
by Akt-mediated phosphorylation and nuclear/cytosolic localization.

Wolfrum C(1), Besser D, Luca E, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Metabolic Diseases and Molecular Vertebrate Embryology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11198-200.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 alpha, beta, and gamma (Foxa-1, -2, and -3) are
transcriptional activators of important metabolic genes in the liver that are
suppressed by the actions of insulin. Here, we show that the activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt by insulin induces Foxa-2 phosphorylation,
nuclear exclusion, and inhibition of Foxa-2-dependent transcriptional activity.
Foxa-2 physically interacts with Akt, a key mediator of the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase pathway and is phosphorylated at a single conserved site (T156) that is 
absent in Foxa-1 and Foxa-3 proteins. This Akt phosphorylation site in Foxa-2 is 
highly conserved from mammals to insects. Mutant Foxa-2T156A is resistant to
Akt-mediated phosphorylation, nuclear exclusion, and transcriptional inactivation
of Foxa-2-regulated gene expression. These results implicate an evolutionarily
conserved mechanism in the regulation of Foxa-2-dependent transcriptional control
by extracellular signals such as insulin.

PMCID: PMC208808
PMID: 14500912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hepatology. 2003 Jun;37(6):1414-24.

Elevated hepatocyte levels of the Forkhead box A2 (HNF-3beta) transcription
factor cause postnatal steatosis and mitochondrial damage.

Hughes DE(1), Stolz DB, Yu S, Tan Y, Reddy JK, Watkins SC, Diehl AM, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor Foxa2 (HNF-3beta) and related family 
members Foxa1 (HNF-3alpha) and Foxa3 (HNF-3gamma) act in concert with other
hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) to coordinately regulate liver-specific gene
expression. To circumvent the hepatic functional redundancy of the Foxa proteins,
we used the T-77 transgenic (TG) mouse line in which the -3-kb transthyretin
(TTR) promoter functioned to increase hepatocyte expression of the Foxa2 cDNA.
Adult TG mice exhibited reduced hepatic glycogen and progressive liver injury,
but maintained normal serum levels of glucose, insulin, and glucagon. In this
study, we further characterized the postnatal liver defect in TTR-FoxA2 TG mice. 
The postnatal TG mice displayed significant reduction in serum glucose levels and
in hepatocyte glycogen storage without increased serum levels of ketone bodies
and free fatty acid suggesting that they are not undergoing a starvation
response. We show that TG liver developed a substantial transient steatosis,
which reached a maximum at postnatal day 5 and is associated with increased
expression of hepatic genes involved in fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis,
lipid beta-oxidation, and amino acid biosynthesis. Furthermore, transmission
electron microscopy analysis of postnatal TG liver revealed extensive
mitochondrial membrane damage, which is likely due to reactive oxygen species
generated from lipid beta-oxidation. In conclusion, our model proposes that in
response to reduction in hepatocyte glycogen storage, the TTR-Foxa2 TG mice
survive by maintaining sufficient serum levels of glucose through gluconeogenesis
using deaminated amino acids with dicarboxylate products of peroxisomal lipid
beta-oxidation shuttled through the tricarboxylic acid cycle.

PMID: 12774021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Aug;17(8):1484-507. Epub 2003 May 15.

The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha (Forkhead Box A1) and androgen
receptor in transcriptional regulation of prostatic genes.

Gao N(1), Zhang J, Rao MA, Case TC, Mirosevich J, Wang Y, Jin R, Gupta A, Rennie 
PS, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Androgens and mesenchymal factors are essential extracellular signals for the
development as well as the functional activity of the prostate epithelium. Little
is known of the intraepithelial determinants that are involved in prostatic
differentiation. Here we found that hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha (HNF-3
alpha), an endoderm developmental factor, is essential for androgen receptor
(AR)-mediated prostatic gene activation. Two HNF-3 cis-regulatory elements were
identified in the rat probasin (PB) gene promoter, each immediately adjacent to
an androgen response element. Remarkably, similar organization of HNF-3 and AR
binding sites was observed in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene core
enhancer, suggesting a common functional mechanism. Mutations that disrupt these 
HNF-3 motifs significantly abolished the maximal androgen induction of PB and PSA
activities. Overexpressing a mutant HNF-3 alpha deleted in the C-terminal region 
inhibited the androgen-induced promoter activity in LNCaP cells where endogenous 
HNF-3 alpha is expressed. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed in vivo that the
occupancy of HNF-3 alpha on PSA enhancer can occur in an androgen-depleted
condition, and before the recruitment of ligand-bound AR. A physical interaction 
of HNF-3 alpha and AR was detected through immunoprecipitation and confirmed by
glutathione-S-transferase pull-down. This interaction is directly mediated
through the DNA-binding domain/hinge region of AR and the forkhead domain of
HNF-3 alpha. In addition, strong HNF-3 alpha expression, but not HNF-3 beta or
HNF-3 gamma, is detected in both human and mouse prostatic epithelial cells where
markers (PSA and PB) of differentiation are expressed. Taken together, these data
support a model in which regulatory cues from the cell lineage and the
extracellular environment coordinately establish the prostatic differentiated
response.

PMID: 12750453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Endocrinology. 2003 May;144(5):2025-33.

Aberrant regulation of human intestinal proglucagon gene expression in the
NCI-H716 cell line.

Cao X(1), Flock G, Choi C, Irwin DM, Drucker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, Toronto General Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada M5G 2C4.

Despite interest in understanding glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) production, the
factors important for GLP-1 biosynthesis remain poorly understood. We examined
control of human proglucagon gene expression in NCI-H716 cells, a cell line that 
secretes GLP-1 in a regulated manner. Insulin, phorbol myristate acetate, or
forskolin, known regulators of rodent proglucagon gene expression, had no effect,
whereas sodium butyrate decreased levels of NCI-H716 proglucagon mRNA
transcripts. The inhibitory effect of sodium butyrate was mimicked by
trichostatin A but was not detected with sodium acetate or isobutyrate. The
actions of butyrate were not diminished by the ERK1/2 inhibitor PD98059, p38
inhibitor SB203580, or soluble guanylate cyclase inhibitor LY83583 or following
treatment of cells with KT5823, a selective inhibitor of cGMP-dependent protein
kinase. NCI-H716 cells expressed multiple proglucagon gene transcription factors 
including isl-1, pax-6, pax-2, cdx-2/3, pax-4, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 
alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3 gamma, and Nkx2.2. Nevertheless, the butyrate-dependent
inhibition of proglucagon gene expression was not associated with coordinate
changes in transcription factor expression and both the human and rat transfected
proglucagon promoters were transcriptionally inactive in NCI-H716 cells. Hence,
NCI-H716 cells may not be a physiologically optimal model for studies of human
enteroendocrine proglucagon gene transcription.

PMID: 12697711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):437-49.

Association between hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6) and FoxA2 DNA binding
domains stimulates FoxA2 transcriptional activity but inhibits HNF-6 DNA binding.

Rausa FM(1), Tan Y, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

In previous studies we used transgenic mice or recombinant adenovirus infection
to increase hepatic expression of forkhead box A2 (FoxA2, previously called
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta [HNF-3beta]), which caused diminished hepatocyte 
glycogen levels and reduced expression of glucose homeostasis genes. Because this
diminished expression of FoxA2 target genes was associated with reduced levels of
the Cut-Homeodomain HNF-6 transcription factor, we conducted the present study to
determine whether there is a functional interaction between HNF-6 and FoxA2.
Human hepatoma (HepG2) cotransfection assays demonstrated that HNF-6
synergistically stimulated FoxA2 but not FoxA1 or FoxA3 transcriptional activity,
and protein-binding assays showed that this protein interaction required the
HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain and FoxA2 winged-helix DNA binding domains. Furthermore, we
show that the HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain sequences were sufficient to synergistically 
stimulate FoxA2 transcriptional activation by recruiting the p300/CBP coactivator
proteins. This was supported by the fact that FoxA2 transcriptional synergy with 
HNF-6 was dependent on retention of the HNF-6 Cut domain LXXLL sequence, which
mediated recruitment of the p300/CBP proteins. Moreover, cotransfection and DNA
binding assays demonstrated that increased FoxA2 levels caused a decrease in
HNF-6 transcriptional activation of the glucose transporter 2 (Glut-2) promoter
by interfering with the binding of HNF-6 to its target DNA sequence. These data
suggest that at a FoxA-specific site, HNF-6 serves as a coactivator protein to
enhance FoxA2 transcription, whereas at an HNF-6-specific site, FoxA2 represses
HNF-6 transcription by inhibiting HNF-6 DNA binding activity. This is the first
reported example of a liver-enriched transcription factor (HNF-6) functioning as 
a coactivator protein to potentiate the transcriptional activity of another liver
factor, FoxA2.

PMCID: PMC151533
PMID: 12509444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):2973-82. Epub 2002 Dec 27.

Fetal liver stroma consists of cells in epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Chagraoui J(1), Lepage-Noll A, Anjo A, Uzan G, Charbord P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U506, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Villejuif, France. jali@netcourrier.com

Liver becomes the predominant site of hematopoiesis by 11.5 dpc (days after
coitus) in the mouse and 15 gestational weeks in humans and stays so until the
end of gestation. The reason the liver is the major hematopoietic site during
fetal life is not clear. In this work, we tried to define which of the fetal
liver microenvironmental cell populations would be associated with the
development of hematopoiesis and found that a population of cells with mixed
endodermal and mesodermal features corresponded to hematopoietic-supportive fetal
liver stroma. Stromal cells generated from primary cultures or stromal lines from
mouse or human fetal liver in the hematopoietic florid phase expressed both
mesenchymal markers (vimentin, osteopontin, collagen I, alpha smooth muscle
actin, thrombospondin-1, EDa fibronectin, calponin, Stro-1 antigens,
myocyte-enhancer factor 2C) and epithelial (alpha-fetoprotein, cytokeratins 8 and
18, albumin, E-cadherin, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha) markers. Such a cell 
population fits with the description of cells in epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT), often observed during development, including that of the liver.
The hematopoietic supportive capacity of EMT cells was lost after hepatocytic
maturation, induced by oncostatin M in the cell line AFT024. EMT cells were
observed in the fetal liver microenvironment during the hematopoietic phase but
not in nonhematopoietic liver by the end of gestation and in the adult. EMT cells
represent a novel stromal cell type that may be generated from hepatic endodermal
or mesenchymal stem cells or even from circulating hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) seeding the liver rudiment.

PMID: 12506029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Struct Funct. 2002 Aug;27(4):181-8.

Foxa (HNF3) up-regulates vitronectin expression during retinoic acid-induced
differentiation in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells.

Shimizu S(1), Kondo M, Miyamoto Y, Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Ochanomizu University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Accumulation of vitronectin protein increased in the conditioned medium of mouse 
neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells during retinoic acid-induced differentiation. To
study the regulatory mechanism of the increase in vitronectin expression during
the differentiation, the activity of the -527/+95 vitronectin promoter was
observed in Neuro2a cells with or without retinoic acid treatment. The result
showed that the -527/+95 promoter activity increased 2.7-fold with retinoic acid,
and despite deletion of regions from -527 to -49 and +54 to +95 base pairs (bp), 
the -48/+53 promoter preserved the retinoic acid response. We recently showed
that the -48/+53 region has two transcription factor Foxa (HNF3)-binding sites
(site A from -34 to -25 bp and site B from +15 to +26 bp), suggesting that Foxa
may up-regulate the vitronectin expression. Therefore, we examined the change of 
Foxa expression in Neuro2a cells during the differentiation. The expression of
Foxa1 protein was increased during the differentiation, but the expression of
Foxa2 protein was not detected. In addition, overexpression of Foxa1 increased
the amount of vitronectin protein in the conditioned medium of
Foxa1-overexpressed Neuro2a cells, but overexpression of Foxa2 only weakly
increased it. The site-A and -B double mutation of the -527/+95 promoter
remarkably reduced the promoter activity induced by Foxa overexpression,
indicating that Foxa-binding sites in the -527/+95 region are located only on
sites A and B. The mutation of site A in the -48/+53 promoter did not affect the 
retinoic acid response, but the site-B mutation abolished the constitutive
promoter activity and remarkably reduced the promoter activity with retinoic
acid. These results demonstrate that Foxa up-regulates the vitronectin expression
during the retinoic acid-induced differentiation in Neuro2a cells.

PMID: 12441652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 15;62(18):5273-9.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha gene, HNF3alpha (FOXA1), on chromosome band
14q13 is amplified and overexpressed in esophageal and lung adenocarcinomas.

Lin L(1), Miller CT, Contreras JI, Prescott MS, Dagenais SL, Wu R, Yee J,
Orringer MB, Misek DE, Hanash SM, Glover TW, Beer DG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Genomic amplification is observed in many, if not all, types of human malignancy 
and is one of the mechanisms for the activation of dominant-acting oncogenes in
tumorigenesis. In the present study, three amplified restriction fragments were
identified in an esophageal adenocarcinoma (P16) using the restriction landmark
genome scanning two-dimensional gel technique. These fragments were cloned,
sequenced, and mapped to chromosome band 14q13. Using the sequence tagged
site-amplification mapping approach, we defined the core-amplified domain by
screening 75 normal-tumor paired esophageal samples. The frequency of 14q13
amplification is 6.7% in esophageal tumors, and the amplicon spans >6 Mb in 1
tumor but is contained in a region <0.3 Mb in all of the remaining amplified
tumors. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) of 8 genes and expressed 
sequence tags located within the core-amplified domain revealed that the
HNF3alpha (FOXA1)(4) gene, a forkhead gene family member, was overexpressed in
all of the amplified esophageal tumors. HNF3alpha amplification was confirmed by 
Southern blot and interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses, and the
results of real-time RT-PCR were consistent with that of the regular quantitative
RT-PCR. Increased immunohistochemical nuclear staining of the HNF3alpha protein
was detected in all of the tumors containing 14q13 amplification. Affymetrix
oligonucleotide microarrays of 86 lung adenocarcinomas demonstrated that
expression of the HNF3alpha mRNA was elevated (> or =2.5-fold of mean expression 
in normal lung) in 37% (32 of 86) of the tumors analyzed. Gene amplification of
HNF3alpha was detected in 2 of the 5 overexpressed lung tumors examined. This is 
the first report of HNF3alpha amplification, and overexpression in esophageal and
lung adenocarcinomas. Amplification of HNF3alpha in esophageal and lung tumors
may suggest a potential oncogenic role for this gene in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12234996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;21(8):561-9.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein promoter is repressed in HepG2 hepatoma cells by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (FOXA).

Huang MC(1), Li KK, Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536-0298, USA.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene is expressed at high levels in the fetal liver
and is transcriptionally silenced at birth. The repression is governed, at least 
in part, by the 250 base pair (bp) AFP promoter. We show here that the AFP
promoter is dramatically repressed by HNF3 in HepG2 hepatoma cells. This
repression is governed by the region between -205 and -150. Furthermore, this
fragment can confer HNF3-mediated repression on a heterologous promoter. The
repression is abolished by a mutation that is centered at -165. EMSA analyses
using in vivo and in vitro synthesized proteins indicate that HNF3 proteins do
not bind DNA from the -205 to -150 region. We propose that HNF3 represses AFP
promoter activity through indirect mechanisms that modulate the binding or
activity of a liver-enriched factor that interacts with the -165 region of the
AFP promoter.

PMCID: PMC1563500
PMID: 12215259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002 Sep;30(9):1029-34.

Glucocorticoid-mediated induction of CYP3A4 is decreased by disruption of a
protein: DNA interaction distinct from the pregnane X receptor response element.

El-Sankary W(1), Bombail V, Gibson GG, Plant N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Toxicology Group, School of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University
of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom.

CYP3A4 is the most abundant cytochrome P450 (P450) in human liver, comprising
approximately 30% of the total liver P450 content. This enzyme has an important
role in steroid catabolism and metabolism of foreign compounds, with the majority
of pharmaceutical compounds being substrates for CYP3A4. The molecular mechanisms
that underlie transcriptional activation of CYP3A4 are complex with many steroid 
hormone nuclear receptors, including glucocorticoid receptor, pregnane X receptor
(PXR), vitamin D receptor, and constitutive androstane receptor, playing roles.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the induction of CYP3A4 gene expression by
glucocorticoids. CYP3A genes lack a consensus glucocorticoid receptor response
element and yet are highly induced by classical glucocorticoids such as
hydrocortisone and dexamethasone. Recent evidence has demonstrated that
glucocorticoids are ligands for the orphan nuclear receptor PXR, and induction of
CYP3A genes by glucocorticoids may occur primarily through PXR interactions. In
this paper, we present a mutant that disrupts a
hepatocyte-nuclear-factor-3/CCAAT-enhancer binding protein alpha binding site in 
the CYP3A4 proximal promoter. This mutation disrupts induction of a reporter gene
construct by the glucocorticoids dexamethasone and hydrocortisone; yet induction 
by the potent PXR ligand rifampicin is unaffected. Such data provides strong
evidence that glucocorticoids induce CYP3A4 gene expression both through the
established PXR-dependent pathway but also through a PXR-independent pathway.

PMID: 12167569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem J. 2002 Sep 1;366(Pt 2):633-41.

Foxa3 (HNF-3gamma) binds to and activates the rat proglucagon gene promoter but
is not essential for proglucagon gene expression.

Liu Y(1), Shen W, Brubaker PL, Kaestner KH, Drucker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, Toronto General
Hospital, University of Toronto, 101 College Street CCRW3-845, Toronto, Canada
M5G 2C4.

Members of the Forkhead box a (Foxa) transcription factor family are expressed in
the liver, pancreatic islets and intestine and both Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate
proglucagon gene transcription. As Foxa proteins exhibit overlapping DNA-binding 
specificities, we examined the role of Foxa3 [hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-3gamma] in control of proglucagon gene expression. Foxa3 was detected by
reverse transcriptase PCR in glucagon-producing cell lines and binds to the rat
proglucagon gene G2 promoter element in GLUTag enteroendocrine cells. Although
Foxa3 increased rat proglucagon promoter activity in BHK fibroblasts,
augmentation of Foxa3 expression did not increase proglucagon promoter activity
in GLUTag cells. Furthermore, adenoviral Foxa3 expression did not affect
endogenous proglucagon gene expression in islet or intestinal endocrine cell
lines. Although Foxa3(-/-) mice exhibit mild hypoglycaemia during a prolonged
fast, the levels of proglucagon-derived peptides and proglucagon mRNA transcripts
were comparable in tissues from wild-type and Foxa3(-/-) mice. These findings
identify Foxa3 as a member of the proglucagon gene G2 element binding-protein
family that, unlike Foxa1, is not essential for control of islet or intestinal
proglucagon gene expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1222783
PMID: 12000309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Apr 12;1574(3):337-44.

Cell-type dependency of two Foxa/HNF3 sites in the regulation of vitronectin
promoter activity.

Shimizu S(1), Miyamoto Y, Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Ochanomizu University, Bunkyo-ku, 112-8610, Tokyo,
Japan.

The mouse vitronectin promoter has two consensus sequences of the Foxa/hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 3-binding site (from -34 to -25, site A, and +15 to +26 base
pairs (bp), site B). Site-directed mutagenesis of site B inhibited binding of
nuclear proteins from mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a and reduced the promoter
activity to 4.6% in a 101-bp fragment (from -48 to +53 bp) in Neuro2a cells. The 
nuclear proteins of site B were identified as the Foxa1/HNF3alpha and
Foxa2/HNF3beta proteins by supershift assay. Next, we examined site A. Mutation
of site A in Neuro2a cells did not affect the promoter activity, and binding of
nuclear proteins was not detected. Overexpression of Foxa1 or Foxa2 protein
activated the mutated site B promoter, but failed to activate the sites A and B
double-mutated promoter in Neuro2a cells, indicating that site A is a potential
transcription regulatory site. Recombinant Foxa1 and Foxa2 proteins and nuclear
extract from mouse liver bound not only to site B, but also to site A. In human
hepatoma HepG2 cells, mutation of sites A and B decreased the promoter activity
to 82% and 38%, respectively, in the wild promoter, and double mutation of sites 
A and B decreased the wild promoter activity to 5%, indicating that sites A and B
contribute to the promoter activity in HepG2 cells. These results demonstrate
that the two Foxa-binding sites regulate the vitronectin promoter activity in
cell type-dependent manner.

PMID: 11997100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Hum Genet. 2002;47(3):136-9.

A novel gene is disrupted at a 14q13 breakpoint of t(2;14) in a patient with
mirror-image polydactyly of hands and feet.

Kondoh S(1), Sugawara H, Harada N, Matsumoto N, Ohashi H, Sato M, Kantaputra PN, 
Ogino T, Tomita H, Ohta T, Kishino T, Fukushima Y, Niikawa N, Yoshiura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Sakamoto, Japan. kyoshi@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Mirror-image polydactyly of hands and feet (MIP) is a very rare congenital
anomaly characterized by mirror-image duplication of digits. To isolate the gene 
responsible for MIP, we performed translocation breakpoint cloning from an MIP
patient with t(2;14)(p23.3;q13). We isolated a good candidate gene for MIP that
was disrupted by the translocation of the patient. We had previously con structed
a 1.2-megabase bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC)/P1-derived artificial
chromosome (PAC) contig covering the 14q13 breakpoint of t(2;14)(p23.3;q13). From
a 500-kb segment consisting of seven BAC/PAC clones in the contig, we isolated a 
novel gene (the mirror-image polydactyly 1 gene, designated as MIPOL1, GenBank
Accession No. AY059470), in addition to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha
gene (HNF3A, GenBank Accession No. XM 007360). MIPOL1 spans about 350kb,
comprises 15 exons, and encodes 442 amino acids. Northern blot analysis revealed 
that MIPOL1 expression is definite but very weak in adult heart, liver, skeletal 
muscle, kidney, and pancreas, and in fetal kidney. In view of the genome sequence
and the contig map constructed, the 14q13 breakpoint of the patient was
identified as located in intron 11 of MIPOL1, indicating that the gene was
disrupted by the translocation, and that the breakage resulted in MIPOL1 protein 
truncation. Whole-mount in situ hybridization in mouse resulted in mouse Mipol1
signals all over E10.5-E13.5 mouse embryos. Two other unrelated patients with
limb anomalies similar to MIP were subjected to mutation analysis of MIPOL1, but 
none had any mutations. We then isolated BAC clones from the other breakpoint,
2p23.3. A search for genes and expressed sequence tags in a more than 300-kb
region around the 2p23.3 breakpoint found only the neuroblastoma-amplified
protein gene (NAG, GenBank Accession No. NM 015909), which is located at least
50kb centromeric to the breakpoint and is not likely to be related to MIP. MIPOL1
is a good candidate gene for the MIP type of anomaly.

PMID: 11954550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3663-7. Epub 2002 Mar 12.

The embryonic stem cell transcription factors Oct-4 and FoxD3 interact to
regulate endodermal-specific promoter expression.

Guo Y(1), Costa R, Ramsey H, Starnes T, Vance G, Robertson K, Kelley M, Reinbold 
R, Scholer H, Hromas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and The Walther Oncology Center, R4-202, 1044 West
Walnut Street, Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The POU homeodomain protein Oct-4 and the Forkhead Box protein FoxD3 (previously 
Genesis) are transcriptional regulators expressed in embryonic stem cells.
Down-regulation of Oct-4 during gastrulation is essential for proper endoderm
development. After gastrulation, FoxD3 is generally down-regulated during early
endoderm formation, although it specifically remains expressed in the embryonic
neural crest. In these studies, we have found that Oct-4 and FoxD3 can bind to
identical regulatory DNA sequences. In addition, Oct-4 physically interacted with
the FoxD3 DNA-binding domain. Cotransfection of Oct-4 and FoxD3 expression
vectors activated the osteopontin enhancer, which is expressed in totipotent
embryonic stem cells. FoxA1 and FoxA2 (previously HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta) are
Forkhead Box transcription factors that participate in liver and lung formation
from foregut endoderm. Although FoxD3 activated the FoxA1 and FoxA2 promoters,
Oct-4 inhibited FoxD3 activation of the FoxA1 and FoxA2 endodermal promoters.
These data indicate that Oct-4 functions as a corepressor of FoxD3 to provide
embryonic lineage-specific transcriptional regulatory activity to maintain
appropriate developmental timing.

PMCID: PMC122580
PMID: 11891324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Apr;282(4):L757-65.

Cell-specific involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene expression in
human respiratory epithelial cells.

Hu C(1), Perlmutter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The synergistic action of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4 plays 
an important role in expression of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin (alpha(1)-AT) gene in
human hepatic and intestinal epithelial cells. Recent studies have indicated that
the alpha(1)-AT gene is also expressed in human pulmonary alveolar epithelial
cells, a potentially important local site of the lung antiprotease defense. In
this study, we examined the possibility that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a
human pulmonary epithelial cell line H441 was also directed by the synergistic
action of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 and/or by the action of HNF-3, which has been
shown to play a dominant role in gene expression in H441 cells. The results show 
that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in H441 cells is predominantly driven by
HNF-1beta, even though HNF-1beta has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in 
human hepatic Hep G2 and human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cell lines.
Expression of alpha(1)-AT and HNF-1beta was also demonstrated in primary cultures
of human respiratory epithelial cells. HNF-4 has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene
expression in H441 cells, even when it is cotransfected with HNF-1beta or
HNF-1alpha. HNF-3 by itself has little effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in
H441, Hep G2, or Caco-2 cells but tends to have an upregulating effect when
cotransfected with HNF-1 in Hep G2 and Caco-2 cells. These results indicate the
unique involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a cell line and
primary cultures derived from human respiratory epithelium.

PMID: 11880302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):279-89.

Opening of compacted chromatin by early developmental transcription factors HNF3 
(FoxA) and GATA-4.

Cirillo LA(1), Lin FR, Cuesta I, Friedman D, Jarnik M, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 7701 Burholme
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):209-11.

The transcription factors HNF3 (FoxA) and GATA-4 are the earliest known to bind
the albumin gene enhancer in liver precursor cells in embryos. To understand how 
they access sites in silent chromatin, we assembled nucleosome arrays containing 
albumin enhancer sequences and compacted them with linker histone. HNF3 and
GATA-4, but not NF-1, C/EBP, and GAL4-AH, bound their sites in compacted
chromatin and opened the local nucleosomal domain in the absence of ATP-dependent
enzymes. The ability of HNF3 to open chromatin is mediated by a high affinity DNA
binding site and by the C-terminal domain of the protein, which binds histones H3
and H4. Thus, factors that potentiate transcription in development are inherently
capable of initiating chromatin opening events.

PMID: 11864602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):209-11.

Opening chromatin.

Lomvardas S(1), Thanos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2002 Feb;9(2):279-89.

How the transcriptional apparatus gains access to and subsequently opens
compacted chromatin has remained a mystery. Now in this issue of Molecular Cell, 
Zaret and coworkers show that chromatin opening in vitro is not mediated by the
classical chromatin remodeling machines but instead occurs through specific
transcription factor-histone interactions.

PMID: 11864594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2001;13(4):241-52.

Influence of neonatal estrogens on rat prostate development.

Prins GS(1), Birch L, Habermann H, Chang WY, Tebeau C, Putz O, Bieberich C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

Brief exposure of rodents to estrogens during early development alters prostate
branching morphogenesis and cellular differentiation in a dose-dependant manner. 
If estrogenic exposures are high, these disturbances lead to permanent imprints
of the prostate, which include reduced growth, differentiation defects of the
epithelial cells, altered secretory function and reduced responsiveness to
androgens in adulthood. This process, referred to as neonatal imprinting or
developmental estrogenization, is associated with an increased incidence of
prostatic lesions with aging, which include hyperplasia, inflammation and
dysplasia. To better understand how early estrogenic exposures can permanently
alter prostate growth and function and predispose the gland to neoplasia, the
effects of estrogens on prostatic steroid receptors, cell-cell communication
molecules and key developmental genes were examined. Transient and permanent
alterations in the expression of prostatic androgen receptors, estrogen receptors
alpha (ERalpha) and beta, and retinoic acid receptors are observed. It is
proposed that the estrogen-induced alterations in these critical transcription
factors play a fundamental role in initiating prostatic growth and
differentiation defects. Down-stream effects of the altered steroid receptor
expression include disruption of TGFbeta paracrine communication, altered
expression of gap junction connexin molecules and loss of epithelial cadherin on 
epithelial cells. Additionally, specific disruptions in the expression of
prostatic developmental genes are observed in response to neonatal estrogen. An
extended developmental period of hoxa-13 expression, a lack of hoxd-13 increase
with maturation, and an immediate and sustained suppression of hoxb-13 was noted 
within prostatic tissue. A transient decrease in Nkx3.1 expression in the
developing prostate was also observed. Thus subtle and overt alterations in
Hox-13 and Nkx3.1 genes may be involved in the altered prostate phenotype in
response to neonatal estrogen exposure. In summary, estrogen imprinting of the
prostate gland is mediated through up-regulated levels of stromal ERalpha, which 
initiates alterations in steroid receptor expression within the developing gland.
Rather than being an androgen-dominated process, as occurs normally, prostatic
development is regulated by alternate steroids, including estrogens and
retinoids, in the estrogenized animal. This, in turn, leads to disruptions in the
coordinated expression of critical developmental genes including TGFbeta, Hox-13 
genes and Nkx3.1. Since a precise temporal expression pattern of these and other 
molecules is normally required for appropriate differentiation of the prostatic
epithelium and stroma, the estrogen-initiated disruption in this pattern would
lead to permanent differentiation defects of the prostate gland. It is
hypothesized that these molecular and cellular changes initiated early in life
predispose the prostate to the neoplastic state upon aging.

PMID: 11800163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Hepatology. 2002 Jan;35(1):30-9.

Adenovirus-mediated increase in HNF-3beta or HNF-3alpha shows differences in
levels of liver glycogen and gene expression.

Tan Y(1), Hughes D, Wang X, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

We previously generated a transgenic mouse line (T-77) in which increased hepatic
expression of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) protein was used to
assess its role in hepatocyte-specific gene transcription. The T-77 transgenic
mice displayed elevated serum bile acid and bilirubin levels and a complete
absence of hepatic glycogen storage. These postnatal liver defects were
associated with diminished expression of hepatocyte genes involved in
gluconeogenesis and bile acid transport as well as reduced levels of hepatocyte
transcription factors. In this study, we show that mouse tail vein injections of 
adenovirus expressing the rat HNF-3beta (AdHNF3beta) cDNA efficiently increased
its levels throughout the liver lobule and recapitulated the T-77 transgenic
liver phenotype within several days postinfection. Likewise, the
AdHNF3beta-infected liver phenotype was associated with reduced hepatic
expression of genes involved in glucose homeostasis, bile acid transport, and
bilirubin conjugation, which were not found with control adenovirus infections.
These studies show that adenovirus-mediated gene transfer is an effective method 
for rapid hepatic increases in transcription factor levels to determine in vivo
target genes. In contrast, AdHNF3alpha-infected liver displayed only a transient 
reduction in hepatic glycogen levels and was associated with less severe
decreases in hepatic expression of gluconeogenic and bilirubin metabolism genes. 
Consistent with these findings, only T-77 transgenic and AdHNF3beta-infected
liver exhibited diminished hepatic expression of the HNF-6 transcription factor, 
suggesting that reduced HNF-6 levels contribute to diminished HNF-3beta-specific 
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11786957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):170-83.

Hepatic nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3 or Foxa2) regulates glucagon gene transcription
by binding to the G1 and G2 promoter elements.

Gauthier BR(1), Schwitzgebel VM, Zaiko M, Mamin A, Ritz-Laser B, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie Clinique, Centre Médical Universitaire, 1211 Genève 4,
Switzerland. benoit.gauthier@medecine.unige.ch

Glucagon gene expression in the endocrine pancreas is controlled by three
islet-specific elements (G3, G2, and G4) and the alpha-cell-specific element G1. 
Two proteins interacting with G1 have previously been identified as Pax6 and
Cdx2/3. We identify here the third yet uncharacterized complex on G1 as
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3)beta, a member of the HNF-3/forkhead
transcription family, which plays an important role in the development of
endoderm-related organs. HNF-3 has been previously demonstrated to interact with 
the G2 element and to be crucial for glucagon gene expression; we thus define a
second binding site for this transcription on the glucagon gene promoter. We
demonstrate that both HNF-3alpha and -beta produced in heterologous cells can
interact with similar affinities to either the G1 or G2 element. Pax6, which
binds to an overlapping site on G1, exhibited a greater affinity as compared with
HNF-3alpha or -beta. We show that both HNF-3beta and -alpha can transactivate
glucagon gene transcription through the G2 and G1 elements. However, HNF-3 via
its transactivating domains specifically impaired Pax6-mediated transactivation
of the glucagon promoter but had no effect on transactivation by Cdx2/3. We
suggest that HNF-3 may play a dual role on glucagon gene transcription by 1)
inhibiting the transactivation potential of Pax6 on the G1 and G3 elements and 2)
direct activation through G1 and G2.

PMID: 11773447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Gene Expr. 2001;9(6):237-48.

Adenovirus-mediated increase of HNF-3 levels stimulates expression of
transthyretin and sonic hedgehog, which is associated with F9 cell
differentiation toward the visceral endoderm lineage.

Tan Y(1), Costa RH, Kovesdi I, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, 60607-7170, USA. ytan@uic.edu

Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
toward the visceral endoderm lineage is accompanied by increased expression of
the Forkhead Box (Fox) transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 3a
(HNF-3alpha) and HNF-3beta, suggesting that they play a crucial role in visceral 
endoderm development. Retinoic acid stimulation results in a cascade of HNF-3
induction in which HNF-3alpha is a primary target for retinoic acid action and
its increase is required for subsequent induction of HNF-3beta expression.
Increased expression of HNF-3beta precedes activation of its known target genes, 
including transthyretin (TTR), Sonic hedgehog (Shh), HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta, and
HNF-4alpha. In order to examine whether increased HNF-3 expression is sufficient 
to induce expression of its downstream target genes without retinoic acid
stimulation, we have used adenovirus-based expression vectors to increase HNF-3
protein levels in F9 cells. We demonstrate that adenovirus-mediated increase of
HNF-3alpha levels in F9 cells is sufficient to induce activation of endogenous
HNF-3beta levels followed by increased TTR and Shh expression. Furthermore, we
show that elevated HNF-3beta levels stimulate expression of endogenous TTR and
Shh without retinoic acid stimulation. Moreover, ectopic HNF-3 levels in
undifferentiated F9 cells are insufficient to induce HNF-3alpha, HNF-1alpha,
HNF-1beta, and HNF-4alpha expression, suggesting that their transcriptional
activation required other regulatory proteins induced by the retinoic acid
differentiation program. Finally, our studies demonstrate the utility of cell
infections with adenovirus expressing distinct transcription factors to identify 
endogenous target genes, which are assembled with the appropriate nucleosome
structure.

PMID: 11763995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):42812-7. Epub 2001 Sep 6.

Foxa3 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma ) is required for the regulation of
hepatic GLUT2 expression and the maintenance of glucose homeostasis during a
prolonged fast.

Shen W(1), Scearce LM, Brestelli JE, Sund NJ, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The winged helix transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factors 3alpha, -beta,
and -gamma (HNF-3, encoded by the Foxa1, -a2, and -a3 genes, respectively), are
expressed early in embryonic endoderm and play important roles in the regulation 
of gene expression in liver and pancreas. Foxa1 has been shown to be required for
glucagon secretion in the pancreas, whereas Foxa2 is critical for the regulation 
of insulin secretion in pancreatic beta-cells. Here we address the role of Foxa3 
in the maintenance of glucose homeostasis. Mice homozygous for a null mutation in
Foxa3 appear normal under fed conditions. However, when fasted, Foxa3(-/-) mice
have a significantly lower blood glucose compared with control mice. The fasting 
hypoglycemia in Foxa3(-/-) mice could not be attributed to defects in pancreatic 
hormone secretion, ketone production, or hepatic glycogen breakdown.
Surprisingly, mRNA levels for several gluconeogenic enzymes were up-regulated
appropriately in fasted Foxa3(-/-) mice, despite the fact that the corresponding 
genes had been shown to be activated by FOXA proteins in vitro. However, the mRNA
for the plasma membrane glucose transporter GLUT2 was decreased by 64% in the
fasted and 93% in the fed state, suggesting that efflux of newly synthesized
glucose is limiting in Foxa3(-/-) hepatocytes. Thus, Foxa3 is the dominating
transcriptional regulator of GLUT2 expression in hepatocytes in vivo. In
addition, we investigated the hepatic transcription factor network in Foxa3(-/-) 
mice and found that the normal activation of HNF-4alpha, HNF-1alpha, and PGC-1
induced by fasting is attenuated in mice lacking Foxa3.

PMID: 11546810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Sep 1;29(17):3495-505.

An enhancer element 6 kb upstream of the mouse HNF4alpha1 promoter is activated
by glucocorticoids and liver-enriched transcription factors.

Bailly A(1), Torres-Padilla ME, Tinel AP, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
25 Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

We have characterized a 700 bp enhancer element around -6 kb relative to the
HNF4alpha1 transcription start. This element increases activity and confers
glucocorticoid induction to a heterologous as well as the homologous promoters in
differentiated hepatoma cells and is transactivated by HNF4alpha1, HNF4alpha7,
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells. A 240 bp sub-region
conserves basal and hormone-induced enhancer activity. It contains HNF1, HNF4,
HNF3 and C/EBP binding sites as shown by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts and/or recombinant HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha1. Mutation analyses showed that the HNF1 site is essential for
HNF1alpha transactivation and is required for full basal enhancer activity, as is
the C/EBP site. Glucocorticoid response element consensus sites which overlap the
C/EBP, HNF4 and HNF3 sites are crucial for optimal hormonal induction. We present
a model that accounts for weak expression of HNF4alpha1 in the embryonic liver
and strong expression in the newborn/adult liver via the binding sites identified
in the enhancer.

PMCID: PMC55877
PMID: 11522818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. BMC Dev Biol. 2001;1:10. Epub 2001 Jun 19.

An efficient method to successively introduce transgenes into a given genomic
locus in the mouse.

Zhao R(1), Fahs SA, Weiler H, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd, WI 53226, USA. rzhao@mcw.edu

BACKGROUND: Expression of transgenes in mice requires transcriptional regulatory 
elements that direct expression in a chosen cell type. Unfortunately, the
availability of well-characterized promoters that direct bona-fide expression of 
transgenes in transgenic mice is limited. Here we described a method that allows 
highly efficient targeting of transgenes to a preselected locus in ES cells.
RESULTS: A pgk-LoxP-Neo cassette was introduced into a desired genomic locus by
homologous recombination in ES cells. The pgk promoter was then removed from the 
targeted ES cells by Cre recombinase thereby restoring the ES cells' sensitivity 
to G418. We demonstrated that transgenes could be efficiently introduced into
this genomic locus by reconstituting a functional Neo gene.
CONCLUSION: This approach is simple and extremely efficient in facilitating the
introduction of single-copy transgenes into defined genomic loci. The
availability of such an approach greatly enhances the ease of using endogenous
regulatory elements to control transgene expression and, in turn, expands the
repertoire of elements available for transgene expression.

PMCID: PMC33517
PMID: 11430765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Horm Metab Res. 2001 Mar;33(3):163-6.

Genetic variation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3alpha gene does not
contribute to maturity-onset diabetes of the young in Japanese.

Yu L(1), Wei Q, Jin L, Nishigori H, Nishigori T, Tomura H, Fujita J, Yamada Y,
Seino Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Maebashi, Gunma, Japan.

Heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding transcription factors in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) cascade are associated with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY), a monogenic form of diabetes mellitus. However,
these genes are responsible for only approximately 20% of the cases of MODY in
Japanese patients. Searching for a novel MODY gene in this population, we
investigated a candidate for encoding the forkhead transcription factor
HNF-3alpha, which also belongs to the HNF-transcription cascade. The human
HNF-3alpha gene, which was assigned to the segment near microsatellites D14S75
and AFM200ZH4 on chromosome 14 by radiation hybrid mapping, spans approximately 5
kb and consists of two exons. Ninety-five Japanese subjects with MODY/early-onset
non-ketotic diabetes were screened for mutations in this gene. Direct sequencing 
of the exons and flanking regions identified one missense mutation (Ala-83-Thr)
in exon 2 and three nucleotide alterations in the non-coding regions. However,
their frequencies were not significantly different between MODY and control
subjects, indicating that mutations in the HNF-3alpha gene are not a major cause 
of MODY in Japanese patients.

PMID: 11355750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes. 2001 May;50(5):928-36.

Regulation of the pancreatic pro-endocrine gene neurogenin3.

Lee JC(1), Smith SB, Watada H, Lin J, Scheel D, Wang J, Mirmira RG, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes 2001 Jun;50(6):1512.

Neurogenin3 (ngn3), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor,
functions as a pro-endocrine factor in the developing pancreas: by itself, it is 
sufficient to force undifferentiated pancreatic epithelial cells to become islet 
cells. Because ngn3 expression determines which precursor cells will
differentiate into islet cells, the signals that regulate ngn3 expression control
islet cell formation. To investigate the factors that control ngn3 gene
expression, we mapped the human and mouse ngn3 promoters and delineated
transcriptionally active sequences within the human promoter. Surprisingly, the
human ngn3 promoter drives transcription in all cell lines tested, including
fibroblast cell lines. In contrast, in transgenic animals the promoter drives
expression specifically in regions of ngn3 expression in the developing pancreas 
and gut; and the addition of distal sequences greatly enhances transgene
expression. Within the distal enhancer, binding sites for several pancreatic
transcription factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and HNF-3,
form a tight cluster. HES1, an inhibitory bHLH factor activated by Notch
signaling, binds to the proximal promoter and specifically blocks promoter
activity. Together with previous genetic data, these results suggest a model in
which the ngn3 gene is activated by the coordinated activities of several
pancreatic transcription factors and inhibited by Notch signaling through HES1.

PMID: 11334435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Diabetes. 2001 Mar;50(3):502-14.

Characterization of the mouse islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic
subunit-related protein gene promoter by in situ footprinting: correlation with
fusion gene expression in the islet-derived betaTC-3 and hamster insulinoma tumor
cell lines.

Bischof LJ(1), Martin CC, Svitek CA, Stadelmaier BT, Hornbuckle LA, Goldman JK,
Oeser JK, Hutton JC, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) is a multicomponent system located in the
endoplasmic reticulum comprising a catalytic subunit and transporters for
glucose-6-phosphate, inorganic phosphate, and glucose. We have recently cloned a 
novel gene that encodes an islet-specific G6Pase catalytic subunit-related
protein (IGRP) (Ebert et al., Diabetes 48:543-551, 1999). To begin to investigate
the molecular basis for the islet-specific expression of the IGRP gene, a series 
of truncated IGRP-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) fusion genes were
transiently transfected into the islet-derived mouse betaTC-3 and hamster
insulinoma tumor cell lines. In both cell lines, basal fusion gene expression
decreased upon progressive deletion of the IGRP promoter sequence between -306
and -66, indicating that multiple promoter regions are required for maximal
IGRP-CAT expression. The ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction footprinting
technique was then used to compare trans-acting factor binding to the IGRP
promoter in situ in betaTC-3 cells, which express the endogenous IGRP gene, and
adrenocortical Y1 cells, which do not. Multiple trans-acting factor binding sites
were selectively identified in betaTC-3 cells that correlate with regions of the 
IGRP promoter identified as being required for basal IGRP-CAT fusion gene
expression. The data suggest that hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 may be important
for basal IGRP gene expression, as it is for glucagon, GLUT2, and Pdx-1 gene
expression. In addition, binding sites for several trans-acting factors not
previously associated with islet gene expression, as well as binding sites for
potentially novel proteins, were identified.

PMID: 11246869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 27;98(5):2712-6. Epub 2001 Feb 20.

Transcriptome of a mouse kidney cortical collecting duct cell line: effects of
aldosterone and vasopressin.

Robert-Nicoud M(1), Flahaut M, Elalouf JM, Nicod M, Salinas M, Bens M, Doucet A, 
Wincker P, Artiguenave F, Horisberger JD, Vandewalle A, Rossier BC, Firsov D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Toxicologie, Université de Lausanne, 27 rue du
Bugnon, CH-1005 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Aldosterone and vasopressin are responsible for the final adjustment of sodium
and water reabsorption in the kidney. In principal cells of the kidney cortical
collecting duct (CCD), the integral response to aldosterone and the long-term
functional effects of vasopressin depend on transcription. In this study, we
analyzed the transcriptome of a highly differentiated mouse clonal CCD principal 
cell line (mpkCCD(cl4)) and the changes in the transcriptome induced by
aldosterone and vasopressin. Serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) was
performed on untreated cells and on cells treated with either aldosterone or
vasopressin for 4 h. The transcriptomes in these three experimental conditions
were determined by sequencing 169,721 transcript tags from the corresponding SAGE
libraries. Limiting the analysis to tags that occurred twice or more in the data 
set, 14,654 different transcripts were identified, 3,642 of which do not match
known mouse sequences. Statistical comparison (at P < 0.05 level) of the three
SAGE libraries revealed 34 AITs (aldosterone-induced transcripts), 29 ARTs
(aldosterone-repressed transcripts), 48 VITs (vasopressin-induced transcripts)
and 11 VRTs (vasopressin-repressed transcripts). A selection of the
differentially-expressed, hormone-specific transcripts (5 VITs, 2 AITs and 1 ART)
has been validated in the mpkCCD(cl4) cell line either by Northern blot
hybridization or reverse transcription-PCR. The hepatocyte nuclear transcription 
factor HNF-3-alpha (VIT39), the receptor activity modifying protein RAMP3
(VIT48), and the glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper protein (GILZ) (AIT28) are
candidate proteins playing a role in physiological responses of this cell line to
vasopressin and aldosterone.

PMCID: PMC30204
PMID: 11226305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Cell Biol. 2000;78(6):659-66.

Changes in lung-specific molecular expression during differentiation of hamster
embryonic M3E3/C3 cell line.

Yoshimi T(1), Takahashi Y, Takahashi S, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life
Sciences,Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Hachioji, Japan.
yocchan@ls.toyaku.ac.jp

To clarify the differentiation mechanisms of bronchiolar epithelial cells,
changes at the transcription level of epithelial cell-specific proteins were
examined using M3E3/C3, a cell line derived from hamster fetal lung. During a
9-day incubation period with 24 microg/mL of retinol, the cells became attached
to each other and formed large bud-like structures which could be detected with
periodic acid-Schiff staining. During the incubation period, the mRNA level of
surfactant-associated protein-B significantly increased 2.6- and 5.4-fold higher 
than cells incubated without retinol on days 3 and 9, respectively. The Clara
cell-specific secretory protein mRNA level also increased and peaked at 5.1-fold 
(P < 0.05) on day 5 compared with control cells. In contrast, mRNA for
surfactant-associated protein-C, an alveolar type II cell-specific protein,
decreased. Moreover, the expression of the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor
3alpha, a putative transactivating factor for lung-related genes, was
up-regulated resulting in consistently higher levels (2.4- to 5.6-fold) compared 
with controls, while those for transmembrane-type mucin-1 and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase were constantly expressed during the
incubation. The present study confirms that at the gene transcription level
M3E3/C3 cells differentiate into Clara-like cells with mucus granules in the
presence of retinol.

PMID: 11206576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;923:154-65.

Regulation of the Clara cell secretory protein/uteroglobin promoter in lung.

Nord M(1), Cassel TN, Braun H, Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge
University Hospital, SE-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden. magnus.nord@mednut.ki.se

Clara cell secretory protein/uteroglobin (CCSP/UG) is specifically expressed in
the conducting airway epithelium of the lung in a differentiation-dependent
manner. The proximal promoter region of the rodent CCSP/UG gene directs Clara
cell specificity. Previously, it was shown that the forkhead transcription
factors HNF-3 alpha and beta and the homeodomain factor TTF-1 are important
transcription factors acting through this region, suggesting that they contribute
to cell specificity of the CCSP/UG gene. Members of the C/EBP family of
transcription factors can also interact with elements of the proximal rat and
mouse CCSP/UG promoters. The onset of C/EBP alpha expression in Clara cells
correlates with the strong increase of CCSP/UG expression. Thus, C/EBP alpha may 
play a crucial role for differentiation-dependent CCSP/UG expression.
Transfection studies demonstrate that C/EBP alpha and TTF-1 can synergistically
activate the murine CCSP/UG promoter. Altogether, these results suggest that
C/EBP alpha, TTF-1, and HNF-3 determine the Clara cell-specific,
differentiation-dependent expression of the CCSP/UG gene in murine lung. The
relative importance of these three transcription factors, however, differs in
rabbits and humans.

PMID: 11193754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1841-6. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Transcriptional regulation of hepatitis B virus by nuclear hormone receptors is a
critical determinant of viral tropism.

Tang H(1), McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Hepatotropism is a prominent feature of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. Cell
lines of nonhepatic origin do not independently support HBV replication. Here, we
show that the nuclear hormone receptors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and retinoid
X receptor alpha plus peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha, support
HBV replication in nonhepatic cells by controlling pregenomic RNA synthesis,
indicating these liver-enriched transcription factors control a unique molecular 
switch restricting viral tropism. In contrast, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
antagonizes nuclear hormone receptor-mediated viral replication, demonstrating
distinct regulatory roles for these liver-enriched transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC29344
PMID: 11172038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Hepatology. 2000 Dec;32(6):1377-85.

The promoter of the long variant of collagen XVIII, the precursor of endostatin, 
contains liver-specific regulatory elements.

Liétard J(1), Théret N, Rehn M, Musso O, Dargère D, Pihlajaniemi T, Clément B.

Author information: 
(1)Detoxication and Tissue Repair Unit, INSERM U-456, Université de Rennes I,
France.

The endostatin precursor collagen XVIII is expressed at high levels in human
livers, the main source being hepatocytes. We have studied the regulatory
elements in the promoter 2 of the Col18a1 gene that directs the transcription of 
the NC1-517 variant of collagen alpha1(XVIII), which is the main form expressed
in the liver. The 5'-flanking region of Col18a1 gene was cloned, and a series of 
5'-deletions from -3286 bp to +285 bp were linked to the luciferase reporter
gene. Transfection experiments in HepG2 cells allowed to identify a silencer-like
element containing putative HNF1 and HNF3 sites and activator elements containing
stretches of GC-rich sequences. Another putative HNF3 site in close apposition to
a NF1/CTF site was localized upstream of the silencer-like element.
Cotransfection experiments showed that the Col18a1 promoter 2 was transactivated 
by Sp1 and HNF3alpha. Gel-shift analyses showed that HNF3, NF1/CTF, and Sp1-like 
sites specifically recognized nuclear factors. Super-shift experiments indicated 
that HNF3beta was the major form of HNF3 interacting with the HNF3/NF1 site. The 
well-differentiated hepatoma cell line mhATFS315 transfected with a truncated
form of HNF3beta, which competitively blocks HNF3 transactivating activity,
expressed the Col18a1gene at a very low level. Taken together, these data
strongly suggest that Col18a1 is a liver-specific gene. Furthermore, gel-shift
analyses performed with nuclear factors prepared from well-differentiated
hepatocellular carcinomas showed increased HNF3/NF1 binding activity compared
with normal livers. Consequently, the precursor of endostatin might be
differently expressed according to the differentiated and/or transformed state of
hepatocytes.

PMID: 11093745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Nov;279(5):L806-14.

Characterization of rabbit SP-B promoter region responsive to downregulation by
tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Berhane K(1), Margana RK, Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75708-3154, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for the maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. Tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), an important mediator of lung inflammation, inhibits
surfactant phospholipid and surfactant protein synthesis in the lung. In the
present study, we investigated the TNF-alpha inhibition of rabbit SP-B promoter
activity in a human lung adenocarcinoma cell line (NCI-H441). Deletion
experiments indicated that the TNF-alpha response elements are located within
-236 bp of SP-B 5'-flanking DNA. The TNF-alpha response region contained binding 
sites for nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B), Sp1/Sp3, thyroid transcription
factor (TTF)-1, and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 transcription factors.
Inhibitors of NF-kappa B activation such as dexamethasone and
N-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone and mutation of the NF-kappa B
element did not reverse TNF-alpha inhibition of SP-B promoter, indicating that
TNF-alpha inhibition of SP-B promoter activity occurs independently of NF-kappa B
activation. TNF-alpha treatment decreased the binding activities of TTF-1 and
HNF-3 elements without altering the nuclear levels of TTF-1 and HNF-3 alpha
proteins. Pretreatment of cells with okadaic acid reversed TNF-alpha inhibition
of SP-B promoter activity. Taken together these data indicated that in NCI-H441
cells 1) TNF-alpha inhibition of SP-B promoter activity may be caused by
decreased binding activities of TTF-1 and HNF-3 elements, 2) the decreased
binding activities of TTF-1 and HNF-3 alpha are not due to decreased nuclear
levels of the proteins, and 3) okadaic acid-sensitive phosphatases may be
involved in mediating TNF-alpha inhibition of SP-B promoter activity.

PMID: 11053014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2000 Nov;127(22):4915-23.

Repressive and restrictive mesodermal interactions with gut endoderm: possible
relation to Meckel's Diverticulum.

Bossard P(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
PA 19111, USA.

The midgut and hindgut endoderm of the mouse embryo give rise to the intestinal
epithelium, yet it is not known how the intestinal program is chosen in contrast 
to other endoderm-derived cell types. Previous tissue explant studies with
embryos at 8.5 to 11.5 days gestation (d) showed that when the gut mesoderm is
removed from the prospective intestinal endoderm, the endoderm activates the
expression of liver-specific genes such as serum albumin, demonstrating the
endoderm's pluripotence. This reversible repression of liver genes does not
affect the expression of the endodermal transcription factors HNF3 and GATA4, nor
these factors' ability to engage target sites in chromatin. We have now found
that at 13.5 d, the mesoderm gains a second inhibitory activity, resulting in the
irreversible loss of expression of HNF3 (Foxa2) and GATA factors in the endoderm 
and the absence of factors binding to their target sites in chromatin. The second
inhibitory activity causes the endoderm to lose the potential to activate a liver
gene, and this restriction precedes the normal cytodifferentiation of the
intestinal epithelium. In summary, two inhibitory interactions with mesoderm
successively restrict the developmental potential of the gut endoderm, leading to
intestinal differentiation. We also observed rare gut bud structures in
midgestation embryos that appear to represent murine examples of Meckel's
Diverticulum, a congenital abnormality in human development. The absence of
restrictive mesodermal interactions could explain how Meckel's diverticula
express diverse non-intestinal, endoderm-derived cell types.

PMID: 11044405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Genomics. 2000 Oct 15;69(2):203-13.

Structural and functional characterization of liver cell-specific activity of the
human sodium/taurocholate cotransporter.

Shiao T(1), Iwahashi M, Fortune J, Quattrochi L, Bowman S, Wick M, Qadri I, Simon
FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center and
Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, Colorado 
80262, USA.

Bile salts are rapidly removed from the circulation by the liver-specific
sodium/taurocholate cotransporter (SLC10A1). To understand factors controlling
its liver-specific expression, we isolated human SLC10A1 from a YAC chromosomal
clone. SLC10A1 spans approximately 23 kb distributed over five exons. The major
transcription start site is at 299 bp, and a minor start site is at 395 bp from
the translational start site. A 1.2-kb portion of the 5' flanking region was
sequenced and shown to contain a number of liver-enriched elements, but no TATA
box. Using secreted alkaline phosphatase reporter constructs liver-specific
expression was examined. Transient transfection demonstrated that SLC10A1
promoter expression was selectively expressed eightfold in FAO and rat
hepatocytes, while deletion mutants demonstrated liver-specific expression in a
region extending from -5 to +198 bp, which contained putative sites for C/EBP and
HNF3. Mutations of the C/EBP site resulted in loss of 77% of transcriptional
activity. Cotransfection of C/EBP, but not other putative liver-enriched binding 
factors, increased SLC10A1 promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays demonstrated specific protein-DNA interactions that involved C/EBPalpha
and beta. These studies demonstrate that the TATA-less human SLC10A1 promoter
exhibits liver-specific activity and its regulatory elements contain binding
sites for C/EBP, which contributes specifically to its transcriptional
regulation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11031103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Endocrinol. 2000 Oct;167(1):R1-5.

Gene expression of the three members of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 is
differentially regulated by nutritional and hormonal factors.

Imae M(1), Inoue Y, Fu Z, Kato H, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657 Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) belongs to a large family of forkhead
transcription factors and is made up of three members (HNF-3alpha, -3beta and
-3gamma). It has been shown that HNF-3 regulates a number of metabolically
important genes. However, the mechanisms underlying this regulation of HNF-3
activity by hormones and nutrition have not yet been well elucidated. In
attempting to explore the regulation of gene expression of HNF-3 members by
physiological status, we analyzed the effects of insulin, dexamethasone and
protein malnutrition on the hepatic mRNA level of each member. Male Wistar rats
were fed on a 12% casein diet, 12% gluten diet (deficient in lysine and
threonine) or a protein-free diet for 1 week. The protein-free diet and gluten
diet caused a 3. 7-fold increase in HNF-3g mRNA in the liver and did not affect
the mRNA level of either HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta. Daily administration of
dexamethasone caused the mRNA levels of HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta to increase
(2.3- and 1.4-fold, respectively), but had no effect on the HNF-3gamma mRNA
level. In diabetic rats that had been injected with streptozotocin, an elevation 
of the hepatic mRNA levels of HNF-3beta and HNF-3gamma was observed (1.6-and
1.9-fold, respectively). Insulin replacement in the diabetic rats decreased both 
mRNA levels in a dose-dependent manner. HNF-3alpha mRNA was not affected by
insulin status. These results show that the genes of the three members of the
HNF-3 family respond differently to hormonal and nutritional factors suggesting
that the activities of HNF-3 members are regulated, at least in part, by the
levels of their gene expression.

PMID: 11018767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jun 21;1492(1):45-55.

Transforming growth factor-beta(1) regulation of surfactant protein B gene
expression is mediated by protein kinase-dependent intracellular translocation of
thyroid transcription factor-1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3.

Kumar AS(1), Gonzales LW, Ballard PL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Environmental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, 19104-6068, USA.

The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF beta) polypeptides control a variety of 
cellular processes including organogenesis and cellular proliferation and
differentiation. In the developing lung, TGF beta(1) treatment inhibits airway
branching and expression of the genes for surfactant proteins (SP). Many effects 
of TGF beta are mediated at the level of gene transcription but there is limited 
information regarding signaling pathways and target transcription factors. In
this study with human pulmonary adenocarcinoma H441 cells, we investigated TGF
beta(1) effects on SP-B, a protein which is essential for normal function of
pulmonary surfactant. TGF beta(1) (10 ng/ml) reduced SP-B mRNA content in a
time-dependent fashion, and transient transfection studies localized
responsiveness to the region of the SP-B promoter (-112/-72 bp) containing
binding sites for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3 (HNF3), transcription factors that are important enhancers of SP gene
expression. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assay and immunofluorescence, we
demonstrated rapid accumulation of these transcription factors in the cytoplasm
and subsequent loss from the nucleus on TGF beta(1) treatment of both
adenocarcinoma cells and cultured human fetal lung. TGF beta(1) treatment caused 
intracellular translocation of protein kinase C and effects of TGF beta(1) were
mostly abrogated in the presence of the protein kinase inhibitor calphostin C. We
conclude that TGF beta(1), acting via protein phosphorylation, blocks nuclear
translocation of TTF-1 and HNF3 which results in down-regulation of the SP-B gene
and presumably other pulmonary genes which are transactivated by these factors.

PMID: 11004479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Biotechniques. 2000 Sep;29(3):466-8.

Rapid mini-scale plasmid isolation for DNA sequencing and restriction mapping.

Ahn SC(1), Baek BS, Oh T, Song CS, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, USA.

PMID: 10997259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34173-82.

Synergistic action of hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 and 6 on CYP2C12 gene
expression and suppression by growth hormone-activated STAT5b. Proposed model for
female specific expression of CYP2C12 in adult rat liver.

Delesque-Touchard N(1), Park SH, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) exerts sexually dimorphic effects on liver gene transcription
through its sex-dependent temporal pattern of pituitary hormone secretion.
CYP2C12 encodes a female-specific rat liver P450 steroid hydroxylase whose
expression is activated by continuous GH stimulation of hepatocytes. Presently,
we investigated the role of liver-enriched and GH-regulated transcription factors
in the activation of CYP2C12 gene expression in GH-stimulated liver cells.
Transcription of a CYP2C12 promoter-luciferase reporter gene in transfected HepG2
cells was activated 15-40-fold by the liver-enriched hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 3 alpha, HNF3 beta, and HNF6. Synergistic interactions leading to an
approximately 300-fold activation of the promoter by HNF3 beta in combination
with HNF6 were observed. 5'-Deletion analysis localized the HNF6 response to a
single 5'-proximal 96-nucleotide segment. By contrast, the stimulatory effects of
HNF3 alpha and HNF3 beta were attributable to five distinct regions within the
1.6-kilobase CYP2C12 proximal promoter. GH activation of the signal transducer
and transcriptional activator STAT5b, which proceeds efficiently in male but not 
female rat liver, inhibited CYP2C12 promoter activation by HNF3 beta and HNF6,
despite the absence of a classical STAT5-binding site. The female-specific
pattern of CYP2C12 expression is thus proposed to reflect the positive
synergistic action in female liver of liver-enriched and GH-regulated
transcription factors, such as HNF3 beta and HNF6, coupled with a dominant
inhibitory effect of GH-activated STAT5b that is manifest in males.

PMID: 10931833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;11(7):281-5.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3 or FOXA) family in metabolism.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415
Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6145, USA. kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

The genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) proteins play a pivotal
role in the regulation of metabolism and in the differentiation of metabolic
tissues such as the pancreas and liver. HNF3 transcription factors bind to
cis-regulatory elements in hundreds of genes encoding gluconeogenic and
glycolytic enzymes, serum proteins and hormones. Genetic analysis in mice has
shown that HNF3 beta is necessary for the development of the foregut endoderm,
from which the liver and pancreas arise. HNF3 alpha is required for the full
activation of glucagon in the pancreas, whereas HNF3 gamma induces the activation
of gluconeogenic enzymes to prevent hypoglycemia during fasting.

PMID: 10920385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):31051-60.

Proximal promoter of the surfactant protein D gene: regulatory roles of AP-1,
forkhead box, and GT box binding proteins.

He Y(1), Crouch EC, Rust K, Spaite E, Brody SL.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Immunology and Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Surfactant protein D (SP-D) plays roles in pulmonary host defense and surfactant 
homeostasis and is increased following lung injury. Because AP-1 proteins
regulate cellular responses to diverse environmental stimuli, we hypothesized
that the conserved AP-1 motif (at -109) and flanking sequences in the human SP-D 
promoter contribute to the regulation of SP-D expression. The AP-1 sequence
specifically bound to fra-1, junD, and junB in H441 lung adenocarcinoma nuclear
extracts. Mutagenesis of the AP-1 motif in a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter construct containing 285 base pairs of upstream sequence nearly
abolished promoter activity, and co-transfection of junD significantly increased 
wild type but not mutant promoter activity. The sequence immediately downstream
of the AP-1 element contained a binding site for HNF-3 (FOXA), and simultaneous
mutation of this site (fox-d) and an upstream FoxA binding site (-277, fox-u)
caused a 4-fold reduction in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity.
Immediately upstream of the AP-1-binding site, we identified a GT box-containing 
positive regulatory element. Despite finding regions of limited homology to the
thyroid transcription factor 1-binding site, SP-D promoter activity did not
require thyroid transcription factor 1. Thus, transcriptional regulation of SP-D 
gene expression involves complex interactions with ubiquitous and
lineage-dependent factors consistent with more generalized roles in innate
immunity.

PMID: 10915785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30471-7.

Creating temperature-sensitive winged helix transcription factors. Amino acids
that stabilize the DNA binding domain of HNF3.

Stevens K(1), Cirillo L, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Winged helix transcription factors contain two polypeptide loops, or "wings,"
that make minor groove contacts with DNA from either side of a three-helix bundle
that binds the DNA major groove. While wing 1 is stabilized by a beta-sheet,
parameters that stabilize wing 2 are unknown. Herein we identify two bulky
aromatic residues in wing 2 that stabilize the loop structure and, thereby, the
entire protein's DNA binding and transcriptional stimulatory activity by
interacting with other residues in the three-helix bundle. Mutations of these
wing 2 residues create proteins that are temperature-sensitive for
transcriptional activity. Aromatic and/or hydrophobic residues are highly
conserved among the 150 known winged helix proteins, suggesting conserved
function. We suggest that the winged helix structure evolved by the acquisition
of aromatic and/or hydrophobic residues in distal polypeptide sequences that
helped stabilize the association of a protein loop (wing 2) with the three-helix 
bundle, thereby enhancing DNA binding.

PMID: 10896667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Cell Physiol. 2000 Aug;184(2):229-38.

Activation of surfactant protein-B transcription: signaling through the SP-A
receptor utilizing the PI3 kinase pathway.

Strayer DS(1), Korutla L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. david.strayer@mail.tju.edu

This study describes receptor-activated signaling initiated by surfactant
protein-A (SP-A), and the means by which it activates transcription of surfactant
protein-B. Pulmonary surfactant is a mixture of lipids and associated proteins
produced by type II pneumocytes. Interaction of SP-A with its cognate receptor
(SPAR) on type II cells is involved in regulating surfactant secretion. This
interaction also increases transcription of surfactant proteins and several other
genes. To study SP-A cytokine activity, we used as a model surfactant-protein
(SP-B) transcription, the activators of which have been characterized. HNF-3 and 
TTF-1 transcription factors are known to stimulate SP-B transcription. SP-A
caused increased phosphorylation and nuclear localization of both. Corresponding 
increases in protein binding to the SP-B promoter were demonstrated by gel shift 
analysis. SP-A increased protein binding to HNF-3 and TTF-1 consensus recognition
elements. Footprinting analysis indicated that SP-A-induced protein binding to
SP-B promoter was greater in amount, but not different in location, from that
seen in control cells, which normally transcribe SP-B. SP-A caused transient
increases in PI3 kinase localization at the plasma membrane, and SP-A signaling
to elicit increased SP-B transcription was blocked by LY294002, an inhibitor of
PI3 kinase. Therefore, SP-A signals through PI3 kinase to increase SP-B
transcription in type II pneumocytes by enhancing TTF-1 and HNF-3 activation of
the SP-B promoter. SP-A activation of this signaling pathway, which affects many 
cellular functions and has not previously been implicated in type II cell
transcriptional activity, has profound import for understanding type II cell
biology.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10867648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 8;275(36):28291-300.

Determinants of vitellogenin B1 promoter architecture. HNF3 and estrogen
responsive transcription within chromatin.

Robyr D(1), Gegonne A, Wolffe AP, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie animale, Université de Lausanne, Bâtiment de Biologie,
CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

The liver-specific vitellogenin B1 promoter is efficiently activated by estrogen 
within a nucleosomal environment after microinjection into Xenopus laevis
oocytes, consistent with the hypothesis that significant nucleosome remodeling
over this promoter is not a prerequisite for the activation by the estrogen
receptor (ERalpha). This observation lead us to investigate determinants other
than ERalpha of chromatin structure and transcriptional activation of the
vitellogenin B1 promoter in this system and in vitro. We find that the
liver-enriched transcription factor HNF3 has an important organizational role for
chromatin structure as demonstrated by DNase I-hypersensitive site mapping. Both 
HNF3 and the estrogen receptor activate transcription synergistically and are
able to interact with chromatin reconstituted in vitro with three positioned
nucleosomes. We propose that HNF3 is the cellular determinant which establishes a
promoter environment favorable to a rapid transcriptional activation by the
estrogen receptor.

PMID: 10854430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem J. 2000 Apr 1;347 Pt 1:147-54.

Identification and characterization of cis-acting elements conferring insulin
responsiveness on hamster cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene promoter.

De Fabiani E(1), Crestani M, Marrapodi M, Pinelli A, Golfieri V, Galli G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacological Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Milan, Via Balzaretti 9, I-20133 Milano, Italy. defabiani@unimi.it

Bile acid biosynthesis occurs primarily through a pathway initiated by the
7alpha-hydroxylation of cholesterol, catalysed by cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase 
(encoded by CYP7A1). Insulin down-regulates CYP7A1 transcription. The aim of our 
study was to characterize the sequences of hamster CYP7A1 promoter, mediating the
response to insulin. We therefore performed transient transfection assays with
CYP7A1 promoter/luciferase chimaeras mutated at putative response elements and
studied protein-DNA interactions by means of gel electrophoresis mobility-shift
assay. Here we show that two sequences confer insulin responsiveness on hamster
CYP7A1 promoter: a canonical insulin response sequence TGTTTTG overlapping a
binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) (at nt -235 to -224) and a
binding site for HNF-4 at nt -203 to -191. In particular we show that the hamster
CYP7A1 insulin response sequence is part of a complex unit involved in specific
interactions with multiple transcription factors such as members of the HNF-3
family; this region does not bind very strongly to HNF-3 and as a consequence
partly contributes to the transactivation of the gene. Another sequence located
at nt -138 to -128 binds to HNF-3 and is involved in the tissue-specific
regulation of hamster CYP7A1. The sequence at nt -203 to -191 is not only
essential for insulin effect but also has a major role in the liver-specific
expression of CYP7A1; it is the target of HNF-4. Therefore the binding sites for 
liver-enriched factors, present in the hamster CYP7A1 proximal promoter in close 
vicinity and conserved between species, constitute a regulatory unit important
for basal hepatic expression and tissue restriction of the action of hormones
such as insulin.

PMCID: PMC1220942
PMID: 10727413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 1;343 Pt 3:687-95.

Delineation of the insulin-responsive sequence in the rat cytosolic aspartate
aminotransferase gene: binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 and nuclear 
factor I.

Beurton F(1), Bandyopadhyay U, Dieumegard B, Barouki R, Aggerbeck M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 490, Université René Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints Pères, 75270
Paris cedex 06, France.

Expression of the rat cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase gene is stimulated by 
glucocorticoids and repressed by insulin in the liver. The regulation by insulin 
and part of the glucocorticoid effect are mediated by a distal region in the
promoter. A 142 bp fragment (-1844 to -1702) confers hormonal sensitivity to the 
heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in transient-transfection assays in
H4IIEC3 hepatoma cells. Footprinting and gel-shift assays showed that several
nuclear proteins bind to this region at conserved CCAAT-enhancer binding protein 
(C/EBP), activator protein (AP-1) and E-box sequences. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3alpha (HNF-3)alpha and beta bind to sequences upstream of a
glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE) half-site as demonstrated by supershift
experiments. Nuclear factor I (NFI)-like proteins bind downstream of the GRE
half-site. These sites around the GRE motif overlap with five insulin responsive 
element (IRE) -like sequences (TG/ATTT). The effect of insulin was not prevented 
by any single mutation in the IRE-like sites. However, mutation of two IRE sites 
(namely IREc and d) prevented the insulin effect although only marginally
affecting the glucocorticoid effect. The results suggest that the effect of
insulin is due to a complex interplay of factors requiring the synergistic
contribution of at least two sites and underline the contribution of HNF-3 and
NFI-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC1220603
PMID: 10527950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Lipid Res. 1999 Sep;40(9):1709-18.

Transcription factors and age-related decline in apolipoprotein A-I expression.

Nakamura T(1), Fox-Robichaud A, Kikkawa R, Kashiwagi A, Kojima H, Fujimiya M,
Wong NC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N 4N1.

Apolipoprotein (apo)A-I alone or as a component of high density lipoprotein
particles has antiatherogenic properties. The age-dependent decline in abundance 
of this protein may underlie the higher risk for developing occlusive coronary
artery disease (CAD) in older individuals. Similar to humans, expression of rat
apoA-I also declines with age. Results in rats showed that levels of serum apoA-I
protein, hepatic mRNA, and transcription of the gene were decreased to 39%, 18%, 
and 38%, respectively, in 180-day-old animals compared to those of newborn rats. 
These findings suggest that a nuclear mechanism(s) may account for the decline in
apoA-I expression. Accordingly, we examined hepatic nuclear binding activity to
four specific cis-acting elements of the rat apoA-I promoter. There were
age-dependent changes of binding activity to two proximal sites, B and C, but not
to the more distal elements, IRCE and A. Decreased B-site binding activity
correlated with lower mRNA levels encoding the activator, HNF-3beta. The
age-dependent change in the pattern of binding to site C was due to a switch from
the activator, HNF-4, to the repressor, ARP-1. In summary, the age-related
decline in apoA-I expression may arise from a reduction in the activity of both
cis-acting elements, B and C.

PMID: 10484619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 31;96(18):10152-7.

Impaired glucose homeostasis and neonatal mortality in hepatocyte nuclear factor 
3alpha-deficient mice.

Shih DQ(1), Navas MA, Kuwajima S, Duncan SA, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, 
USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 (HNF-3) belong to an evolutionarily conserved family
of transcription factors that are critical for diverse biological processes such 
as development, differentiation, and metabolism. To study the physiological role 
of HNF-3alpha, we generated mice that lack HNF-3alpha by homologous recombination
in embryonic stem cells. Mice homozygous for a null mutation in the HNF-3alpha
gene develop a complex phenotype that is characterized by abnormal feeding
behavior, progressive starvation, persistent hypoglycemia, hypotriglyceridemia,
wasting, and neonatal mortality between days 2 and 14. Hypoglycemia in
HNF-3alpha-null mice leads to physiological counter-regulatory responses in
glucocorticoid and growth hormone production and an inhibition of insulin
secretion but fails to stimulate glucagon secretion. Glucagon-producing
pancreatic alpha cells develop normally in HNF-3alpha-/- mice, but proglucagon
mRNA levels are reduced 50%. Furthermore, the transcriptional levels of
neuropeptide Y are also significantly reduced shortly after birth, implying a
direct role of HNF-3alpha in the expression of these genes. In contrast, mRNA
levels were increased in HNF-3 target genes
phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphophatase, insulin growth factor binding 
protein-1, and hexokinase I of HNF-3alpha-null mice. Mice lacking one or both
HNF-3alpha alleles also show impaired insulin secretion and glucose intolerance
after an intraperitoneal glucose challenge, indicating that pancreatic beta-cell 
function is also compromised. Our results indicate that HNF-3alpha plays a
critical role in the regulation of glucose homeostasis and in pancreatic islet
function.

PMCID: PMC17858
PMID: 10468578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 27;274(35):25113-20.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 relieves chromatin-mediated repression of the
alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Crowe AJ(1), Sang L, Li KK, Lee KC, Spear BT, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

The alpha-fetoprotein gene (AFP) is tightly regulated at the tissue-specific
level, with expression confined to endoderm-derived cells. We have reconstituted 
AFP transcription on chromatin-assembled DNA templates in vitro. Our studies show
that chromatin assembly is essential for hepatic-specific expression of the AFP
gene. While nucleosome-free AFP DNA is robustly transcribed in vitro by both
cervical (HeLa) and hepatocellular (HepG2) carcinoma extracts, the general
transcription factors and transactivators present in HeLa extract cannot relieve 
chromatin-mediated repression of AFP. In contrast, preincubation with either
HepG2 extract or HeLa extract supplemented with recombinant hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3 alpha (HNF3alpha), a hepatic-enriched factor expressed very early during
liver development, is sufficient to confer transcriptional activation on a
chromatin-repressed AFP template. Transient transfection studies illustrate that 
HNF3alpha can activate AFP expression in a non-liver cellular environment,
confirming a pivotal role for HNF3alpha in establishing hepatic-specific gene
expression. Restriction enzyme accessibility assays reveal that HNF3alpha
promotes the assembly of an open chromatin structure at the AFP promoter.
Combined, these functional and structural data suggest that chromatin assembly
establishes a barrier to block inappropriate expression of AFP in non-hepatic
tissues and that tissue-specific factors, such as HNF3alpha, are required to
alleviate the chromatin-mediated repression.

PMID: 10455192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Jul 10;250(1):1-9.

The HNF-3alpha transcription factor is a primary target for retinoic acid action.

Jacob A(1), Budhiraja S, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, The Chicago Medical School,
North Chicago, Illinois, 60064, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that gene expression of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3alpha (HNF-3alpha) transcription factor is activated during
retinoic-acid-induced differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells (A. Jacob
et al. (1994). Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 2126-2133). We have extended these studies 
and now show that HNF-3alpha mRNA is induced approximately 6 h after addition of 
retinoic acid to the cells, peaks at 1 day postdifferentiation, and then declines
to undetectable levels. Furthermore, HNF-3alpha induction occurs in the absence
of de novo protein synthesis, suggesting that it is a primary target for retinoic
acid action. In order to corroborate this hypothesis, we have mapped the
cis-acting HNF-3alpha promoter site that mediates the retinoic acid response. DNA
sequence analysis indicates that the HNF-3alpha promoter contains an authentic
retinoic acid response element (RARE) of the DR5 class. As expected, this element
is able to confer retinoic acid responsiveness to a heterologous promoter. In
addition, the HNF-3alpha-specific RARE is able to interact with various retinoic 
acid receptor heterodimers of the RAR/RXR type. Since HNF-3alpha is induced early
during mammalian neurogenesis, our data shed new light on the connection between 
retinoic-acid-mediated HNF-3alpha activation and establishment of the neuronal
phenotype.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10388516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;18(2):157-64.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (winged helix domain) activates trefoil factor gene
TFF1 through a binding motif adjacent to the TATAA box.

Beck S(1), Sommer P, dos Santos Silva E, Blin N, Gött P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, 
University of Tübingen, Germany.

The winged helix transcription factors HNF-3/FKH (forkhead homologs) activate
endodermal-derived and acute-phase gene expression and control gut development in
Drosophila. Trefoil factor family (TFFs) peptides are vertebrate products
secreted by mucin-producing epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
involved in restitution and repair of the mucosa. They are positively regulated
in ulcerative and neoplastic conditions. We describe a consensus sequence in
human and rodent TFF promoters close to the TATAA box showing striking similarity
to the binding site of the HNF-3/FKH family. In gel retardation assays, HNF-3
alpha and beta bound predominantly to the site in TFF1 (formerly pS2) and, to a
lesser extent, to the sites in TFF2 or TFF3. Mutations generated in this motif
severely impaired transcription of TFF1 reporter genes. Cotransfection with
expression vectors of HNF-3alpha and beta, but not the related HFH 11A and B,
specifically activated the wild-type TFF1 reporter genes. Activation of
endogenous expression of TFF1 by HNF-3 alpha and beta gene products was more than
1000 fold in the pancreatic cell line Capan-2 and fivefold in the gastric cell
line MKN-45, whereas the intestinal cell lines HUTU 80 and HT-29 displayed no
effect. Thus, HNF-3/FKH factors contribute causally to cell-specific regulation
of TFF genes and may explain the acute-phase response of TFF peptides.

PMID: 10073575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genes Dev. 1999 Feb 15;13(4):495-504.

Inactivation of the winged helix transcription factor HNF3alpha affects glucose
homeostasis and islet glucagon gene expression in vivo.

Kaestner KH(1), Katz J, Liu Y, Drucker DJ, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA. kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

Mice homozygous for a null mutation in the winged helix transcription factor
HNF3alpha showed severe postnatal growth retardation followed by death between P2
and P12. Homozygous mutant mice were hypoglycemic despite unchanged expression of
HNF3 target genes involved in hepatic gluconeogenesis. Whereas insulin and
corticosteroid levels were altered as expected, plasma glucagon was reduced
markedly in the mutant animals despite the hypoglycemia that should be expected
to increase glucagon levels. This correlated with a 70% reduction in pancreatic
proglucagon gene expression. We also showed that HNF3alpha could bind to and
transactivate the proglucagon gene promoter. These observations invoke a central 
role for HNF3alpha in the regulatory control of islet genes essential for glucose
homeostasis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC316473
PMID: 10049364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochem J. 1999 Mar 1;338 ( Pt 2):241-9.

Upstream region of rat serum albumin gene promoter contributes to promoter
activity: presence of functional binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3.

Hsiang CH(1), Marten NW, Straus DS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Division and Biology Department, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, USA.

Transcription of the serum albumin gene occurs almost exclusively in the liver
and is controlled in part by a strong liver-specific promoter. The upstream
region of the serum albumin gene promoter is highly conserved among species and
is footprinted in vitro by a number of nuclear proteins. However, the role of the
upstream promoter region in regulating transcription and the identity of the
transcription factors that bind to this region have not been established. In the 
present study, deletion analysis of the rat serum albumin promoter in transiently
transfected HepG2 cells demonstrated that elimination of the region between -207 
and -153 bp caused a two-fold decrease in promoter activity (P<0.05). Additional 
analysis of the -207 to -124 bp promoter interval led to the identification of
two potential binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) located at
-168 to -157 bp (site X) and -145 to -134 bp (site Y). Electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays performed with the HNF-3 X and Y sites demonstrated that
both sites are capable of binding HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta. Placement of a single
copy of the HNF-3 X site upstream from a minimal promoter increased promoter
activity by about four-fold in HepG2 cells, and the reporter construct containing
this site could be transactivated if co-transfected with an HNF-3 expression
construct. Furthermore, inactivation of the HNF-3 X site by site-directed
mutagenesis within the context of the -261 bp albumin promoter construct resulted
in a 40% decrease in transcription (P<0.05). These results indicate that the
positive effect of the -207 to -153 bp promoter interval is attributable to the
presence of the HNF-3 X site within this interval. Additional results obtained
with transfected HepG2 cells suggest that the HNF-3 Y site plays a lesser role in
activation of transcription than the X site.

PMCID: PMC1220048
PMID: 10024498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Gene. 1998 Dec 11;224(1-2):97-107.

Exon-I is involved in positive as well as negative regulation of human
angiotensinogen gene expression.

Cui Y(1), Narayanan CS, Zhou J, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Angiotensinogen is the glycoprotein precursor of one of the most potent
vasoactive hormones, angiotensin-II. Angiotensinogen gene is primarily expressed 
in the liver, and this gene locus is linked with human essential hypertension. We
show here that a mutation in exon-I reduces the basal expression of the human
angiotensinogen gene in liver cells. We also show that a nucleotide sequence in
exon-I binds to liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-3 and a ubiquitous factor
AP4. Our studies also show that transient transfection of an expression vector
containing AP4 coding sequence downregulates the expression of reporter
constructs containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter. By contrast,
co-transfection of an expression vector containing HNF-3beta coding sequence
increases the expression of these reporter constructs. The human angiotensinogen 
gene has a C/A polymorphism located at -20, and we have shown that estrogen
receptor-alpha binds to this sequence when nucleoside A is present at this site. 
We show here that co-transfection of an expression vector containing AP4 coding
sequence reduces estrogen-induced promoter activity of reporter constructs
containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter (with nucleoside A at -20)
attached to the CAT gene. These studies partly explain the molecular mechanisms
involved in tissue-specific expression of the human angiotensinogen gene.

PMID: 9931457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1279-88.

p53-mediated repression of alpha-fetoprotein gene expression by specific DNA
binding.

Lee KC(1), Crowe AJ, Barton MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524, USA.

Aberrant expression of the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is characteristic of a
majority of hepatocellular carcinoma cases and serves as a diagnostic
tumor-specific marker. By dissecting regulatory mechanisms through
electromobility gel shift, transient-transfection, Western blot, and in vitro
transcription analyses, we find that AFP gene expression is controlled in part by
mutually exclusive binding of two trans-acting factors, p53 and hepatic nuclear
factor 3 (HNF-3). HNF-3 protein activates while p53 represses AFP transcription
through sequence-specific binding within the previously identified AFP
developmental repressor domain. A single mutation within the DNA binding domain
of p53 protein or a mutation of the p53 DNA binding element within the AFP
developmental repressor eliminates p53-repressive effects in both
transient-transfection and cell-free expression systems. Coexpression of p300
histone acetyltransferase, which has been shown to acetylate p53 and increase
specific DNA binding, amplifies the p53-mediated repression. Western blot
analysis of proteins present in developmentally staged, liver nuclear extracts
reveal a one-to-one correlation between activation of p53 protein and repression 
of AFP during hepatic development. Induction of p53 in response to actinomycin D 
or hypoxic stress decreases AFP expression. Studies in fibroblast cells lacking
HNF-3 further support a model for p53-mediated repression that is both passive
through displacement of a tissue-specific activating factor and active in the
presence of tissue-specific corepressors. This mechanism for p53-mediated
repression of AFP gene expression may be active during hepatic differentiation
and lost in the process of tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC116057
PMID: 9891062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Oct;12(10):1487-98.

Structural requirements of the glucocorticoid and retinoic acid response units in
the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene promoter.

Sugiyama T(1), Scott DK, Wang JC, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

The phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene promoter contains a
glucocorticoid response unit (GRU) that includes three accessory factor-binding
sites (AF1, AF2, and AF3), two glucocorticoid receptor-binding sites (GR1 and
GR2), and a cAMP response element. All of these elements, and the proteins that
bind to them, are required for a complete glucocorticoid response. The PEPCK
promoter also contains a retinoic acid response unit (RARU) that consists of two 
retinoic acid response elements (RARE1 and RARE2) that bind retinoic acid
receptor/9-cis-retinoic acid receptor heterodimers. The sequences of RARE1 and
RARE2 coincide with those for AF1 and AF3, respectively. Thus, the PEPCK promoter
can mediate different hormone responses through hormone response units that
utilize common elements, but that bind different sets of proteins. We reasoned
that each response might require a unique structural assembly and therefore
tested how various arrangements of the PEPCK promoter affect the actions of
either glucocorticoids or retinoic acid. The activation of the PEPCK gene in
response to glucocorticoids requires a specific set of cis-acting elements that
must be precisely positioned within the GRU. The distance between AF2 and GR1 is 
critical for the glucocorticoid response, and since the AF2 factor, HNF3,
interacts with GR in vitro, this protein-protein interaction may be important for
the glucocorticoid response. By contrast, the distance and orientation
requirements of AF1 and AF3 with respect to GR1 are more flexible. In the case of
the RARU, although the relative positions of RARE1 and RARE2 are important for
the retinoic acid response, more tolerance for distance and stereospecific
alignment between RARE1 and RARE2 is allowed. In addition, we show that the GRU
and the RARU can act as a module, within a restricted region, in the context of
the PEPCK promoter and in limited contexts of a heterologous promoter. These
observations suggest that the structural requirements of the GRU and the RARU are
different, and this may have important implications for how multiple hormonal
signals are integrated through this promoter.

PMID: 9773973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Sep;12(9):1343-54.

Inhibition by insulin of glucocorticoid-induced gene transcription: involvement
of the ligand-binding domain of the glucocorticoid receptor and independence from
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.

Pierreux CE(1), Ursø B, De Meyts P, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School,
Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium.

Insulin can inhibit the stimulatory effect of glucocorticoid hormones on the
transcription of genes coding for enzymes involved in glucose metabolism. We
reported earlier that insulin inhibits the glucocorticoid-stimulated
transcription of the gene coding for liver 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFK-2). To
elucidate the mechanism of these hormonal effects, we have studied the regulatory
regions of the PFK-2 gene in transfection experiments. We found that both
glucocorticoids and insulin act via the glucocorticoid response unit (GRU)
located in the first intron. Footprinting experiments showed that the GRU binds
not only the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), but also ubiquitous [nuclear factor I 
(NF-I)] and liver-enriched [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3, HNF-6,
CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)] transcription factors. Site-directed
mutational analysis of the GRU revealed that these factors modulate
glucocorticoid action but that none of them seems to be individually involved in 
the inhibitory effect of insulin. We did not find an insulin response element in 
the GRU, but we showed that insulin targets the GR. Insulin-induced inhibition of
the glucocorticoid stimulation required the ligand-binding domain of the GR.
Finally, the insulin-signaling cascade involved was independent of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
Together, these results suggest that insulin acts on the PFK-2 gene via another
pathway and targets either the GR in its ligand-binding domain or a cofactor
interacting with this domain.

PMID: 9731703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):174-5.

Assignment of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 genes to rat chromosome bands
6q23-->q24 (alpha: Hnf3a), 3q41 (beta: Hnf3b) and 1q21-->q22 (gamma: Hnf3g) by in
situ hybridization.

Van Reeth T(1), Van Vooren P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rhode-St-Genèse, Belgium. tvanreet@dbm.ulb.ac.be

PMID: 9730593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Int J Dev Biol. 1998 Sep;42(6):741-6.

The -4 kilobase promoter region of the winged helix transcription factor
HNF-3alpha gene elicits transgene expression in mouse embryonic hepatic and
intestinal diverticula.

Clevidence DE(1), Zhou H, Lau LF, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 60612-7334, USA.

Murine hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha (HNF-3alpha) protein is a member of a
large family of developmentally regulated transcription factors that share
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and participate in
embryonic pattern formation. HNF-3alpha also mediates cell-specific transcription
of genes important for the function of hepatocytes, intestinal, pancreatic and
bronchiolar epithelium. We have previously determined that -520 nucleotides
upstream of the rat HNF-3alpha gene were sufficient to elicit hepatoma-specific
expression in transfection assays and reported on a novel HNF-3alpha expression
pattern in the renal pelvis urothelium of the embryonic and adult kidney. We also
showed that retinoic acid mediated activation of the HNF-3alpha gene required -4 
kb of the HNF-3alpha promoter region in F9 teratocarcinoma transfections. In
order to determine regulatory sequences mediating the HNF-3alpha cellular
expression pattern in developing mouse embryos, we created transgenic mice
bearing the -4 kb HNF-3alpha promoter region driving expression of the
beta-galactosidase transgene. Embryonic analysis of two transgenic mouse lines
demonstrated that the -4 kb HNF-3alpha promoter sequences were sufficient to
elicit transgene expression in the developing liver, intestine, esophagus, nasal 
epithelial cells and floorplate of the neurotube, but not in the mesodermal
notochord or in the lung bud. One of the transgenic lines also exhibited proper
expression in the mesonephric ducts and metanephric diverticulum, suggesting that
the -4 kb HNF-3alpha promoter region contained a subset of the regulatory
sequences necessary for HNF-3alpha expression in the developing kidney.

PMID: 9727829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Science. 1998 Jul 31;281(5377):692-5.

Regulation of a transcription factor network required for differentiation and
metabolism.

Duncan SA(1), Navas MA, Dufort D, Rossant J, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Cell Biology and Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily
conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation
and metabolism. Mutations in HNF-1alphaand HNF-4alpha genes impair insulin
secretion and cause type 2 diabetes. Regulation of HNF-4/HNF-1 expression by
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta was studied in embryoid bodies in which one or both
HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta alleles were inactivated. HNF-3beta positively regulated 
the expression of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha and their downstream targets, implicating
a role in diabetes. HNF-3beta was also necessary for expression of HNF-3alpha. In
contrast, HNF-3alpha acts as a negative regulator of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha
demonstrating that HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta have antagonistic transcriptional
regulatory functions in vivo. HNF-3alpha does not appear to act as a classic
biochemical repressor but rather exerts its negative effect by competing for
HNF-3 binding sites with the more efficient activator HNF-3beta. In addition, the
HNF-3alpha/HNF-3beta ratio is modulated by the presence of insulin, providing
evidence that the HNF network may have important roles in mediating the action of
insulin.

PMID: 9685261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gene. 1998 Jul 3;214(1-2):167-76.

Chromatin structure and functional analysis of the mouse HNF3alpha gene.

Lodmell AG(1), Jung J, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Biochemistry, Brown University,
Box G-J363, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The transcription factor HNF3alpha is a member of the winged-helix family of
regulatory proteins. It is expressed in the definitive endoderm, notochord, and
neural tube in embryos, but in the adult is expressed primarily in
endoderm-derived tissues such as liver, lung, and pancreas. We present here the
cloning of the mouse HNF3alpha gene and a characterization of its chromatin
structure and regulatory sequences. The HNF3alpha gene is encoded by two exons
and its transcription initiates at multiple start sites at a TATA-less promoter
that is highly conserved between mouse and rat. We found different patterns of
DNaseI hypersensitive sites in HNF3alpha gene chromatin in different adult
tissues in which HNF3alpha is expressed, suggesting distinct regulatory
mechanisms occurring within different tissue derivatives of the endoderm germ
layer. Cell transfection data indicate that sequences spanning certain upstream
hypersensitive sites can enhance transcription from the HNF3alpha promoter, but
only when stably integrated into chromatin and not when transiently transfected. 
The results suggest a complex regulatory interplay between distinct genetic
regulatory sequences that function specifically in chromatin.

PMID: 9651517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4245-51.

Targeted disruption of the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma results
in reduced transcription of hepatocyte-specific genes.

Kaestner KH(1), Hiemisch H, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

The winged helix transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma
(HNF3gamma) is expressed in embryonic endoderm and its derivatives liver,
pancreas, stomach, and intestine, as well as in testis and ovary. We have
generated mice carrying an Hnf3g-lacZ fusion which deletes most of the HNF3gamma 
coding sequence as well as 5.5 kb of 3' flanking region. Mice homozygous for the 
mutation are fertile, develop normally, and show no morphological defects. The
mild phenotype change of the Hnf3g-/- mice can be explained in part by an
upregulation of HNF3alpha and HNF3beta in the liver of the mutant animals.
Analysis of steady-state mRNA levels as well as transcription rates showed that
levels of expression of several HNF3 target genes (phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase, transferrin, tyrosine aminotransferase) were reduced by 50 to 70%,
indicating that HNF3gamma is an important activator of these genes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC109008
PMID: 9632808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Gene. 1998 May 12;211(2):301-10.

Cloning and functional expression of the rabbit transferrin gene promoter.

Ghareeb BA(1), Thépot D, Delville-Giraud C, Houdebine LM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, INRA, 78352, Jouy-en-Josas,
Cedex, France.

The transferrin gene is expressed in all mammals, mainly in the liver. A rabbit
genomic library was screened using cDNA probes, and 8kb of 5' flanking sequence
of the rabbit transferrin gene was cloned upstream of the cat reporter gene. The 
first 200 nucleotides of this promoter were sequenced. The rabbit transferrin
promoter is highly homologous to the human and murine ones. Its functional
activity was tested in the human hepatic cell line HepG2. Using transitory
transfections in these cells, a proximal positive region, a negative region and a
distal positive region located between -3.6 and -4.0kb were identified. This
distal positive region sequence is highly conserved with the the human gene
enhancer sequence, and contains an HNF3alpha binding site, the mutation of which 
totally abolished its effect in HepG2 and HuH7 cell lines. The rabbit transferrin
5' flanking sequence thus shows a promoter organization very similar to that of
the human gene, and the HNF3alpha binding site in the distal positive region
presents the same functional importance in both genes.

PMID: 9602160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Apr 1;26(7):1761-8.

E1A represses apolipoprotein AI enhancer activity in liver cells through a pRb-
and CBP-independent pathway.

Kilbourne EJ(1), Evans MJ, Karathanasis SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Receptors, Wyeth-Ayerst Research, 145 King of Prussia
Road, Radnor, PA 19087, USA.

The apolipoprotein AI (apoAI) promoter/enhancer contains multiple cis -acting
elements on which a variety of hepatocyte-enriched and ubiquitous transcription
factors function synergistically to regulate liver-specific transcription.
Adenovirus E1A proteins repress tissue-specific gene expression and disrupt the
differentiated state in a variety of cell types. In this study expression of E1A 
12Sor 13S in hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells repressed apoAI enhancer activity 8-fold.
Deletion mapping analysis showed that inhibition by E1A was mediated by the apoAI
promoter site B. E1A selectively inhibited the ability of HNF3beta and HNF3alpha 
to transactivate reporter genes controlled by the apoAI site B and the HNF3
binding site from the transthyretin promoter. The E1A-mediated repression of HNF3
activity was not reversed by overexpression of HNF3beta nor did E1A alter nuclear
HNF3beta protein levels or inhibit HNF3 binding to DNA in mobility shift assays. 
Overexpression of two cofactors known to interact with E1A, pRb and CBP failed to
overcome inhibition of HNF3 activity. Similarly, mutations in E1A that disrupt
its interaction with pRb or CBP did not compromise its ability to repress
HNF3beta transcriptional activity. These data suggest that E1A inhibits HNF3
activity by inactivating a limiting cofactor(s) distinct from pRb or CBP.

PMCID: PMC147459
PMID: 9512550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 May;56(1-2):227-37.

Winged helix hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 and POU-domain protein brn-2/N-oct-3
bind overlapping sites on the neuronal promoter of human aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase gene.

Raynal JF(1), Dugast C, Le Van Thaï A, Weber MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, CNRS UPR 9006, 118 route de
Narbonne, F31062 Toulouse Cedex, France.

The neuronal promoter of human aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase gene has been 
analysed to elucidate the mechanisms of neuron type-specific expression. The
(-560/+92) promoter segment was sufficient to direct luciferase expression at a
higher level in SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cells, than in CHP126 neuroepithelia, HepG2
hepatoma or SK-Hep1 epithelioma cells. Deletions experiments showed that this
segment contained a neuronal-specific (element T1) and a SK-N-BE-specific
(element N1) cis-activating sequences. Element T1 (-72/-36) bound Sp1 and NF-Y
proteins, and unidentified neuronal-specific factors. Element N1 (-102/-72) bound
cell-specific factors, identified as HNF-3, N-Oct-3/Brn-2 and N-Oct-2. HNF-3
proteins recognized the sequence TCAGTAAATA that matches the consensus motif.
Oct-1, N-Oct-2 and N-Oct-3 bound the AAATAATGC sequence that overlaps the HNF-3
binding site. In addition, we show that the HNF-3 binding sites from aldolase C
and HNF-3beta gene promoters also bind N-Oct-2 and N-Oct-3 proteins. These data
suggest a functional interplay of winged helix/forkhead and POU-domain
transcription factors on a variety of neuronal gene promoters.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9602135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Dyn. 1998 Feb;211(2):131-40.

Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha in rat prostate, seminal vesicle, 
and bladder.

Kopachik W(1), Hayward SW, Cunha GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824-1115,
USA. kopachik@pilot.msu.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha (HNF-3alpha), a member of the
hepatocyte-forkhead-homolog family of transcription factors, regulates gene
expression in the endoderm-derived liver and lung. To determine if HNF-3alpha
might also play a role in endodermal derivatives of the urogenital sinus, the
expression of HNF-3alpha in male accessory sex organs was assessed by Northern
blotting, in situ hybridization, and electrophoretic mobility shift analysis. RNA
from the dorsolateral prostate (DP), ventral prostate (VP), anterior prostate
(AP), seminal vesicle (SV), and bladder was compared with RNA from the liver and 
spleen as positive and negative controls, respectively. HNF-3alpha mRNA levels in
the DP, VP, AP, and bladder were 20, 14, 5, and 6 times higher than the SV
equivalent in the liver. HNF-3alpha mRNA was detected in 8 of 10 prostate
epithelial cell lines (rat NRP 152 and 154, mouse Pr14, and human DU-145, PC3,
LNCaP, ND-1, and BPH-1) but not in rat Dunning epithelial or mouse Pr12 cells.
Addition of testosterone to castrated rats was found to prevent a drastic loss of
HNF-3alpha mRNA in the VP. This result suggests that HNF-3alpha mRNA levels are
at least indirectly regulated by testosterone. The HNF-3alpha mRNA is expressed
in epithelial cells of the urogenital sinus derivatives VP, AP, DP, and bladder
and Wolffian duct derivative, the SV. To confirm that functional HNF-3alpha
protein is produced in the VP, electrophoretic mobility shift assays were
performed with whole-cell extracts and high-affinity oligonucleotide (TTR-S) from
the transthyretin promoter. Binding to TTR-S was disrupted when the extract was
incubated with HNF-3alpha, but not with HNF-3beta, antibody. Taken together, the 
results using VP, AP, DP, SV, and bladder suggest that HNF-3alpha may play an
important role in development and maintenance of urogenital tract epithelial
cells.

PMID: 9489767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. EMBO J. 1998 Jan 2;17(1):244-54.

Binding of the winged-helix transcription factor HNF3 to a linker histone site on
the nucleosome.

Cirillo LA(1), McPherson CE, Bossard P, Stevens K, Cherian S, Shim EY, Clark KL, 
Burley SK, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Box G-J363, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The transcription factor HNF3 and linker histones H1 and H5 possess winged-helix 
DNA-binding domains, yet HNF3 and other fork head-related proteins activate genes
during development whereas linker histones compact DNA in chromatin and repress
gene expression. We compared how the two classes of factors interact with
chromatin templates and found that HNF3 binds DNA at the side of nucleosome
cores, similarly to what has been reported for linker histone. A nucleosome
structural binding site for HNF3 is occupied at the albumin transcriptional
enhancer in active and potentially active chromatin, but not in inactive
chromatin in vivo. While wild-type HNF3 protein does not compact DNA extending
from the nucleosome, as does linker histone, site-directed mutants of HNF3 can
compact nucleosomal DNA if they contain basic amino acids at positions previously
shown to be essential for nucleosomal DNA compaction by linker histones. The
results illustrate how transcription factors can possess special
nucleosome-binding activities that are not predicted from studies of factor
interactions with free DNA.

PMCID: PMC1170375
PMID: 9427758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Genes Dev. 1998 Jan 1;12(1):5-10.

Nucleosome positioning by the winged helix transcription factor HNF3.

Shim EY(1), Woodcock C, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

Nucleosome positioning at genetic regulatory sequences is not well understood.
The transcriptional enhancer of the mouse serum albumin gene is active in liver, 
where regulatory factors occupy their target sites on three nucleosome-like
particles designated N1, N2, and N3. The winged helix transcription factor HNF3
binds to two sites near the center of the N1 particle. We created dinucleosome
templates using the albumin enhancer sequence and found that site-specific
binding of HNF3 protein resulted in nucleosome positioning in vitro similar to
that seen in liver nuclei. Thus, binding of a transcription factor can position
an underlying nucleosome core.

PMCID: PMC316403
PMID: 9420326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Mar;174(3):273-84.

Alteration of expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
transition between growth and differentiation of primary cultured rat
hepatocytes.

Mizuguchi T(1), Mitaka T, Hirata K, Oda H, Mochizuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, Japan.

In the present study, we showed the role of the liver-enriched transcription
factors in the transition during which proliferating hepatocytes become
quiescent. We used primary rat hepatocytes cultured in modified L-15 medium. The 
cells proliferated and, after the addition of 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) from
day 4, they stopped growing and gradually differentiated. During hepatic
proliferation, expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)1alpha, HNF4, C/EBP 
alpha, and C/EBP beta mRNAs was depressed, whereas that of HNF3alpha and HNF3beta
transcripts was enhanced. After the addition of DMSO, the expression of
HNF1alpha, HNF3gamma, and HNF4 returned to the level in isolated cells and
HNF1beta mRNA expression gradually increased. However, expression of C/EBP alpha 
and C/EBP beta mRNAs was partially recovered. The mitoinhibitory agents,
IL-1beta, IL-6, TGF-beta, and activin A, were examined to determine whether they 
could induce differentiation of proliferating hepatocytes as shown in cells
treated with DMSO. Although these factors inhibited cell growth, the cells did
not differentiate. The expression pattern of HNF3gamma mRNA was quite different
in the cells cultured with DMSO and those cultured with cytokines. Therefore,
hepatic differentiation requires not only inhibition of DNA synthesis but also
induction of appropriate transcription factors. Thus, expression of HNF3gamma,
C/EBP alpha, and C/EBP beta may be necessary for hepatocytes to acquire highly
differentiated functions in addition to coexpression of certain amounts of
transcripts of HNF1alpha, HNF1beta, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4 as well as
suppression of C/EBP delta.

PMID: 9462689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Dyn. 1997 Dec;210(4):431-45.

Genetic patterning of the developing mouse tail at the time of posterior
neuropore closure.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Posterior neuropore (PNP) closure coincides with the end of gastrulation, marking
the end of primary neurulation and primary body axis formation. Secondary
neurulation and axis formation involve differentiation of the tail bud
mesenchyme. Genetic control of the primary-secondary transition is not
understood. We report a detailed analysis of gene expression in the caudal region
of day 10 mouse embryos during primary neuropore closure. Embryos were collected 
at the 27-32 somite stage, fixed, processed for whole mount in situ
hybridisation, and subsequently sectioned for a more detailed analysis. Genes
selected for study include those involved in the key events of gastrulation and
neurulation at earlier stages and more cranial levels. Patterns of expression
within the tail bud, neural plate, recently closed neural tube, notochord,
hindgut, mesoderm, and surface ectoderm are illustrated and described.
Specifically, we report continuity of expression of the genes Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Evx1,
Fgf8, RARgamma, Brachyury, and Hoxb1 from primitive streak and node into
subpopulations of the tail bud and caudal axial structures. Within the caudal
notochord, developing floorplate, and hindgut, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Shh, and
Brachyury expression domains correlate directly with known genetic roles and
predicted tissue interdependence during induction and differentiation of these
structures. The patterns of expression of Wnt5a, Hoxb1, Brachyury, RARgamma, and 
Evx1, together with observations on proliferation, reveal that the caudal
mesoderm is organised at a molecular level into distinct domains delineated by
longitudinal and transverse borders before histological differentiation.
Expression of Wnt5a in the ventral ectodermal ridge supports previous evidence
that this structure is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. These
results provide a foundation for understanding the mechanisms facilitating
transition from primary to secondary body axis formation, as well as the factors 
involved in defective spinal neurulation.

PMID: 9415428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):432-45.

Early postnatal lethality in Hoxa-5 mutant mice is attributable to respiratory
tract defects.

Aubin J(1), Lemieux M, Tremblay M, Bérard J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Canada.

To uncover roles for the Hoxa-5 gene during embryogenesis, we have focused on
identifying structural and functional defects in organ systems underlying the
perinatal lethality in Hoxa-5 homozygous mutants. Analysis of the mutant
phenotype shows that Hoxa-5 is essential for normal organogenesis and function of
the respiratory tract. In homozygous newborn mutants, improper tracheal and lung 
morphogenesis can lead to tracheal occlusion, and to respiratory distress
associated with a marked decrease in the production of surfactant proteins.
Collectively, these defects likely underlie the pronounced mortality of
homozygous mutant pups. Furthermore, the loss of Hoxa-5 function results in
altered TTF-1, HNF-3 beta, and N-myc gene expression in the pulmonary epithelium.
Since expression of Hoxa-5 is confined to the mesenchymal component of the
developing trachea and lung, the effects observed in epithelial cells may result 
from a disruption of normal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

PMID: 9441679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1407-18.

Liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP, are major
contributors to the strong activity of the chicken CYP2H1 promoter in chick
embryo hepatocytes.

Dogra SC(1), May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

Chicken CYP2H1 promoter constructs express strongly in chick embryo hepatocytes
at a level comparable with that of Rous sarcoma viral promoter. We have
identified the transcription factors responsible for the active CYP2H1 promoter. 
Binding sites for transcription factors were located within the first 160 bp of
promoter sequence using promoter deletion experiments and DNase I footprint
analysis. Sequence analysis revealed characteristic sites for the liver-enriched 
transcription factors of the HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP families and for the
ubiquitous factor, USF. Protein binding to these sites was established by gel
mobility shift assays. Mutagenesis and transient transfection experiments
demonstrated that these sites, in combination, were responsible for the strong
promoter activity with a substantial contribution from HNF-1 and HNF-3. The
promoter was also active in mammalian HepG2 and COS-1 cell lines where expression
was dependent on the identified transcription factor binding sites but promoter
activity in the HeLa cells was low. Transactivation experiments revealed that
promoter expression could be activated through the appropriate binding sites by
exogenously expressed rat HNF-1alpha or HNF-1beta, rat HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta
and chicken C/EBP alpha. Transcriptional synergism between HNF-1 and C/EBP was
observed in these transactivation experiments. A Barbie box-like sequence
overlapped the USF element but was not functional. The results demonstrate that
liver-enriched transcription factors and USF direct strong expression of the
CYP2H1 promoter in transiently transfected cells. By comparison, in vivo
expression of this gene in uninduced chick embryo hepatocytes is low but markedly
increased by phenobarbital. Drug induction may therefore substantially reflect
derepression of this inherently active promoter.

PMID: 9428789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Gen Virol. 1997 Nov;78 ( Pt 11):3029-38.

Characterization of the hepatitis B virus major surface antigen promoter
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 binding site.

Raney AK(1), McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Transcription of the HBV 2.1 kb RNAs is regulated by the major surface antigen
promoter. Previously, transient transfection analysis identified regulatory
sequence elements in this promoter located between -189 and +1 which govern the
level of transcription from this promoter and appear to bind only ubiquitous
transcription factors including NF1, Sp1 and NF-Y. However, in vivo transcription
analysis in transgenic mice has demonstrated that the expression of the HBV 2.1
kb RNAs is largely restricted to hepatocytes. In this study, the presence of a
functional HNF3 transcription factor binding site located between -231 and -240
in the major surface antigen promoter suggests that the in vivo liver-restricted 
expression of the 2.1 kb RNAs may be governed by this liver-enriched
transcription factor. The identification of a functional HNF3 binding site
upstream of the DNA polymerase open reading frame also supports the contention
that transient transfection analysis may fail to detect all of the cis-acting
regulatory sequence elements involved in modulating the level of transcription
from the viral promoters.

PMID: 9367390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Endocrinology. 1997 Oct;138(10):4291-300.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3 and high mobility group I/Y proteins bind the insulin
response element of the insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-1 promoter.

Allander SV(1), Durham SK, Scheimann AO, Wasserman RM, Suwanichkul A, Powell DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The insulin response element (IRE) of the human insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) promoter contains a palindrome of the
T(A/G)TTT sequence crucial to hormonal regulation of many genes. In initial
studies of how this IRE participates in hormonal regulation, the electromobility 
shift assay was used under a variety of conditions to identify IRE-binding
proteins. An exhaustive search identified five proteins that specifically bind
this IRE; purified proteins were used to show that all five are related to either
the high mobility group I/Y (HMGI/Y) or hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) protein
families. Further studies used purified HNF3 and HMGI proteins to show: 1) eah
protects the IGFBP-1 IRE from deoxyribonuclease I (DNaseI) digestion; and 2) HNF3
but not HMGI/Y binds to the related phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and Apo
CIII IREs. A series of IRE mutants with variable responsiveness to insulin were
used to show that the presence of a TGTTT sequence in the mutants did parallel,
but HMGI/Y and HNF3 binding to the mutants did not parallel, the ability of the
mutants to confer the inhibitory effect of insulin. In contrast, HNF3 binding to 
these IRE mutants roughly correlates with response of the mutants to
glucocorticoids. The way by which HNF3 and/or other as yet unidentified
IRE-binding proteins confer insulin inhibition to IGFBP-1 transcription and the
role of HMGI/Y in IRE function have yet to be established.

PMID: 9322942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4914-32.

Functional domains of the human orphan receptor ARP-1/COUP-TFII involved in
active repression and transrepression.

Achatz G(1), Hölzl B, Speckmayer R, Hauser C, Sandhofer F, Paulweber B.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, General Hospital of Salzburg, Austria.

The orphan receptor ARP-1/COUP-TFII, a member of the chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF) subfamily of nuclear receptors, strongly 
represses transcriptional activity of numerous genes, including several
apolipoprotein-encoding genes. Recently it has been demonstrated that the
mechanism by which COUP-TFs reduce transcriptional activity involves active
repression and transrepression. To map the domains of ARP-1/COUP-TFII required
for repressor activity, a detailed deletion analysis of the protein was
performed. Chimeric proteins in which various segments of the ARP-1/COUP-TFII
carboxy terminus were fused to the GAL4 DNA binding domain were used to
characterize its active repression domain. The smallest segment confering active 
repressor activity to a heterologous DNA binding domain was found to comprise
residues 210 to 414. This domain encompasses the region of ARP-1/COUP-TFII
corresponding to helices 3 to 12 in the recently published crystal structure of
other members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. It includes the AF-2 AD core
domain formed by helix 12 but not the hinge region, which is essential for
interaction with a corepressor in the case of the thyroid hormone and retinoic
acid receptor. Attachment of the nuclear localization signal from the simian
virus 40 large T antigen (Flu tag) to the amino terminus of ARP-1/COUP-TFII
abolished its ability to bind to DNA without affecting its repressor activity. By
using a series of Flu-tagged mutants, the domains required for transrepressor
activity of the protein were mapped. They include the DNA binding domain and the 
segment spanning residues 193 to 399. Transcriptional activity induced by
liver-enriched transactivators such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3),
C/EBP, or HNF-4 was repressed by ARP-1/COUP-TFII independent of the presence of
its cognate binding site, while basal transcription or transcriptional activity
induced by ATF or Sp1 was not perturbed by the protein. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate that the domains of ARP-1/COUP-TFII required for active
repression and transrepression do not coincide. Moreover, they strongly suggest
that transrepression is the predominant mechanism underlying repressor activity
of ARP-1/COUP-TFII. This mechanism most likely involves interaction of the
protein with one or several transcriptional coactivator proteins which are
employed by various liver-enriched transactivators but not by ubiquitous factors 
such as Sp1 or ATF.

PMCID: PMC232344
PMID: 9271371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 15;272(33):20764-73.

Phorbol ester down-regulation of lung surfactant protein B gene expression by
cytoplasmic trapping of thyroid transcription factor-1 and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3.

Kumar AS(1), Venkatesh VC, Planer BC, Feinstein SI, Ballard PL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Institute for Environmental
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6068, USA.

The lung-specific surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for surfactant
function and normal respiration. We investigated the role of thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) in the
down-regulation of SP-B gene expression by phorbol ester in pulmonary
adenocarcinoma H441 cells. Responsiveness to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA) localized to the SP-B proximal promoter (-140/-65 bp) and specifically to
binding sites for TTF-1 and HNF3, which act as cell-specific enhancers of SP-B
expression. Treatment of cells with TPA (10 nM) caused a time-dependent decrease 
in both TTF-1 and HNF3 in nuclear extracts and accumulation of both factors in
the cytoplasm as assessed by electromobility shift, Western, Southwestern, and
immunofluorescence assays. Treatment did not alter the mRNA content or DNA
binding activity for either transcription factor. We conclude that
down-regulation of SP-B gene expression by phorbol ester involves cytoplasmic
trapping and loss of TTF-1 and HNF3 from the nucleus. This mechanism of action is
independent of AP-1 and other transcription factors known to be influenced by
phorbol ester.

PMID: 9252399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Aug 1;234(2):277-84.

Differential induction of HNF-3 transcription factors during neuronal
differentiation.

Jacob A(1), Budhiraja S, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, The Chicago Medical School, 
Illinois 60064, USA.

We have investigated the regulation of transcription factors HNF-3alpha and
HNF-3beta during the retinoic acid-mediated differentiation of mouse P19 cells.
Retinoic acid treatment converts P19 stem cells into neurons and astrocytes and
we have clearly shown that gene expression of both HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta is
activated during this process. HNF-3alpha transcription was detected 2 h after
addition of retinoic acid and took place in the absence of de novo protein
synthesis. This suggests that HNF-3alpha is a primary target for retinoic acid
action. HNF-3alpha induction displays a biphasic profile and HNF-3alpha mRNA
reaches maximal levels at 2 and 6 days postdifferentiation. Additional
experiments strongly suggest that the second peak is due to HNF-3alpha induction 
in postmitotic neurons. P19 stem cells, on the other hand, do not contain any
detectable HNF-3alpha mRNA. According to our studies, the retinoic acid-mediated 
induction of HNF-3alpha occurs at the level of transcriptional initiation and is 
conferred by distal promoter sequences. In comparison to HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta
induction is a subsequent event and detectable levels of HNF-3beta mRNA
materialize approximately 1 day after addition of retinoic acid to P19 stem
cells. Time course studies firmly demonstrate that HNF-3beta mRNA peaks at about 
2 days postdifferentiation and then declines to virtually unreadable levels. This
temporal pattern is consistent with HNF-3beta being a secondary target for
retinoic acid. In analogy to HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta activation also takes place at
the level of transcriptional initiation. Recent studies implicate HNF-3alpha and 
HNF-3beta in early mammalian neurogenesis. The detection of HNF-3alpha/beta
activation during P19 cell differentiation provides us with a convenient cell
culture system to elucidate the induction mechanism and the precise role of both 
transcriptional regulators in the formation of neuronal cells.

PMID: 9260895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Diabetes. 1997 Aug;46(8):1364-7.

Pancreatic islet expression studies and polymorphic DNA markers in the genes
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6.

Vaisse C(1), Kim J, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

The genes encoding the functionally related hepatocyte nuclear factors HNF-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha play a critical role in normal pancreatic beta-cell function.
Mutations in these liver-enriched transcription factors result in two forms of
early-onset type 2 diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]), MODY3 
and MODY1, which are characterized by impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, early disease onset, and autosomal dominant inheritance. The
transcriptional hierarchy of HNFs suggests that other proteins of the regulatory 
cascade might be responsible for other forms of MODY and/or late-onset type 2
diabetes. In this study, we show that HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and
-6 are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. We report the identification and
characterization of simple tandem repeat DNA polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6 and the mapping of HNF-6 to
chromosome bands 15q21.1-21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. These
markers will be useful to study the role of genetic variation in these genes in
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9231664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jul 15;25(14):2888-96.

Different DNA contact schemes are used by two winged helix proteins to recognize 
a DNA binding sequence.

Bravieri R(1), Shiyanova T, Chen TH, Overdier D, Liao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, 1819 
West Polk Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3)/fork head (fkh) family contains a large
number of transcription factors which recognize divergent DNA sequences via a
winged-helix binding motif. In this report we present studies on the DNA binding 
properties of winged-helix HNF-3/fkh homologues 1 (HFH-1) and 2 (HFH-2) which
recognize a shared DNA binding site with different affinities. To explore how
HFH-1 and HFH-2 proteins recognize this DNA binding sequence, the binding
affinities of these two HFH proteins toward a series of DNA sites containing a
single strand trimer loop insertion at different positions were studied. This
insertion induces a bend of approximately 80 degrees in the DNA binding site
(prebending). HFH-1 and HFH-2 were shown to recognize DNA sites prebent at many
nucleotide positions on both strands of the DNA sequence. Both HFH-1 and HFH-2
were more sensitive to mismatch insertions on the sense strand of the DNA binding
site, especially within the AAAATAAC sequence. Our data suggest that the
recognition helix (helix 3) recognizes the AAAATAAC sequence and that the helix
3/DNA interaction results in bending of the DNA which narrows the major groove in
the AAAATAAC sequence. Furthermore, the binding affinities of HFH-1 and HFH-2
toward DNA binding sites with base-pair reversion in the AAAATAAC sequence was
also investigated. Different patterns of response from HFH-1 and HFH-2 to both
prebent and base-pair reverted binding sites was observed. Our results
demonstrate that even two highly conserved members of the winged-helix family may
contact the same DNA sequence differently.

PMCID: PMC146796
PMID: 9207039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 11;272(28):17327-32.

Protein kinase A activation of the surfactant protein B gene is mediated by
phosphorylation of thyroid transcription factor 1.

Yan C(1), Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Divisions of Neonatology and Pulmonary
Biology, The Children's Hospital Research Foundations, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a homeodomain-containing nuclear
transcription factor expressed in epithelial cells of the lung and thyroid. TTF-1
binds to and activates the transcription of genes expressed selectively in the
respiratory epithelium including pulmonary surfactant A, B, C and Clara cell
secretory protein. Transfection with a plasmid encoding the cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase (protein kinase A; PKA) catalytic subunit, Cat-beta, stimulated
the phosphorylation of a TTF-1-flag fusion protein 6-7-fold in H441 pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells. Recombinant TTF-1 was phosphorylated by purified PKA
catalytic subunit in the presence of [gamma-32P]ATP. PKA catalytic subunit family
members, Cat-alpha and Cat-beta, markedly enhanced the transcriptional activation
of surfactant B gene promoters by TTF-1 in vitro. Peptide mapping was used to
identify a PKA phosphorylation site at the NH2 terminus of TTF-1. A 17-amino acid
synthetic peptide comprising this site completely inhibited the PKA-dependent
phosphorylation of TTF-1 in vitro. A substitution mutation of TTF-1 (Thr9 two
head right arrow Ala) abolished phosphorylation by PKA and reduced
transactivation of the surfactant B gene promoter. Transfection with a plasmid
encoding the cAMP regulatory element binding factor inhibited transcriptional
activity of the surfactant protein B gene promoter. Phosphorylation of TTF-1
mediates PKA-dependent activation of surfactant protein B gene transcription.

PMID: 9211870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3817-22.

Involvement of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 in endoderm differentiation of
embryonic stem cells.

Levinson-Dushnik M(1), Benvenisty N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Givat-Ram, Israel.

The transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family, which
are active in the liver, are expressed early during endoderm differentiation. To 
study their involvement in early murine development, we examined their role in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. HNF3alpha or HNF3beta mRNA transcripts were not
detected in ES cells before differentiation, and only low levels of HNF3beta mRNA
were detected at a late stage of differentiation of ES cells to embryoid bodies
(EB) (20 days after induction of differentiation). To examine the consequences of
overexpressing HNF3alpha or -beta in ES cells, we transfected the two genes into 
these cells and determined the levels of expression of tissue-specific genes
during EB differentiation. Specifically, we examined expression of albumin,
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK), alpha1-antitrypsin, transthyretin, zeta-globin, and
neurofilament 68kd as markers for different cell lineages. Overexpression of
HNF3beta (and to a lesser extent of HNF3alpha) induced the expression of genes
associated with endodermal lineage, namely, the genes for CFTR and albumin, but
did not induce the expression of genes involved in late endoderm differentiation,
such as the genes for PEPCK and alpha1-antitrypsin. Moreover, expression of
HNF1beta was highly induced in HNF3-overexpressing cells, while expression of
HNF1alpha and HNF4 was only mildly induced in these cells. Therefore, HNF3alpha
and -beta seem to be involved in early endoderm differentiation of ES cells and
together with other developmental factors are apparently needed for the induction
of the endodermal lineage in vivo.

PMCID: PMC232233
PMID: 9199315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Physiol. 1997 Jun;272(6 Pt 1):L1142-51.

Interferon-gamma regulation of Clara cell gene expression: in vivo and in vitro.

Magdaleno SM(1), Wang G, Jackson KJ, Ray MK, Welty S, Costa RH, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

This report demonstrates that Clara cell 10-kDa protein (CC10) mRNA levels are
regulated by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). An analysis of total lung RNA from
mice given IFN-gamma intratracheally showed increased levels of CC10 mRNA
compared to control animals but no significant increases in surfactant proteins B
and C. These results were confirmed in a Clara cell line, mtCC1-2, generated from
the lungs of a transgenic mouse expressing the SV40 large T antigen under the
control of a Clara cell-specific promoter. Significant increases in mtCC1-2 CC10 
mRNA levels were observed in a time- and a dose-dependent manner. The expression 
of transacting factors hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 alpha and 3 beta (HNF-3 alpha
and HNF-3 beta) were also analyzed, and a transient increase in the expression of
HNF-3 beta but not HNF-3 alpha was detected. Deoxyribonuclease I footprint
analysis identified a signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
binding site (at nucleotides -293 to -284 of CC10) adjacent to two thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) binding sites, suggesting a potential interaction 
between STAT1 and TTF-1. This report reinforces the hypothesis that CC10
functions as an anti-inflammatory protein and that increases in CC10 protein may 
provide additional protection from inflammation and disease in the lung.

PMID: 9227516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 May;16(5):569-77.

Synergistic transactivation of HNF-1alpha, HNF-3, and NF-I contributes to the
activation of the liver-specific protein C gene.

Tsay W(1), Lee YM, Lee SC, Shen MC, Chen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Republic of China.

We have previously characterized the functional cis elements of the protein C
promoter. One hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) site, three HNF-3 sites, and at
least two NF-I sites have been identified within the 140-bp basal transcriptional
unit of this promoter. Here we present evidence that either HNF-1alpha or HNF-3
can cooperate with each other in binding to their cis elements. The results from 
the co-transfection assays in HeLa cells showed a novel synergistic
transactivation between HNF-1alpha and HNF-3. Our data further indicate that the 
unique overlapping of the HNF-3 sites, the specific spatial relationship of the
sites, and the co-activator C/EBP all contributed to the synergistic interaction.
Although NF-I itself has a weak transactivating effect, it apparently coordinates
the transactivation complex formation. NF-I can synergistically enhance the
transactivation of HNF-1alpha or HNF-3. Taken together, the combinatorial
interplay of HNF-1alpha, HNF-3, and NF-I make a significant contribution to the
activation of the liver-specific protein C gene.

PMID: 9174162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):197-211.

Winged-helix, Hedgehog and Bmp genes are differentially expressed in distinct
cell layers of the murine yolk sac.

Farrington SM(1), Belaoussoff M, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The visceral yolk sac plays a critical role in normal embryogenesis, yet little
is known about the specific molecules that regulate its development. We show here
that four winged-helix genes (HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3gamma and HFH-4) are
restricted to visceral endoderm. In the absence of HNF-3beta, visceral endoderm
forms but the morphogenetic movements by which the embryo becomes enclosed within
its yolk sac are disrupted and serum protein gene transcription is greatly
reduced. Hedgehog and Bmp genes, which encode signaling molecules known to play
multiple roles in embryonic development, are also differentially expressed in the
closely apposed yolk sac mesoderm and endoderm layers. Our results suggest that
similar mechanisms may be utilized to mediate inductive interactions in both
extraembryonic and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 9152011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1626-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head homolog 11 is expressed in proliferating
epithelial and mesenchymal cells of embryonic and adult tissues.

Ye H(1), Kelly TF, Samadani U, Lim L, Rubio S, Overdier DG, Roebuck KA, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612-7334,
USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3alpha (HNF-3alpha) and 3beta proteins have
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and regulate
cell-specific transcription in hepatocytes and in respiratory and intestinal
epithelia. In this study, we describe two novel isoforms of the winged helix
transcription factor family, HNF-3/fork head homolog 11A (HFH-11A) and HFH-11B,
isolated from the human colon carcinoma HT-29 cell line. We show that these
isoforms arise via differential splicing and are expressed in a number of
epithelial cell lines derived from tumors (HT-29, Caco-2, HepG2, HeLa, A549, and 
H441). We demonstrate that differentiation of Caco-2 cells toward the enterocyte 
lineage results in decreased HFH-11 expression and reciprocal increases in
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta mRNA levels. In situ hybridization of 16 day postcoitus 
mouse embryos demonstrates that HFH-11 expression is found in the mesenchymal and
epithelial cells of the liver, lung, intestine, renal cortex, and urinary tract. 
Although HFH-11 exhibits a wide cellular expression pattern in the embryo, its
adult expression pattern is restricted to epithelial cells of Lieberkühn's crypts
of the intestine, the spermatocytes and spermatids of the testis, and the thymus 
and colon. HFH-11 expression is absent in adult hepatocytes, but its expression
is reactivated in proliferating hepatocytes at 4, 24, and 48 h after partial
hepatectomy. Consistent with these findings, we demonstrate that HFH-11 mRNA
levels are stimulated by intratracheal administration of keratinocyte growth
factor in adult lung and its expression in an adult endothelial cell line is
reactivated in response to oxidative stress. These experiments show that the
HFH-11 transcription factor is expressed in embryonic mesenchymal and epithelial 
cells and its expression is reactivated in these adult cell types by
proliferative signals or oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC231888
PMID: 9032290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genomics. 1997 Feb 1;39(3):417-9.

Assignment of the human genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3-alpha, -beta, and
-gamma (HNF3A, HNF3B, HNF3G) to 14q12-q13, 20p11, and 19q13.2-q13.4.

Mincheva A(1), Lichter P, Schütz G, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Organisation komplexer Genome, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

PMID: 9119385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):165-71.

The novel human HNF-3/fork head-like 5 gene: chromosomal localization and
expression pattern.

Wiese S(1), Emmerich D, Schröder B, Murphy DB, Grzeschik KH, Van Kessel AG, Thies
U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany.

Analysis of cDNA clones, isolated from a human fetal brain cDNA library, that
hybridized with the rat HNF-3 alpha fork head homolog domain revealed the 3.6-kb 
HFKL5 cDNA. The transcript of HFKL5 is 4.4 kb long and represents a novel member 
of the HNF-3/fork head transcription factor family. Comparison of the amino acid 
sequence of the fork head domain reveals a relatively low level of homology to
other members of this family of genes, the closest related sequence being rat
HFH7 with 68% homology. The HFKL5 cDNA codes for a putative 500-amino-acid
protein. Southern analysis revealed that the HFKL5 gene homolog is present as a
single copy in the human genome. Zoo Southern analysis showed strong evolutionary
conservation of HFKL5 among mammalian and possibly avian species. Expression of
HFKL5 in neurons is restricted to the fully differentiated neurons in fetal and
adult brain as well as in the parasympathic ganglia of the small intestine. We
also observed expression in lymphocytes, kidney tubule cells, and a subset of
hepatocytes. The HFKL5 gene homolog was mapped to chromosome 22q13-qter by cell
panel hybridization.

PMID: 9052737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 31;272(5):3083-90.

Functional analysis of surfactant protein B (SP-B) promoter. Sp1, Sp3, TTF-1, and
HNF-3alpha transcription factors are necessary for lung cell-specific activation 
of SP-B gene transcription.

Margana RK(1), Boggaram V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center
at Tyler, Tyler, Texas 75710, USA.

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for maintenance of biophysical
properties and physiological function of pulmonary surfactant. SP-B mRNA
expression is restricted to alveolar type II epithelial cells and bronchiolar
epithelial cells (Clara cells) of adult lung. We previously (Margana, R. K., and 
Boggaram, V. (1996) Am. J. Physiol. 270, L601-L612) found that a minimal promoter
region (-236 to +39) of rabbit SP-B gene is sufficient for high level expression 
of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene in NCI-H441 cells, a cell line
with characteristics of Clara cells. In the present study we used mutational
analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and DNase I footprinting to
identify cis-DNA regulatory elements and trans-acting protein factors required
for lung cell-specific expression of SP-B gene. We found that in addition to
thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3alpha
(HNF-3alpha) binding sites, two spatially separate DNA sequences that bind Sp1
and Sp3 factors are necessary for the maintenance of SP-B promoter activity.
Mutation of any one of the transcription factor binding sites caused a
significant reduction in SP-B promoter activity suggesting that Sp1, Sp3, and
TTF-1 and HNF-3alpha interact cooperatively with SP-B promoter to activate gene
transcription.

PMID: 9006959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biochem. 1997 Jan;121(1):172-7.

Suppressed expression of the urea cycle enzyme genes in the liver of
carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice in infancy and during 
starvation in adulthood.

Tomomura M(1), Tomomura A, Musa DA, Horiuchi M, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Saheki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima University.

Systemic carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice exhibit
decreased expression of some liver-selective genes including those for the urea
cycle enzymes during the infantile period. At 25 days, carbamoylphosphate
synthetase (CPS) mRNA level was remarkably low in the liver of JVS mice, and the 
HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNA contents were also reduced. HNF-3 alpha and C/EBP-beta
mRNAs were slightly higher in the liver of JVS mice, and HNF-1 mRNA remained
normal. These results, together with the developmental changes of these
transcription factor mRNA levels, suggest that HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha are involved
in the suppression of CPS expression. If JVS mice survived the crisis at 4-5
weeks, their body weight caught up with that of control mice around 7 weeks. The 
steady-state levels of CPS and argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) mRNAs in the
liver of JVS mice were normalized by no later than 8 weeks. Starvation for 48 h
caused an increase of about twofold in CPS and ASS mRNA levels in the liver of
control mice, while the same treatment failed to increase their levels in the
liver of JVS mice. The starvation similarly caused increases in HNF-4 and
C/EBP-beta mRNA levels in the liver of both control and JVS mice, but the
increases were significantly less in JVS mice than in control mice. Thus, the
lack of induction of CPS and ASS mRNAs during development and under starvation in
JVS mice correlated with the lower induction of HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNAs, and 
of HNF-4 and C/ EBP-beta mRNAs, respectively. Furthermore, all these changes
seemed to correlate with the presence of fatty liver and the high serum free
fatty acid levels, suggesting that disturbance of fatty acid metabolism affects
nitrogen metabolism at least in part via altered gene expression of transcription
factors such as HNF-4, C/EBP-alpha, and C/EBP-beta.

PMID: 9058209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jan;8(1):69-82.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha promoter regulation involves recognition by
cell-specific factors, thyroid transcription factor-1, and autoactivation.

Peterson RS(1), Clevidence DE, Ye H, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha (HNF-3 alpha) and -3 beta proteins share
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and regulate
cell-specific transcription in hepatocytes and respiratory epithelium. In this
study, we used transfection assays to demonstrate that the -520 nucleotides
upstream of the rat HNF-3 alpha gene were sufficient for cell-specific
expression. We identified binding sites for a liver and kidney-enriched nuclear
factor and a kidney-enriched protein that recognizes two distinct promoter
elements. We showed that the rat HNF-3 alpha promoter binds the HNF-3 protein
isoforms, which may serve an auto- and/or cross-regulatory role. Furthermore, we 
showed that cotransfection of the thyroid transcription factor-1 expression
vector enhanced HNF-3 alpha promoter activity. We discuss these results with
respect to the transcriptional induction of the HNF-3 alpha gene in respiratory
epithelium during embryogenesis. Because the HNF-3 alpha promoter region bound
nuclear factors in kidney extracts, we used in situ hybridization to demonstrate 
that it was expressed in the urothelium of the renal pelvis in adult and
embryonic kidney. We also report on a novel expression pattern of HNF-3 alpha in 
the epithelium of the urinary bladder, penile urethra, and the prostate gland,
and show that its expression in the intestinal epithelium increases from the
proximal duodenum to distal ileum. We also demonstrate that HNF-3 alpha is
abundantly expressed in the colonic epithelium. Furthermore, we use the HNF-3 DNA
binding consensus sequence to identify putative target genes in the renal pelvis 
and gut epithelium.

PMID: 8993836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;15(12):1063-74.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3, and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein control the far-upstream enhancer of
the rat alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Thomassin H(1), Bois-Joyeux B, Delille R, Ikonomova R, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche sur l'Endocrinologie, Moléculaire et le Développement,
CNRS, UPR 1511, Meudon, France.

We have further characterized the most distal of the three alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) enhancers required for expression of the AFP gene in fetal hepatocytes and 
yolk sac endodermal cells. Almost total rat AFP enhancer 3 (E3) activity is
driven by a 160-bp fragment at -6 kb containing three target regions for nuclear 
proteins that cooperate to stimulate transcription from the AFP and the thymidine
kinase promoters in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Region 1, recently shown to be crucial 
for correct function of the enhancer in liver of transgenic mice, is recognized
by two sets of transcription factors that bind to partly overlapping sites, 1a
and 1b, in a noncooperative and nonexclusive manner. Site 1a contains a motif,
AGGTCA, which is recognized by chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription 
factors (COUP-TFs), but not by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3 (HNF3) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), which bind to regions
2 and 3, respectively, are likely responsible for the liver-specific E3 action.
They play a key role by acting in synergy. The participation of nuclear receptors
such as COUP-TFs, with C/EBP and HNF3, in the tight control of the distal AFP
enhancer is a new, and perhaps key, step toward understanding the regulation and 
function of this enhancer, which may remain active throughout development.

PMID: 8985120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8813-20.

A functional hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 binding site is a critical component of 
the duck hepatitis B virus major surface antigen promoter.

Welsheimer T(1), Newbold JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599-7290, USA.

The gene coding for the S protein, the smaller of the two envelope antigens of
the duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV), is transcribed from a TATA-less promoter. In
this study, we localized the promoter to a 245-bp segment of the genome that was 
capable of efficiently driving expression of a linked reporter gene upon
transient transfection into the differentiated hepatoma cell lines LMH and HepG2.
However, no measurable activity from this construct could be detected in similar 
assays with the dedifferentiated cell line HepG2.1 or the nonhepatic cell line
HeLa. Located at position -25 relative to the transcriptional start site was a
sequence conforming to the consensus binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
(HNF3). Deletion of this region reduced activity of the reporter gene to barely
detectable levels in LMH cells. The results of electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis (EMSA) demonstrated that a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing
this sequence formed a specific complex with DNA-binding proteins from LMH and
HepG2 cells but not with nuclear extracts obtained from HepG2.1 or HeLa cells.
Cotransfection of HepG2.1 cells with DHBV S promoter constructs and a rat
HNF3beta expression plasmid resulted in transactivation of only those constructs 
in which the candidate HNF3 site was present. Furthermore, EMSA using HepG2.1
nuclear extracts containing exogenously expressed HNF3 formed complexes with the 
same migration and competition properties as those in which the proteins were
derived from the differentiated hepatoma cells. Thus, several lines of evidence
suggest a critical role for HNF3 in activity from the DHBV S promoter.

PMCID: PMC190978
PMID: 8971010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Nov;16(11):6273-84.

The transcriptional activator hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 regulates liver gene
expression.

Samadani U(1), Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612-7334,
USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3(alpha) (HNF-3(alpha)), -3(beta), and -3(gamma)
proteins share homology in the winged-helix/fork head DNA binding domain and
mediate hepatocyte-enriched transcription of numerous genes whose expression is
necessary for organ function. In this work, we identify a liver-enriched
transcription factor, HNF-6, which recognizes the -138 to -126 region of the
HNF-3(beta) promoter and binds the original HNF-3 site of the transthyretin
promoter (-94 to -106). We show that HNF-6 and HNF-3 possess different DNA
binding specificities by competition and methylation interference studies and are
immunologically distinct. Site-directed mutagenesis of the HNF-6 sites in the
HNF-3(beta) and transthyretin promoters diminishes reporter gene expression,
suggesting that HNF-6 activates transcription of these promoters. Using the HNF-6
binding sequence DHWATTGAYTWWD (where W = A or T, Y = T or C, H is not G, and D
is not C) determined by sequence comparison and methylation interference, we
predicted that HNF-6 will bind to 22 additional hepatocyte-enriched genes. Of
these potential target genes, we selected seven of the HNF-6 binding sequences
and demonstrated that they bind the HNF-6 protein. These include promoter
sequences from alpha-2 urinary globulin, alpha-1 antitrypsin, cytochrome P-450
2C13, L-type 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase, mouse major urinary protein, tryptophan
oxygenase, and alpha-fetoprotein genes. HNF-6 binding activity was also found in 
the intestinal epithelial cell line HT29, and potential HNF-6 binding sites were 
present in intestinal sucrase isomaltase, cdx-2 homeodomain protein, and
intestinal fatty acid binding protein promoter regions. These studies suggest
that HNF-6 may regulate hepatocyte-specific genes and may play a role in
epithelial cell differentiation of gut endoderm via regulation of HNF-3(beta).

PMCID: PMC231630
PMID: 8887657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 1996 Sep 15;178(2):289-303.

A fork head/HNF-3 homolog expressed in the pharynx and intestine of the
Caenorhabditis elegans embryo.

Azzaria M(1), Goszczynski B, Chung MA, Kalb JM, McGhee JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

We have cloned a member of the fork head/HNF-3 family of transcription factors
from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Within the predicted DNA binding
domain, this gene, called Ce-fkh-1, is 75-78% identical to the Drosophila fork
head and rat liver HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma genes. Ce-fkh-1 mRNA is highly
enriched in embryos. The Ce-fkh-1 gene produces three major transcripts: the
longest mRNA retains its original 5'-end but two shorter mRNAs are trans-spliced 
at the beginning of exons 2 and 3, respectively. In situ hybridization and
transgenic Ce-fkh-1::lacZ reporter constructs indicate that the Ce-fkh-1 gene is 
expressed in both pharynx and intestine of the embryo, beginning at the
midproliferation stage. A second phase of Ce-fkh-1 expression occurs in cells of 
the larval somatic gonad. The pharynx-gut expression of Ce-fkh-1 in the C.
elegans embryo is compared with expression of fork head throughout the gut of
Drosophila embryos and with expression of HNF-3 (alpha beta gamma) in the
endoderm of mammalian embryos. Such conserved patterns of gene expression point
to universal features of gastrulation and of digestive tract formation.

PMID: 8812130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Lipid Res. 1996 Sep;37(9):1831-41.

Transcriptional regulation of the human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene
(CYP7A) in HepG2 cells.

Wang DP(1), Stroup D, Marrapodi M, Crestani M, Galli G, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown 44272, USA.

A stable HepG2 cell line harboring a human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase
(CYP7A) minigene/luciferase reporter gene construct was selected for studying
transcriptional regulation of CYP7A gene promoter. Insulin and phorbol
12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) strongly repressed the promoter activity as
measured with luciferase activity expressed in the cells. The promoter activity
of the 5' progressive deletion/luciferase reporter gene constructs was studied in
a transient transfection assay in HepG2 cells. PMA represses the promoter
activity and the response elements were localized in the -184/-151 and -134/-81
regions. Insulin also represses the promoter activity and response element was
mapped in the -298/-81 region. Surprisingly, glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
strongly inhibited promoter activity in the presence of dexamethasone, and
response elements were localized in the -298/-151 and the -150/+24 regions.
Thyroid hormone receptor also repressed promoter activity and response elements
were localized in the -150/+24 and upstream regions. Cotransfection of CYP7A
chimeric constructs with an expression vector carrying liver-enriched
transcription factor HNF3 alpha stimulated the reporter gene activity, but
cotransfection with GR plasmid interfered with the HNF3 alpha-stimulated activity
possibly through competition for binding to overlapping GR/HNF3 binding sites.
Thus, human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene promoter is strongly repressed
by insulin, PMA, and steroid/thyroid hormones and results in the low level of
cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase expression in the human liver.

PMID: 8895049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochemistry. 1996 Jul 16;35(28):9060-8.

Regulation of human C-reactive protein gene expression by two synergistic IL-6
responsive elements.

Li SP(1), Goldman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergenic Products and Parasitology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland
20852-1448, USA.

To study the mechanism of interleukin-6 (IL-6) induction of human C-reactive
protein (CRP) gene expression, we have utilized a human hepatoma (PLC/PRF/5) cell
culture system to analyze the trans-acting factors which bind to the 300 bp
5'-flanking region of human CRP gene. In vitro gel mobility shift analyses and
methylation interference assays demonstrated that NFIL-6 alpha interacted with
two IL-6 responsive elements, and HNF-1 alpha and HNF-3/Octamer-like factors
interacted with the downstream IL-6 responsive element in the human CRP promoter.
In vivo functional analysis by transient transfection of plasmid constructs
containing site-specific mutations in one or two IL-6 responsive elements in the 
CRP promoter fused to a reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT), 
demonstrated that the binding of NFIL-6 alpha to two IL-6 responsive elements
resulted in synergistic induction of the gene. When HNF-1 alpha or
HNF-3/Octamer-like factors were independently bound to their corresponding sites,
they had either a positive or negative effect, respectively, on IL-6 inducible
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 8703909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochem J. 1996 Jul 15;317 ( Pt 2):361-70.

Effect of dietary protein restriction on liver transcription factors.

Marten NW(1), Sladek FM, Straus DS.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of California, Riverside 92521-0121, USA.

The transcription of several genes that are preferentially expressed in the
liver, including the serum albumin, transthyretin and carbamyl phosphate
synthetase-I genes, is specifically decreased in animals consuming inadequate
amounts of dietary protein. The high level of transcription of these genes in the
liver is directed in part by a number of liver-enriched transcription factors,
including hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)-1, -3, and -4, and proteins of the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) family. In the present study, we
investigated the possibility that the co-ordinate decrease in transcription of
the nutritionally sensitive genes in protein-deprived rats results from altered
activity of one or more of the liver-enriched transcription factors. For HNF-4,
Western blots indicated no change in the level of nuclear HNF-4 protein in liver 
of protein-deprived animals, whereas we observed a 40% reduction in the DNA
binding activity of HNF-4 as measured by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA). Furthermore, the binding affinity of HNF-4 for DNA was unaltered by
dietary protein deprivation, while the number of HNF-4 molecules able to bind to 
DNA (Bmax) was reduced, as determined by Scatchard analysis. This indicates that 
in the protein-restricted rats a portion of the pool of HNF-4 protein is
inactivated or otherwise prevented from binding to DNA. The overall DNA binding
activity of C/EBP alpha and beta was increased in protein-restricted animals.
This change occurred in the absence of a change in the amount of the full-length 
forms of these two proteins, quantified by Western blotting. Interestingly,
dietary protein restriction specifically increased the level of a truncated form 
of C/EBP beta (liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein, LIP), which is 
a protein dominant negative inhibitor of C/EBP function. Analysis of HNF-3
DNA-binding activity by EMSA revealed that HNF-3 alpha and beta DNA binding was
increased and that HNF-3 gamma DNA-binding activity was unchanged in
protein-restricted animals. We also detected two apparently novel shift complexes
with the HNF-3 probe by EMSA, both of which were decreased in protein-restricted 
animals. HNF-1 DNA-binding activity was increased by dietary protein restriction.
We also examined the effect of protein restriction on the DNA-binding activity of
two ubiquitous transcription factors, NF1 and Sp1. The DNA binding activity of
the major NF1 isoforms was unchanged whereas the binding activity of Sp1 was
increased in the protein-restricted animals. In summary, restriction of dietary
protein resulted in a number of specific changes in the DNA-binding activity of
various transcription factors. Because transcriptional activation typically
involves the synergistic action of more than one transcription factor, small
changes in the amount/activity of several factors, could have a strong net effect
on the transcription of many genes.

PMCID: PMC1217496
PMID: 8713059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Jul;10(7):794-800.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3 is an accessory factor required for the stimulation of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene transcription by glucocorticoids.

Wang JC(1), Strömstedt PE, O'Brien RM, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Transcription of the hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene is stimulated
by glucocorticoids and inhibited by insulin. The glucocorticoid response is
mediated by a complex glucocorticoid response unit that consists of two
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-binding sites (GR1 and GR2) and two accessory
factor-binding sites (AF1 and AF2). The complete unit is required for the full
glucocorticoid response. The dominant insulin effect is mediated in part through 
an insulin response sequence that is coincident with the AF2 element. Members of 
the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) and CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
families bind to the AF2 element; however, there is no correlation between
binding of these factors and the ability of the AF2 element to mediate an insulin
response. We show here that binding of HNF3 does correlate with the stimulation
of the glucocorticoid response by the AF2 element and that C/EBP is apparently
not involved in this effect. This requirement for HNF3 is quite specific since
the substitution of elements known to enhance the action of the GR in other
promoters fails to recapitulate AF2 accessory factor activity. By contrast, an
HNF3-binding site from the transthyretin gene is able to substitute for the wild 
type AF2 sequence and elicit a maximal glucocorticoid response. Based on current 
and previous observations, the glucocorticoid response unit consists of four DNA 
elements that bind four different proteins. These are: AF1 (hepatic nuclear
factor 4/chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor), AF2 (HNF3),
GR1 (GR), and GR2 (GR).

PMID: 8813720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Genes Dev. 1996 Jul 1;10(13):1670-82.

Hepatic specification of the gut endoderm in vitro: cell signaling and
transcriptional control.

Gualdi R(1), Bossard P, Zheng M, Hamada Y, Coleman JR, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

We have studied the initial development of pluripotent gut endoderm to
hepatocytes using a tissue explant system from mouse embryos. We not only find
cellular interactions that specify hepatic differentiation but also those that
block hepatogenesis in regions of the endoderm that normally give rise to other
tissues. The results implicate both positive and negative signaling in early
hepatic specification. In vivo footprinting of the albumin enhancer in precursor 
gut endoderm shows that the transcriptionally silent but potentially active
chromatin is characterized by occupancy of an HNF-3 site. Upon hepatic
specification, a host of other factors bind nearby sites as the gene becomes
active. Genes in pluripotent cells therefore may be marked for potential
expression by entry points in chromatin, where additional factors bind during
cell type specification. The findings also provide insight into the evolutionary 
origin of different endodermal cell types.

PMID: 8682297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3626-36.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 activates transcription of thyroid transcription
factor 1 in respiratory epithelial cells.

Ikeda K(1), Shaw-White JR, Wert SE, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 3alpha
(HNF-3alpha), and HNF-3beta regulate the transcription of genes expressed in the 
respiratory epithelium. To test whether members of the HNF-3/forkhead family
influence TTF-1 gene expression, deletion constructs containing the 5' region of 
the human TTF-1 gene were transfected into immortalized mouse lung epithelial
(MLE) cells. DNase I protection and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
identified elements in the 5' region of the TTF-1 gene that bound MLE cell
nuclear proteins consistent with the binding of HNF-3 to sites at positions -135 
to -124 and -14 to -3. In MLE cells, TTF-1-luciferase reporter constructs were
activated by cotransfection with HNF-3beta, activated to a lesser extent by
HNF-3alpha, but not activated by HFH-8. HNF-3alpha. and HFH-8 inhibited the
activation of TTF-1-luciferase by HNF-3beta. Site-specific mutagenesis of each of
the HNF-3 binding sites in the human TTF-1 gene inhibited the binding of MLE cell
nuclear proteins and inhibited transactivation of the TTF-1-luciferase constructs
after cotransfection with HNF-3beta. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated
that both HNF-3beta and TTF-1 were detected in bronchiolar and alveolar type II
cells in the human lung. Modulation of TTF-1 gene expression by members of the
HNF-3/forkhead family members may provide a mechanism by which distinct
HNF-3/forkhead family members influence respiratory epithelial cell gene
expression and cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC231358
PMID: 8668179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1996 Jun 3;1307(1):17-20.

Molecular cloning of the forkhead transcription factor HNF-3 alpha from a human
pulmonary adenocarcinoma cell line.

Bingle CD(1), Gowan S.

Author information: 
(1)DH Department of Toxicology, St Bartholomew's School of Medicine, London, UK.

We have cloned the human homologue of HNF-3 alpha from the pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cell line NCI-H441. Full-length HNF-3 alpha which was found to be 
2872 bp encoded a protein of 473 amino acids. The human protein is highly related
to the rat and mouse homologues and the forkhead DNA binding domain is highly
conserved between all species yet identified. Northern blotting with a variety of
human-derived cell lines identified a single 3 kb mRNA species. RNA levels are > 
10-fold higher in the H441 cells than in any of the others.

PMID: 8652662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):609-12.

Expression of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factors in mouse liver
tumours.

Kalkuhl A(1), Kaestner K, Buchmann A, Schwarz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in rodent liver show alterations in the
expression of various enzymes which can be used for their identification. To
address the question whether these enzymatic alterations result from specific
changes in the levels of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors (HNF), we analysed
the mRNA levels of six different HNFs (HNF-1alpha, beta, HNF-3alpha, beta, gamma,
and HNF-4) by RNase protection assay in chemically induced liver tumours and
corresponding normal liver tissue from mice of three different strains. When
compared with the normal liver tissue, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta showed
unchanged expression levels in the various liver tumours, which HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4 mRNAs were lowered by 20-30%, and HNF-3gamma mRNA was increased by 50%.
There were no significant differences in HNF-expression between tumours
harbouring point mutations at codon 61 of the Ha-ras protooncogene and tumours
without detectable Ha-ras mutations.

PMID: 8631153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Feb;40(1):245-53.

A fork head related multigene family is transcribed in Xenopus laevis embryos.

Lef J(1), Dege P, Scheucher M, Forsbach-Birk V, Clement JH, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Germany.

We have isolated and sequenced ten different members of the fork head/HNF-3
multigene family from Xenopus laevis which have been termed Xenopus fork head
domain related (XFD) genes 1 to 10. Another four isolated genes (XFD' genes)
represent pseudo-allelic variants which arose by an ancient tetraploidization
within this species. Whereas all genes of this multigene family exhibit a high
degree of sequence homology within the evolutionary conserved fork head domain,
sequences outside this module are substantially different. Based upon sequence
homologies over the entire coding sequences, XFD-7/7' represent the Xenopus
homologs to the rodent hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF-3 alpha, while XFD-3/3'
encode the homologs to HNF-3 beta. Here we present an analysis of the temporal
transcription pattern of XFD genes 1 to 10 during embryogenesis and in some adult
tissues. Eight of these XFD genes are activated during embryonic development, but
show different and distinct transcription profiles. The localization of
transcripts was determined by whole-mount in situ hybridization. Although
transcription of individual XFD genes partially overlaps, each gene is
characterized by means of a specific spatial pattern of transcriptional activity.

PMID: 8735935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochem Soc Trans. 1996 Feb;24(1):106S.

Cloning of an Atlantic salmon transcription factor.

Stenson C(1), McNair A, Byrnes L, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College Galway.

PMID: 8674586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. FASEB J. 1996 Feb;10(2):267-82.

Liver-enriched transcription factors and hepatocyte differentiation.

Cereghini S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Liver-specific gene expression in adult hepatocytes relies on four families of
evolutionary conserved transcription factors that are liver-enriched but not
restricted to this tissue. These factors function in unique combinations, often
synergistically, to stimulate cell-specific transcription. Each family is
composed of several members displaying similar, if not identical, DNA recognition
properties and sharing structural homology in their DNA binding domains. The
homo- and heterodimerization between members of a particular transcription factor
family adds an additional level of complexity in gene regulation. The
consequences of inactivating different family members in the mouse by homologous 
recombination, together with recent studies of their regulation, suggest a model 
for liver differentiation involving a regulatory network rather than a completely
hierarchical genetic circuitry. These studies also indicate that individual
regulators appear to serve multiple developmental functions. Their possible role 
in the progression through different stages of hepatic cell commitment and
differentiation is discussed.

PMID: 8641560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Gene Expr. 1996;6(1):23-33.

Identification of a transthyretin enhancer site that selectively binds the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta isoform.

Samadani U(1), Qian X, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

The upstream proximal region of the transthyretin (TTR) promoter and a distal
enhancer are sufficient to drive liver-specific expression of the TTR gene, as
demonstrated by experiments in transgenic mice. Previous analyses have
characterized the binding of a number of liver-enriched transcription factors of 
the TTR promoter including hepatocyte nuclear factors one (HNF-1), HNF-4, and
three distinct HNF-3 proteins (alpha, beta, and gamma), which are members of the 
winged helix (fork head) family. The TTR enhancer was shown to bind members of
the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family at two distinct sites (TTR-2
and TTR-3), and an oligonucleotide containing the activation protein one (AP-1)
binding sequence competed for recognition to a third enhancer site (TTR-1). In
this study, we have carried out a detailed analysis of the transcription factors 
that recognize the TTR enhancer elements (TTR-1, TTR-2, and TTR-3 oligonucleotide
sequences). Analysis of the TTR-1 site demonstrates that the putative AP-1 site
in the TTR enhancer binds a ubiquitously expressed factor that is distinct from
the AP-1 family of proteins. Next we demonstrate, via gel shift analysis, that
the TTR-3 site is recognized by the C/EBP family in liver nuclear extracts. We
also show that whereas the TTR-2 enhancer site is capable of binding recombinant 
C/EBP proteins, it does not bind C/EBP proteins from liver nuclear extracts. The 
TTR-2 site does, however, contain a variant HNF-3 recognition sequence that
exclusively binds the HNF-3 beta isoform. Mutation of this HNF-3 beta-specific
recognition sequence caused reductions in TTR enhancer activity. We had
previously observed a 95% decrease in HNF-3 alpha expression and a 20% reduction 
in HNF-3 beta expression in acute phase livers, which correlated with a 60%
decrease in TTR gene transcription. We propose that the HNF-3 beta-specific
binding site in the TTR enhancer may play a role in maintaining TTR gene
expression during the acute phase response in spite of the dramatic reduction in 
HNF-3 alpha protein levels.

PMID: 8931989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Virology. 1995 Dec 20;214(2):371-8.

HNF3 binds and activates the second enhancer, ENII, of hepatitis B virus.

Li M(1), Xie Y, Wu X, Kong Y, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, People's Republic of
China.

The basic functional unit of hepatitus B virus (HBV) enhancer II (ENII) is
located within nt 1687-1774, which is defined as the B fragment in our previous
papers. A major trans-acting factor binding site has been identified within the B
fragment. The sequence corresponding to this binding site was named B2. In this
paper, several point mutations were introduced into the B2 subunit by
PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis. CAT analysis indicated that the TGTTTGTTT
motif within the B2 subunit was critical for the activity of ENII. Mutations of
individual nucleotides within this motif could decrease the activity of ENII.
Electrophoresis mobility shift assay revealed that the liver-enriched
transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3 alpha and HNF3 beta bound
to the B2 subunit specifically and the TGTTTGTTT motif was essential for
DNA-protein interaction. Anti-HNF3 alpha and anti-HNF3 beta antisera could block 
such binding ability. Moreover, HNF3 beta could switch on the activity of ENII in
HeLa cells and the activity of ENII could be suppressed by antisense HNF3 alpha
and antisense HNF3 beta mRNA in HepG2 cells. These results prompted the
conclusion that HNF3 was crucial for the liver-specific activity of ENII, which
in turn contributed significantly to the liver specificity of HBV.

PMID: 8553537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Protein Expr Purif. 1995 Dec;6(6):821-5.

Expression of a highly unstable and insoluble transcription factor in Escherichia
coli: purification and characterization of the fork head homolog HNF3 alpha.

Zaret KS(1), Stevens K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA. zaret@brown.edu

The HNF3 alpha transcription factor is highly enriched in adult hepatocytes and
activates many liver-specific genes; its expression in hepatic primordia and
neurogenic tissue implies a developmental role. HNF3 alpha is a member of a
family of proteins, including fork head in Drosophila, which bind DNA at specific
sites using a newly defined "winged helix" structural motif. We describe here the
expression and purification of full-length HNF3 alpha containing an
amino-terminal histidine tag and show that the protein binds DNA with
dissociation constant in the sub-nanomolar range. The techniques used to isolate 
HNF3 alpha should be applicable to other members of the HNF3/fork head family
which appear to be generally unstable and insoluble in Escherichia coli.

PMID: 8746635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Am J Pathol. 1995 Dec;147(6):1633-48.

Transcription factor and liver-specific mRNA expression in facultative epithelial
progenitor cells of liver and pancreas.

Dabeva MD(1), Hurston E, Shafritz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The pattern of mRNA expression for liver-specific proteins and liver-enriched
transcription factors was studied in two models of facultative gut epithelial
progenitor cells activation: D-galactosamine (GalN)-induced liver injury and
dietary copper depletion leading to pancreatic acinar atrophy. After 5 weeks of
copper deficiency (CuD), pancreatic acini of Fischer 344 rats underwent atrophy, 
associated with intense proliferation of small duct-like cells with oval-shaped
nuclei. These cells resemble morphologically epithelial progenitor cells of the
liver that proliferate after GalN administration. Activated pancreatic epithelial
cells express mRNAs for liver-specific genes normally expressed in fetal liver,
including alpha-fetoprotein, albumin, alpha-1 antitrypsin, glucose-6-phosphatase,
and others, but not genes that are turned on after birth such as serine
dehydratase, tyrosine aminotransferase, and multidrug resistance gene-1b. They
express mRNAs for liver-enriched transcription factors including HNF-1 alpha,
HNF-3 beta and gamma, HNF-4, and members of the CCAAT-enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) family. The only mRNA for a liver-enriched transcription factor not
detected in the pancreas of CuD animals was HNF-3 alpha. Expression of HNF-3
alpha, beta, and gamma, and C/EBP-beta mRNA was highly activated in proliferating
liver epithelial cells on days 2 and 3 after GalN injury. Increased expression of
C/EBP-delta was observed first in the liver on day 1 after GalN administration
and in the pancreas at 4 weeks after initiating CuD. We suggest that C/EBP-delta 
could be involved in the initial activation of epithelial progenitor cells and
that HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma, and C/EBP-beta might participate in their
maturation. We conclude further that pancreatic epithelial progenitor cells
undertake differentiation through the hepatocyte lineage but cannot complete the 
differentiation program within the pancreatic milieu.

PMCID: PMC1869941
PMID: 7495289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Virology. 1995 Oct 20;213(1):231-40.

Interplay between a new HNF3 and the HNF1 transcriptional factors in the duck
hepatitis B virus enhancer.

Crescenzo-Chaigne B(1), Pillot J, Lilienbaum A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

We identified a new hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) binding site in the DHBV
enhancer. This site is close to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding
site, responsible for most of the enhancing activity. No differences in the
migrating properties were found between this new site and the two other HNF3
sites recently described in this enhancer. Factor HNF1 strongly inhibits binding 
of the HNF3 factor in this newly characterized site. The two factors were never
detected simultaneously on the DNA fragment, even when their respective
concentrations were modified. Competition persisted after enlarging by 5 and 10
nucleotides the space between the two sites. On the contrary, when the HNF3
binding site was changed into the perfect consensus site, binding of the HNF3
factor was not inhibited any longer by HNF1 and a supershift, corresponding to
the binding of both factors, was observed. Thus a limited mismatching appears to 
modulate the interaction between transcriptional proteins and DNA and allows a
second transcriptional protein to interplay with the former one.

PMID: 7483267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. FEBS Lett. 1995 Aug 7;369(2-3):277-82.

Interaction of DNA binding domain of HNF-3 alpha with its transferrin enhancer
DNA specific target site.

Terenzi H(1), Petropoulos I, Ellouze C, Takahashi M, Zakin MM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Expression des Gènes Eucaryotes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Transferrin hepato-specific gene enhancer, associated with the liver-enriched
HNF-3 alpha transcriptional factor and ubiquitous proteins, is a complex
molecular edifice maintained through DNA-protein and protein-protein
interactions. As a first step to understand the mechanisms responsible for its
organization and activity, we have analyzed the interaction of the DNA binding
domain of HNF-3 alpha (HDBD) with a specific DNA segment present in the
transferrin enhancer by different biophysical techniques. The kinetic constants
of this interaction were measured using surface plasmon resonance. The HDBD-DNA
interaction was also characterized by circular dichroism and fluorescence
spectroscopy. HDBD binds to its specific DNA site with high affinity (Kd
approximately equal to 10(-8) M). The affinity is reduced after sequence
modification of the target DNA. Size exclusion chromatography and binding
stoichiometry determined by fluorescence measurements indicate that the protein
is present in a monomeric form before and after interaction with the DNA. The
secondary structure of the protein was not significantly altered upon binding to 
specific DNA. By contrast, a structural change of DNA by interaction with HDBD
seems to occur.

PMID: 7649272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1995 Aug;20(1-2):129-40.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3/forkhead transcription regulatory family in
development, inflammation, and neoplasia.

Hromas R(1), Costa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University Medical
Center, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

HNF-3/FKH genes are a large family of transcriptional activators. They are
expressed in specific developmental and tissue patterns. Indeed, several of them 
are known to be essential for normal development (e.g. Dfkh and slp-1,2).
Mutation within one of these genes produces mutant fruitfly embryos that are
unable to survive. This family shares conserved DNA binding and transcriptional
activation domains. The DNA binding domain has been crystallized, and its
structure determined. Although it has resemblance to helices of homeodomains and 
H5 histones, it represents a new DNA binding motif, which has been called the
'winged helix,' because it contains additional interactive peptide regions called
termed wings. Subtle amino acid variations in a region adjacent to the DNA
recognition helix influence the recognition specificity of each HNF-3/FKH protein
and therefore confer selectivity in promoter regulation. Members of this family
are important in regulating the inflammatory response of the liver (the three
HNF-3 genes). In addition, several members may be important in blood cell
development (H3 and 5-3). Finally, two of these genes have been found to produce 
neoplasia (qin and FKHR). As investigation progresses, the mechanism by which
these genes regulate development, inflammation and neoplasia will become more
clear.

PMID: 7576194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jul 26;212(3):800-5.

Laminin-rich extracellular matrix maintains high level of hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 in rat hepatocyte culture.

Oda H(1), Nozawa K, Hitomi Y, Kakinuma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, Nagoya University, Japan.

Laminin-rich extracellular matrix, EHS-gel, has been demonstrated to keep a high 
level of liver-specific gene expression in cultured rat hepatocytes. To obtain
information about the effect of EHS-gel on liver-specific functions, gene
expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in rat hepatocytes was
investigated. The apolipoprotein A-I and albumin mRNA levels were higher in
hepatocytes cultured on EHS-gel than in those cultured on type I collagen (TIC). 
The levels of mRNA for HNF-4, C/EBP alpha and C/EBP beta were also higher on
EHS-gel than on TIC. The level of HNF-4 mRNA in hepatocytes on EHS-gel was almost
comparable to that in liver. The HNF-3 alpha mRNA level was lower on EHS-gel than
on TIC. C/EBP beta mRNA was induced by dexamethasone in both EHS-gel and TIC. The
induction of C/EBP alpha and HNF-4 by dexamethasone was observed only on TIC.
These data suggest that EHS-gel leads hepatocytes to keep the phenotypic
expression through high expression of liver-enriched transcription factors, such 
as HNF-4.

PMID: 7626113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3848-56.

Molecular analysis of the distal enhancer of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Millonig JH(1), Emerson JA, Levorse JM, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544, USA.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is transcribed at high levels in the
visceral endoderm of the yolk sac and fetal liver and at much lower rates in the 
endoderm of the fetal gut. Expression of the gene in vivo requires the presence
of at least one of three enhancers which lie in its 5' flanking region. In this
report, we establish that the most distal AFP enhancer directed consistent
expression of a linked AFP minigene in all three endodermal tissues in transgenic
mice. The enhancer is composed of three domains, each of which is essential for
full enhancer function by transient transfection assays. DNase I footprinting
identified three regions of the enhancer which are protected by human hepatoma
nuclear extracts, one of which corresponded to a consensus site for HNF-3
binding. Site-directed mutations in this site caused a 10-fold reduction in
enhancer function by transient transfection. In transgenic mice, however, the
mutation resulted in sporadic expression of the transgene, dependent on the site 
of integration. A similar acquisition of position-dependent sporadic expression
of the transgene was observed with a mutation in a second protein binding site,
despite the fact that this mutation had very little effect on enhancer function
as assessed by transient transfection. These studies underscore the value of
examining the functions of specific protein binding sites in vivo.

PMCID: PMC230624
PMID: 7540720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3265-72.

Regulation of transcription from the hepatitis B virus large surface antigen
promoter by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3.

Raney AK(1), Zhang P, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The influence of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) on the level of
transcriptional activity from the four hepatitis B virus promoters was
investigated by transient-transfection analysis in the dedifferentiated hepatoma 
cell line, HepG2.1. It was found that the large surface antigen promoter and, to 
a much lesser extent, the nucleocapsid promoter were transactivated in the
presence of HNF3. DNase I footprinting analysis demonstrated that purified
recombinant HNF3 alpha protects one region of the large surface antigen promoter.
Gel retardation analysis showed that a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing
this HNF3-binding site formed a specific complex with DNA-binding proteins in the
differentiated hepatoma cell lines, Huh7 and HepG2. The complex formed with Huh7 
cell extract comigrated with exogenously expressed HNF3 beta in HeLa S3 extracts 
and was specifically inhibited from forming by the addition of HNF3 beta
antiserum. The promoter element which appears to mediate the HNF3 transactivation
was functionally mapped by mutational analysis to a region between nucleotides
-65 and -54 relative to the transcriptional start site. This regulatory sequence 
is within the region protected from DNase I digestion by HNF3 alpha and contains 
10 of 12 nucleotides homologous to the HNF3-binding-site consensus sequence. A
synthetic promoter construct containing this HNF3-binding site was able to
mediate transactivation by HNF3 beta. These and previous results suggest that the
hepatitis B virus large surface antigen promoter is regulated by at least two
liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF1 and HNF3, which together may
contribute to the differentiated liver cell type specificity of this promoter.

PMCID: PMC189037
PMID: 7745673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem J. 1995 May 15;308 ( Pt 1):197-202.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha and hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta in
Clara cell secretory protein gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium.

Bingle CD(1), Hackett BP, Moxley M, Longmore W, Gitlin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

The 5' flanking region of the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene contains
two cis-acting elements which bind hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta in vitro. To determine the role of these proteins in mediating CCSP
gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium, chimeric CCSP-reporter gene
constructs containing various regions of the CCSP 5' flanking region were
co-transfected into H-441 cells with HNF-3 alpha or HNF-3 beta expression
plasmids. These studies indicate that each of these transcription factors
positively regulates CCSP gene expression and revealed that CCSP region I (-132
to -76) is sufficient to mediate this effect. Gel-mobility-shift assays with
oligonucleotides corresponding to CCSP region I, nuclear extract from bronchiolar
epithelial cells and HNF-3-specific antibodies indicate that HNF-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta are the only proteins in bronchiolar epithelial cells which directly
interact with this region. Consistent with these observations, HNF-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta transcripts were found to be enriched in this cell population and in
situ hybridization of adult lung revealed HNF-3 gene expression in non-ciliated
bronchiolar epithelial cells expressing the CCSP gene. Finally, experiments with 
CCSP region I and a heterologous promoter indicate that this region acts in a
promoter-specific context, suggesting that additional factors interacting via the
minimal CCSP promoter region are essential in determining the effects of HNF-3 on
cell-specific CCSP gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium.

PMCID: PMC1136863
PMID: 7755566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1364-76.

Decreased expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha during the acute-phase 
response influences transthyretin gene transcription.

Qian X(1), Samadani U, Porcella A, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334.

Three distinct hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) proteins (alpha, beta, and
gamma) are known to regulate the transcription of numerous liver-specific genes. 
The HNF-3 proteins bind to DNA as monomers through a winged-helix motif, which is
also utilized by a number of developmental regulators, including the Drosophila
homeotic fork head (fkh) protein. We have previously characterized a
strong-affinity HNF-3S site in the transthyretin (TTR) promoter region which is
essential for expression in human hepatoma (HepG2) cells. In the current study,
we identify an activating protein 1 (AP-1) site which partially overlaps the
HNF-3S sequence in the TTR promoter. We show that in HepG2 cells the AP-1
sequence confers 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate inducibility to the TTR
promoter and contributes to normal TTR transcriptional activity. We also
demonstrate that the HNF-3 proteins and AP-1 bind independently to the TTR
AP-1-HNF-3 site, and cotransfection experiments suggest that they do not
cooperate to activate an AP-1-HNF-3 reporter construct. In addition,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate exposure of HepG2 cells results in a
reciprocal decrease in HNF-3 alpha and -3 gamma expression which may facilitate
interaction of AP-1 with the TTR AP-1-HNF-3 site. In order to explore the role of
HNF-3 in the liver, we have examined expression patterns of TTR and HNF-3 during 
the acute-phase response and liver regeneration. Partial hepatectomy produced
minimal fluctuation in HNF-3 and TTR expression, suggesting that HNF-3 expression
is not influenced by proliferative signals induced during liver regeneration. In 
acute-phase livers, we observed a dramatic reduction in HNF-3 alpha expression
which correlates with a decrease in the expression of its target gene, the TTR
gene. Furthermore, consistent with previous studies, the acute-phase livers are
induced for c-jun but not c-fos expression. We propose that the reduction in TTR 
gene expression during the acute phase is likely due to lower HNF-3 alpha
expression levels and that the induction of primarily c-jun homodimers, which are
poor transcriptional activators, is insufficient to maintain normal TTR
expression levels. We also discuss the role of reduced HNF-3 alpha expression in 
mediating decreased transcription of HNF-3 target genes which respond negatively 
to cytokine signalling.

PMCID: PMC230360
PMID: 7862129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1747-58.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3- and hormone-regulated expression of the
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 
1 genes.

O'Brien RM(1), Noisin EL, Suwanichkul A, Yamasaki T, Lucas PC, Wang JC, Powell
DR, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

The rate of transcription of the hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK) and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) genes is
stimulated by glucocorticoids and inhibited by insulin. In both cases, the effect
of insulin is dominant, since it suppresses both basal and
glucocorticoid-stimulated PEPCK or IGFBP-1 gene transcription. Analyses of both
promoters by transfection of PEPCK or IGFBP-1-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
fusion genes into rat hepatoma cells has led to the identification of insulin
response sequences (IRSs) in both genes. The core IRS, T(G/A)TTTTG, is the same
in both genes, but the PEPCK promoter has a single copy of this element whereas
the IGFBP-1 promoter has two copies arranged as an inverted palindrome. The
IGFBP-1 IRS and PEPCK IRS both bind the alpha and beta forms of hepatic nuclear
factor 3 (HNF-3), although the latter does so with a sixfold-lower relative
affinity. Both the PEPCK and the IGFBP-1 IRSs also function as accessory factor
binding sites required for the full induction of gene transcription by
glucocorticoids. A combination of transient transfection and DNA binding studies 
suggests that HNF-3 is the accessory factor that supports glucocorticoid-induced 
gene transcription. In both genes, the HNF-3 binding site overlaps the IRS core
motif(s). A model in which insulin is postulated to mediate its negative effect
on glucocorticoid-induced PEPCK and IGFBP-1 gene transcription indirectly by
inhibiting HNF-3 action is proposed.

PMCID: PMC230399
PMID: 7532283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Virology. 1995 Feb 20;207(1):98-106.

Hepatitis B virus enhancer binds and is activated by the Hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3.

Ori A(1), Shaul Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

The enhancer of hepatitis B (HBV) virus displays a liver-specific activity that
determines the postreceptor virus-host tropism. Despite the detailed study of
this enhancer our knowledge of the mechanisms underlying this behavior is very
limited. Here we report that the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) is at least
in part responsible for the liver-specific activity of the enhancer. We
demonstrate that recombinant HNF3 alpha binds the enhancer at two sites with
different affinity. Transfection studies have demonstrated that the enhancer is
active only in liver cells and that integrity of the HNF3 binding sites is
important for its full activity. In vitro transcription assays revealed that the 
enhancer is active only in liver extracts but not in extracts prepared from HeLa 
cells. Furthermore, the latter extract cannot be activated by addition of
recombinant HNF3 alpha. A similar behavior is manifested in transfected cells
and, here again, the inactive enhancer is not activated by cotransfected HNF3
beta and alpha. Collectively, our study shows that HNF3 activators are required
but not sufficient for full activation of the HBV enhancer and there is a need
for additional liver-specific activators or coactivators.

PMID: 7871756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 11;23(3):395-404.

Hierarchy and positive/negative interplays of the hepatocyte nuclear factors
HNF-1, -3 and -4 in the liver-specific enhancer for the human
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor.

Rouet P(1), Raguenez G, Tronche F, Mfou'ou V, Salier JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 78, Boisguillaume, France.

Alpha-1-microglobulin and bikunin are two plasma glycoproteins encoded by an
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor (AMBP) gene. The strict liver-specific
expression of the AMBP gene is controlled by a potent enhancer made of six
clustered boxes numbered 1-6 that have been reported to be proven or potential
binding sites for the hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors HNF-1, -4, -3, -1, -3, 
-4, respectively. In the present study, electromobility shift assays of wild-type
or mutated probes demonstrated that the boxes 1-5 have a binding capacity for
their cognate HNF protein. Box 5 is also a target for another, as yet
unidentified, factor. A functional analysis of the wild-type or mutated enhancer,
driving its homologous promoter and a reporter CAT gene in the HepG2 hepatoma
cell line, demonstrated that all six boxes participate in the enhancer activity, 
with the primary influence of box 4 (HNF-1) and box 2 (HNF-4). A similar analysis
in the HNF-free CHO cell line co-transfected with one or several HNF factors
further demonstrated various interplays between boxes: box 3 (HNF-3 alpha and
beta) has a negative influence over the major HNF-4 box 2 as well as a positive
influence over the major HNF-1 box 4.

PMCID: PMC306689
PMID: 7533900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Genomics. 1995 Jan 20;25(2):388-93.

Murine chromosomal location of eight members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor
3/fork head winged helix family of transcription factors.

Avraham KB(1), Fletcher C, Overdier DG, Clevidence DE, Lai E, Costa RH, Jenkins
NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

A 100-amino-acid DNA-binding motif, known as the winged helix, was first
identified in the mammalian hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) and Drosophila
fork head family of transcription factors. Subsequently, more than 40 different
genes that contain the winged helix motif have been identified. In the studies
described here, we have determined the murine chromosomal location of eight
members of this gene family, HFH-1, HFH-3, HFH-4, HFH-5, HFH-6, HFH-8, BF-1, and 
BF-2, by interspecific backcross analysis. These genes, designated HNF-3 fork
head homolog 1 (Hfh1), Hfh3, Hfh4, Hfh5, Hfh6, Hfh8, Hfh9, and Hfh10,
respectively, mapped to 6 different mouse autosomes and are thus well dispersed
throughout the mouse genome. Based on this mapping information, we predict the
chromosomal location of these genes in humans and discuss the potential of these 
genes as candidates for uncloned mouse mutations.

PMID: 7789972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 30;269(52):32947-56.

Complex organization of CTF/NF-I, C/EBP, and HNF3 binding sites within the
promoter of the liver-specific vitellogenin gene.

Cardinaux JR(1), Chapel S, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

Vitellogenin genes are expressed specifically in the liver of female oviparous
vertebrates under the strict control of estrogen. To explain this tissue-specific
expression, we performed a detailed analysis of the Xenopus laevis vitellogenin
gene B1 promoter by DNase I footprinting and gel mobility-shift assays. We
characterized five binding sites for the ubiquitous factor CTF/NF-I. Two of these
sites are close to the TATA-box, whereas the others are located on both sides of 
the estrogen responsive unit formed by two imperfect estrogen response elements. 
Moreover two liver-enriched factors, C/EBP and HNF3, were found to interact with 
multiple closely spaced proximal promoter elements in the first 100 base pairs
upstream of the TATA-box. To confirm the physiological significance of this in
vitro analysis, in vivo DNase I footprinting experiments were carried out using
the ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction technique. The various
cis-elements characterized in vitro as binding sites for known transcription
factors and more particularly for liver-enriched transcription factors are
efficiently recognized in vivo as well, suggesting that they play an important
role in the control of the liver-specific vitellogenin gene B1 expression.

PMID: 7806524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Virology. 1994 Nov 15;205(1):127-32.

Regulation of hepatitis B virus ENI enhancer activity by hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factor HNF3.

Chen M(1), Hieng S, Qian X, Costa R, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
90033.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) ENI enhancer can activate the expression of HBV and
non-HBV genes in a liver-specific manner. By performing the electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays, we demonstrated that the three related, liver-enriched,
transcription factors, HNF3 alpha, HNF3 beta, and HNF3 gamma could all bind to
the 2c site of HBV ENI enhancer. Mutations introduced in the 2c site to abolish
the binding by HNF3 reduced the enhancer activity approximately 15-fold.
Moreover, expression of HNF3 antisense sequences to suppress the expression of
HNF3 in Huh-7 hepatoma cells led to reduction of the ENI enhancer activity. These
results indicate that HNF3 positively regulates the ENI enhancer activity and
this regulation is most likely mediated through the 2c site. The requirement of
HNF3 for the ENI enhancer activity could explain the liver specificity of this
enhancer element.

PMID: 7975208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Biol. 1994 Nov;166(1):195-209.

Members of the HNF-3/forkhead family of transcription factors exhibit distinct
cellular expression patterns in lung and regulate the surfactant protein B
promoter.

Clevidence DE(1), Overdier DG, Peterson RS, Porcella A, Ye H, Paulson KE, Costa
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago 60612-7334.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3)/forkhead (fkh) proteins consist of an
extensive family of tissue-specific and developmental gene regulators which share
homology within the winged helix DNA binding motif. We report on the isolation of
a new family member, HNF-3/forkhead homolog 8 (HFH-8), from lung cDNA libraries
and the derivation of the complete amino acid sequences for the HFH-8 protein as 
well as previously identified HFH-1 and HFH-4 proteins. The HFH proteins contain 
several sequence motifs found in activation domains of other transcription
factors and HNF-3/fkh family members. In situ hybridization with the HNF-3,
HFH-4, and HFH-8 probes in adult lung demonstrate that the HNF-3/fkh cellular
expression patterns are regionally specified. Whereas HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3 beta 
are normally coexpressed in the hepatocyte, their expression patterns in the lung
are different. The HNF-3 alpha and HFH-4 genes are coexpressed in the bronchiolar
epithelium (clara cells), whereas the HNF-3 beta probe exhibits prominent
hybridization with the smooth muscle surrounding arterioles and bronchioles. In
contrast, HFH-8 probes labeled the type II pneumocyte cells lining the
respiratory surfaces of terminal bronchioles and alveolar sac. We have identified
an HNF-3 consensus DNA binding sequence in the proximal surfactant protein B
(SPB) promoter region (SPB-f2, -78 to -88). SPB gene transcription is restricted 
to bronchiolar and alveolar epithelium which colocalizes with the expression
pattern of the HNF-3 alpha and HFH-8 genes, respectively. We show that the SPB-f2
sequence is recognized by both HNF-3 alpha and HFH-8 proteins and that these cDNA
expression vectors activate the SPB promoter in cotransfection assays through the
HNF-3 consensus sequence. Our results suggest that SPB promoter activity is
regulated by HNF-3 alpha and HFH-8 proteins in a cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 7958446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Exp Cell Res. 1994 Nov;215(1):189-98.

Hepatocytic transcription factor expression in human embryonal carcinoma and yolk
sac carcinoma cell lines: expression of HNF-3 alpha in models of early endodermal
cell differentiation.

Roach S(1), Schmid W, Pera MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Oxford University, United Kingdom.

Retinoic acid treatment of the multipotent human embryonal carcinoma cell line
GCT 27 X-1 induced differentiation into an epithelial cell type which
morphologically resembled rodent visceral endoderm in vitro. The differentiated
cells expressed some markers characteristic of yolk sac, such as cytokeratin 19
and extracellular matrix proteins, but none of the secreted serum proteins
produced by normal yolk sac or liver. HNF-3 alpha expression increased upon
retinoic acid-induced GCT 27 X-1 differentiation. This increase in HNF-3 alpha
expression may characterize an early stage in the differentiation of
extraembryonic endoderm. In support of this hypothesis, we found that a yolk sac 
carcinoma cell line with a phenotype similar to rodent visceral endoderm
expressed transcripts for HNF-1 alpha, -1 beta, -3 alpha, -3 beta, -3 gamma, and 
4, whereas yolk sac carcinoma cell lines resembling rodent parietal endoderm
expressed transcripts for HNF-3 alpha. The results support the conclusion that
hepatocytic transcription factors, particularly HNF-3 alpha, may play an
important role in early endodermal differentiation in man.

PMID: 7957668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):441-8.

Estrogen-inducible derivatives of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3 and liver factor B1 are differently affected by pure and partial
antiestrogens.

Drewes T(1), Clairmont A, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
(HNF4), hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF3), and liver factor B1 (LFB1) families
are thought to play a role in the development of internal organs and in the
tissue-specific expression of many distinct genes. We have now constructed
derivatives of these proteins by introducing the hormone-binding domain of the
estrogen receptor and show that in transient transfections these chimeric
proteins act as estrogen-inducible transcription factors with the DNA sequence
specificity of the original factors. These chimeric transcription factors are
differently affected by the partial estrogen antagonist 4-hydroxytamoxifen and
the pure antiestrogen N-n-butyl-11-(3,17-dihydroxy-estra-1,3,5(10)-trien- 7
alpha-yl)N-methyl-undecamide (ICI 164384); 4-hydroxytamoxifen activates, at least
partially, all the chimeric factors and the estrogen receptor, while ICI 164384
surprisingly activates the transcription factors derived from HNF3 and LFB1 and
inhibits only the estrogen receptor and the HNF4 derivative. Together with the
DNA-sequence-binding specificity, the different response to estrogen and
anti-estrogens makes our estrogen receptor fusion proteins useful tools for the
investigation of the roles of HNF4, HNF3 and LFB1 in gene expression,
differentiation and developmental processes.

PMID: 7925467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Sep 30;203(3):1835-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) binds to the insulin response sequence in the
IGF binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) promoter and enhances promoter function.

Unterman TG(1), Fareeduddin A, Harris MA, Goswami RG, Porcella A, Costa RH,
Lacson RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994 Dec 15;205(2):1496.

IGF binding protein-1 is an important short-term modulator of IGF
bioavailability. Hepatic transcription of IGFBP-1 is increased by glucocorticoids
and suppressed by insulin. We previously identified adjacent glucocorticoid and
insulin response sequences approximately 90 bp 5' to the RNA cap site in the
IGFBP-1 promoter. This insulin response sequence contains a sequence highly
related (10/12 bases) to a consensus HNF-3 binding sequence. Gel shift and
supershift studies confirm that this sequence binds HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma. 
Co-expression of HNF-3 beta enhances IGFBP-1 promoter activity in NIH-3T3 cells. 
Mutation of this HNF-3 binding sequence disrupts this effect as well as the
ability of glucocorticoids to stimulate and of insulin to inhibit IGFBP-1
promoter activity in H4IIE and HepG2 hepatoma cells. HNF-3 binding at this site
may play an important role in the multihormonal regulation of hepatic IGFBP-1
gene expression.

PMID: 7524494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 2;269(35):22211-6.

Two members of the HNF-3 family have opposite effects on a lung transcriptional
element; HNF-3 alpha stimulates and HNF-3 beta inhibits activity of region I from
the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) promoter.

Sawaya PL(1), Luse DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0524.

Region I of the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP; also called CC10) promoter
contains at least three functional factor binding sites, an upstream HNF-3 site
and a downstream overlapping AP-1/HNF-3 site (Sawaya, P.L., Stripp, B. R.,
Whitsett, J.A., and Luse, D. S. Mol. Cell. Biol. (1993) 13, 3860-3871). Fragments
containing -320/+58 of the rat CCSP promoter were mutagenized to eliminate one or
two factor binding sites in region I, cloned into a luciferase reporter cassette,
and assayed for activity by transfection into cultured lung (H441) cells. We
found that the HNF-3 sites alone can account for the activity of region I in H441
cells. The activity of the two HNF-3 sites is synergistic; this effect depends on
the presence of an upstream factor binding site. We had shown previously that
H441 cells contain exclusively the HNF-3 alpha form of HNF-3, whereas HeLa cells 
have essentially no HNF-3. Co-transfection of an HNF-3 alpha expression plasmid
with a CCSP reporter containing four copies of region I in HeLa cells stimulated 
CCSP activity 4-fold, whereas co-expression of HNF-3 beta inhibited activity
8-fold. HNF-3 beta was also inhibitory to region I expression in H441 cells, but 
to a lesser extent than in HeLa cells, presumably because of the high levels of
HNF-3 alpha already present in H441 cells. We have thus identified a gene
regulatory element through which two members of the HNF-3 transcription factor
family, HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3 beta, exert opposite effects.

PMID: 8071346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):5671-81.

The lung-specific surfactant protein B gene promoter is a target for thyroid
transcription factor 1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3, indicating common factors
for organ-specific gene expression along the foregut axis.

Bohinski RJ(1), Di Lauro R, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-2899.

We used the lung epithelial cell-specific surfactant protein B (SPB) gene
promoter as a model with which to investigate mechanisms involved in
transcriptional control of lung-specific genes. In a previous study, we showed
that the SPB promoter specifically activated expression of a linked reporter gene
in the continuous H441 lung cell line and that H441 nuclear proteins specifically
protected a region of this promoter from bp -111 to -73. In this study, we
further show that this region is a complex binding site for thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3). Whereas TTF-1 bound two
highly degenerate and closely spaced sites, HNF-3 proteins bound a TGT3 motif
(TGTTTGT) that is also found in several liver-specific gene regulatory regions,
where it appears to be a weak affinity site for HNF-3. Point mutations of these
binding sites eliminated factor binding and resulted in significant decreases in 
transfected SPB promoter activity. In addition, we developed a cotransfection
assay and showed that a family of lung-specific gene promoters that included the 
SPB, SPC, SPA, and Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene promoters were
specifically activated by cotransfected TTF-1. We conclude that TTF-1 and HNF-3
are major activators of lung-specific genes and propose that these factors are
involved in a general mechanism of lung-specific gene transcription. Importantly,
these data also show that common factors are involved in organ-specific gene
expression along the mammalian foregut axis.

PMCID: PMC359092
PMID: 8065304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 23;33(33):9889-97.

Transactivation of the rat CYP2C13 gene promoter involves HNF-1, HNF-3, and
members of the orphan receptor subfamily.

Legraverend C(1), Eguchi H, Ström A, Lahuna O, Mode A, Tollet P, Westin S,
Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

The rat CYP2C13 gene (2C13) encodes one of the constitutive male forms of
cytochrome P-450 that are involved in steroid metabolism. In addition to being
developmentally regulated, the expression of 2C13 is restricted to the liver and 
suppressed by the female pattern of growth hormone (GH) secretion at the
transcriptional initiation level. In this study, we show that the liver-specific 
expression, but not the regulation by GH, can be reconstituted with 117 bp to 2
kb of 2C13 5' flank. Transactivation of the 2C13 promoter requires both HNF-1 and
HNF-3 and is influenced by members of the orphan receptor subfamily of
transcription factors. Although HNF-4, ARP-1, EAR-2, and COUP-TF bind to the 2C13
promoter in vitro, overexpression of EAR-2 and COUP-TF, but not of HNF-4 or
ARP-1, results in the potentiation of the HNF-3- and HNF-1-supported activity in 
non-liver cells.

PMID: 8060996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Jul 15;223(2):329-37.

The interaction of DNA with the DNA-binding domain encoded by the Drosophila gene
fork head.

Kaufmann E(1), Hoch M, Jäckle H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Göttingen, Germany.

The Drosophila gene fork head (fkh) encodes a nuclear protein which shares
sequence similarity with the rat hepatocyte-enriched transcription factor family 
HNF3 alpha-gamma. The sequence similarity is restricted to the region that has
been defined as the DNA-binding domain of these proteins, termed the fork head
domain. In this study, we investigate the structural properties of the fork head 
domain of the prototype of this protein family encoded by fkh and its interaction
with DNA. The core sequence required for DNA binding of the fork head domain
consists of 114 amino acids and represents a stable and highly compact monomer of
globular structure with an alpha-helix content of 37%. The fork head domain binds
specifically to the DNA target sequence of HNF3 alpha-gamma and to an enhancer
element that is derived from a regulatory sequence of an in vivo Drosophila
target gene. The specific interaction between the DNA-binding domain of the
fkh-encoded protein and its target DNA is mediated by two contact regions which
are separated from each other by one turn of the DNA. Our data are consistent
with a structural model which derived rom X-ray diffraction analysis of the
DNA-binding domain of HNF3 gamma. Differences concerning the DNA contact sites
between the DNA-binding domain of the fkh-encoded protein and the HNF3 protein
family are discussed.

PMID: 8055900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;126(1):223-33.

Expression of hepatic transcription factors during liver development and oval
cell differentiation.

Nagy P(1), Bisgaard HC, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0037.

The oval cells are thought to be the progeny of a liver stem cell compartment and
strong evidence now exists indicating that these cells can participate in liver
regeneration by differentiating into different hepatic lineages. To better
understand the regulation of this process we have studied the expression of
liver-enriched transcriptional factors (HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 alpha,
HNF3 beta, and HNF3 gamma, HNF4, C/EBP, C/EBP beta, and DBP) in an experimental
model of oval cell proliferation and differentiation and compared the expression 
of these factors to that observed during late stages of hepatic ontogenesis. The 
steady-state mRNA levels of four (HNF1 alpha, HNF3 alpha, HNF4, and C/EBP beta)
"liver-enriched" transcriptional factors gradually decrease during the late
period of embryonic liver development while three factors (HNF1 beta, HNF3 beta, 
and DBP) increase. In the normal adult rat liver the expression of all the
transcription factors are restricted to the hepatocytes. However, during early
stages of oval cell proliferation both small and large bile ducts start to
express HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 gamma, C/EBP, and DBP but not HNF4. At the
later stages all of these factors are also highly expressed in the proliferating 
oval cells. Expression of HNF4 is first observed when the oval cells
differentiate morphologically and functionally into hepatocytes and form
basophilic foci. At that time the expression of some of the other factors is also
further increased. Based on these data we suggest that the upregulation of the
"establishment" factors (HNF1 and -3) may be an important step in oval cell
activation. The high levels of these factors in the oval cells and embryonic
hepatoblasts further substantiates the similarity between the two cell
compartments. Furthermore, the data suggest that HNF4 may be responsible for the 
final commitment of a small portion of the oval cells to differentiate into
hepatocytes which form the basophilic foci and eventually regenerate the liver
parenchyma.

PMCID: PMC2120103
PMID: 8027180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Jun 11;22(11):2126-33.

Retinoic acid-mediated activation of HNF-3 alpha during EC stem cell
differentiation.

Jacob A(1), Budhiraja S, Qian X, Clevidence D, Costa RH, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School, IL
60064.

We present evidence demonstrating that the liver-enriched transcription factor
HNF-3 alpha is activated upon retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9
embryonal carcinoma cells. We have detected increases in the DNA binding activity
and mRNA level of HNF-3 alpha. Both are reflections of the actual activation
mechanism at the level of transcriptional initiation, which we showed with the
help of HNF-3 alpha promoter constructs. Time course studies clearly show that
HNF-3 alpha activation is a transient event. Employing Northern blots, HNF-3
alpha mRNA can be detected between 16 and 24 hours post-differentiation, reaches 
its zenith at approximately 1 day, and then declines to virtually undetectable
levels. F9 cells can give rise to three distinct differentiated cell types;
visceral endoderm, parietal endoderm, and primitive endoderm. We have clearly
shown that HNF-3 alpha stimulation occurs upon primitive endoderm formation. In
addition, the transcription factor is also activated during the induction of cell
lineages that give rise to parietal and visceral endoderm. HNF-3 alpha
stimulation upon visceral endoderm differentiation is accompanied by the
activation of HNF-3 target genes such as transthyretin, suggesting that HNF-3
alpha is involved in the developmental activation of this gene. In contrast,
HNF-3 alpha target genes in parietal and primitive endoderm have yet to be
identified. However, the stimulation of HNF-3 alpha during primitive endoderm
formation, which is an extremely early event during murine embryogenesis, points 
towards a role for the factor in crucial determination processes that occur early
during development.

PMCID: PMC308131
PMID: 8029022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Surg Res. 1994 Jun;56(6):510-7.

Liver-directed gene therapy: evaluation of liver specific promoter elements.

Hafenrichter DG(1), Ponder KP, Rettinger SD, Kennedy SC, Wu X, Saylors RS, Flye
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110.

Liver-directed gene therapy could dramatically alter the therapy of many
inherited hematologic and metabolic diseases. We have developed a rapid,
reliable, low-mortality method for the in vivo delivery in rats of retroviral
vectors 24 hr after 70% hepatectomy by intraportal injection during hepatic
in-flow occlusion (HIFO). Using the human alpha 1-antitrypsin (hAAT) reporter
gene, we found in vivo that up to 10% of hepatocytes integrated the provirus, and
serum hAAT protein levels were sustained for up to 1 year. Despite high in vivo
transduction efficiencies, gene expression at the mRNA level is disappointingly
low compared to in vitro transduced NIH 3T3 or Hepa A1 tissue culture cells. In
this report, LNL-6-derived retroviral vectors (RV) were combined with one of two 
strong, liver-specific promoters, murine albumin or human alpha 1-antitrypsin, an
upstream insertion of a trimer of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) binding
sites, and the hAAT reporter gene. HNF-3 has been demonstrated to increase in
vitro transcriptional activity [23]. Twenty-four hours after 70% hepatectomy,
10-fold concentrated (by methotrexate-resistant titer) RV-producing cell
supernatant was given intraportally during a 3-min HIFO. Serum hAAT levels as
quantitated with a human specific ELISA were sustained for over 40 weeks with all
of the liver-specific promoter constructions. However, the hAAT protein
production with the murine albumin promoter retroviral constructs decreased with 
time, but was sustained at levels approximately 80% of the initial serum peak
levels with the constructs containing the hAAT promoter.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 8015304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Apr 11;22(7):1242-6.

Activity of the rat liver-specific aldolase B promoter is restrained by HNF3.

Gregori C(1), Kahn A, Pichard AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Unité 129 de l'INSERM, CHU Cochin,
Paris, France.

Although it contains binding sites for HNF1, NFY and C/EBP/DBP, the proximal
promoter of the aldolase B gene is surprisingly weak when tested by transient
transfection in differentiated hepatoma cells. This low activity could be due to 
overlapping between HNF1 and HNF3 binding sites in element PAB, from -127 to -103
bp with respect to the cap site. Replacement of the PAB region by a consensus
HNF1 binding site unable to bind HNF3, results in a 30 fold activation of the
promoter, in accordance with the hypothesis that activity of the wild-type
promoter is normally restrained by HNF3 binding to PAB competitively with HNF1.
Consistently, transactivation of the wild-type promoter by excess HNF1 is very
high, most likely due to the displacement of HNF3, while the construct with the
exclusive HNF1 binding site is weakly transactivated by HNF1. The inhibitory
effect of HNF3 on HNF1-dependent transactivation is clearly due to competition
between these two factors for binding to mutually exclusive, overlapping sites;
indeed, when HNF1 and HNF3 sites are contiguous and not overlapping, the
resulting promoter is as active as the one containing an exclusive HNF1 binding
site. A construct in which PAB has been replaced by an exclusive HNF3 binding
site is weakly expressed and is insensitive to HNF3 hyperexpression.
DBP-dependent transactivation, finally, is independent of the nature of the
element present in the PAB region.

PMCID: PMC523649
PMID: 8165139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Apr;14(4):2755-66.

The DNA-binding specificity of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/forkhead domain is
influenced by amino-acid residues adjacent to the recognition helix.

Overdier DG(1), Porcella A, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334.

Three distinct hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) proteins (HNF-3 alpha, -3
beta, and -3 gamma) are known to regulate the transcription of liver-specific
genes. The HNF-3 proteins bind to DNA as a monomer through a modified
helix-turn-helix, known as the winged helix motif, which is also utilized by a
number of developmental regulators, including the Drosophila homeotic forkhead
(fkh) protein. We have previously described the isolation, from rodent tissue, of
an extensive family of tissue-specific HNF-3/fkh homolog (HFH) genes sharing
homology in their winged helix motifs. In this report, we have determined the
preferred DNA-binding consensus sequence for the HNF-3 beta protein as well as
for two divergent family members, HFH-1 and HFH-2. We show that these HNF-3/fkh
proteins bind to distinct DNA sites and that the specificity of protein
recognition is dependent on subtle nucleotide alterations in the site. The HNF-3,
HFH-1, and HFH-2 consensus binding sequences were also used to search DNA
regulatory regions to identify potential target genes. Furthermore, an analysis
of the DNA-binding properties of a series of HFH-1/HNF-3 beta protein chimeras
has allowed us to identify a 20-amino-acid region, located adjacent to the DNA
recognition helix, which contributes to DNA-binding specificity. These sequences 
are not involved in base-specific contacts and include residues which diverge
within the HNF-3/fkh family. Replacement of this 20-amino-acid region in HNF-3
beta with corresponding residues from HFH-1 enabled the HNF-3 beta recognition
helix to bind only HFH-1-specific DNA-binding sites. We propose a model in which 
this 20-amino-acid flanking region influences the DNA-binding properties of the
recognition helix.

PMCID: PMC358641
PMID: 8139574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Genomics. 1994 Apr;20(3):377-85.

The HNF-3 gene family of transcription factors in mice: gene structure, cDNA
sequence, and mRNA distribution.

Kaestner KH(1), Hiemisch H, Luckow B, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The rat HNF-3 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3) gene family encodes three
transcription factors known to be important in the regulation of gene expression 
in liver and lung. We have cloned and characterized the mouse genes and cDNAs for
HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma and analyzed their expression patterns in various
adult tissues and mouse embryonic stages. The HNF-3 proteins are highly conserved
between mouse and rat, with the exception of the amino terminus of HNF-3 gamma,
which in mouse is more similar to those of HNF-3 alpha and beta than to the amino
termini of the rat HNF-3 gamma protein. The mouse HNF-3 genes are small and
contain only two or three (HNF-3 beta) exons with conserved intron-exon
boundaries. The proximal promoter of the mouse HNF-3 beta gene is remarkably
similar to that of the previously cloned rat HNF-3 beta gene, but is different
from the promoters of the HNF-3 alpha and gamma genes. The mRNA distribution of
the mouse HNF-3 genes was analyzed by quantitative RNase protection with
gene-specific probes. While HNF-3 alpha and beta are restricted mainly to
endoderm-derived tissues (lung, liver, stomach, and small intestine), HNF-3 gamma
is more extensively expressed, being present additionally in ovary, testis,
heart, and adipose tissue, but missing from lung. Transcripts for HNF-3 beta and 
alpha are detected most abundantly in midgestation embryos (Day 9.5), while HNF-3
gamma expression peaks around Day 15.5 of gestation.

PMID: 8034310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Cell. 1994 Jan 14;76(1):103-15.

HNF-3 beta as a regulator of floor plate development.

Sasaki H(1), Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175.

The transcription factor gene HNF-3 beta is expressed in the ventral midline of
the mouse embryonic neural tube, including the floor plate, a structure important
for dorsoventral patterning and axonal guidance. To assess HNF-3 beta function,
the gene has been ectopically expressed in the midbrain/hindbrain of transgenic
embryos using an En-2 promoter/enhancer. By 18.5 days postcoitum, transgenic
brains show a range of abnormalities, including absent inferior colliculus and
reduced cerebellum. Earlier, several genes normally expressed in the floor plate 
(BMP-1, Steel factor, and HNF-3 alpha) are induced within the same ectopic dorsal
domain as HNF-3 beta, and autoactivation of the endogenous HNF-3 beta is
observed. Conversely, expression of the dorsal gene Pax-3 is suppressed. Ectopic 
dorsal neuronal differentiation and abnormal dorsal axonal projections are also
seen. These results suggest that HNF-3 beta is an important regulator of floor
plate development in vivo.

PMID: 8287471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 15;90(24):11583-7.

DNA-binding properties and secondary structural model of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3/fork head domain.

Li C(1), Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

An 84-amino acid segment of QRF-1 [glutamine (Q)-rich factor 1], a newly cloned, 
B-cell-derived DNA-binding protein, shows significant sequence homology with the 
DNA-binding domains of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head family of
proteins. Here we demonstrate that this 84-amino acid domain is necessary and
sufficient for DNA binding. We also propose a secondary structural model for the 
domain. At the N-terminal portion of the model, a basic hook structure is
followed by two amphipathic helices separated by a turn. Invariant amino acid
residues within the two proposed helices form the hydrophobic cores. An aromatic 
kink and a third amphipathic helix comprise the center of the domain. At the C
terminus, two variable-length loops flank a putative 7-amino acid helix followed 
by a short basic region.

PMCID: PMC48028
PMID: 8265594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Development. 1993 Dec;119(4):1301-15.

The formation and maintenance of the definitive endoderm lineage in the mouse:
involvement of HNF3/forkhead proteins.

Ang SL(1), Wierda A, Wong D, Stevens KA, Cascio S, Rossant J, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

Little is known about genes that govern the development of the definitive
endoderm in mammals; this germ layer gives rise to the intestinal epithelium and 
various other cell types, such as hepatocytes, derived from the gut. The
discovery that the rat hepatocyte transcription factor HNF3 is similar to the
Drosophila forkhead gene, which plays a critical role in gut development in the
fly, led us to isolate genes containing the HNF3/forkhead (HFH) domain that are
expressed in mouse endoderm development. We recovered mouse HNF3 beta from an
embryo cDNA library and found that the gene is first expressed in the anterior
portion of the primitive streak at the onset of gastrulation, in a region where
definitive endoderm first arises. Its expression persists in axial structures
derived from the mouse equivalent of Hensen's node, namely definitive endoderm
and notochord, and in the ventral region of the developing neural tube.
Expression of the highly related gene, HNF3 alpha, appears to initiate later than
HNF3 beta and is first seen in midline endoderm cells. Expression subsequently
appears in notochord, ventral neural tube, and gut endoderm in patterns similar
to HNF3 beta. Microscale DNA binding assays show that HNF3 proteins are
detectable in the midgut at 9.5 days p.c. At later stages HNF3 mRNAs and protein 
are expressed strongly in endoderm-derived tissues such as the liver. HNF3 is
also the only known hepatocyte-enriched transcription factor present in a highly 
de-differentiated liver cell line that retains the capacity to redifferentiate to
the hepatic phenotype. Taken together, these studies suggest that HNF3 alpha and 
HNF3 beta are involved in both the initiation and maintenance of the endodermal
lineage. We also discovered a novel HFH-containing gene, HFH-E5.1, that is
expressed transiently in posterior ectoderm and mesoderm at the primitive streak 
stage, and later predominantly in the neural tube. HFH-E5.1 is highly similar in 
structure and expression profile to the Drosophila HFH gene FD4, suggesting that 
HFH family members have different, evolutionarily conserved roles in development.

PMID: 8306889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Biol. 1993 Dec;160(2):413-23.

XFKH2, a Xenopus HNF-3 alpha homologue, exhibits both activin-inducible and
autonomous phases of expression in early embryos.

Bolce ME(1), Hemmati-Brivanlou A, Harland RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley
94720.

We have isolated the Xenopus fork head (fkh) box-containing gene XFKH2. XFKH2
appears to be most similar to the rat liver transcription factor HNF-3 alpha,
with 64% amino acid identity throughout the protein and 96% amino acid identity
within the fkh box. Dissection experiments demonstrate that XFKH2 is present in
the vegetal pole and marginal zone but not the animal pole of gastrulae and in
equal levels in the dorsal and ventral halves of both gastrulae and neurulae. By 
in situ hybridization, we know that the dorsal component of expression is
concentrated in the notochord in neurulae. In tailbud embryos, XFKH2 is detected 
in the foregut, the brain, and in two lines of cells just dorsal and ventral to
the notochord, the hypochord and the floor plate of the spinal cord. Finally,
although explanted animal caps will turn on XFKH2 autonomously at midneurula
stage, activin induces early expression at gastrula stage. The early, growth
factor-dependent expression does occur in the presence of the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide, suggesting that XFKH2 expression during gastrula stage
may be an immediate early response to mesoderm induction.

PMID: 8253274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mech Dev. 1993 Dec;44(2-3):91-108.

Sequential expression of HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 alpha by embryonic organizing
centers: the dorsal lip/node, notochord and floor plate.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1), Prezioso VR, Darnell JE, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

Axial patterning in the nervous system of vertebrate embryos depends on inductive
signals that derive from the organizer region (the dorsal lip in amphibians and
the node in birds and mammals) and leter from the notochord and floor plate.
Previous studies have shown that Pintallavis, a member of the HNF-3/fork head
transcription factor family, is expressed selectively by these cell groups in
frog embryos and may be involved in regulating neural development. We report here
that in early rat and mouse embryos, the embryonic endoderm, the node, the
notochord and the floor plate express two related transcription factors, HNF-3
alpha and HNF-3 beta, which also function in the control of liver cell
differentiation. Early embryonic tissues express variant forms of HNF-3 beta
which derive from the use of 5' alternative exons. Within the organizer region
and notochord, HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 alpha have distinct temporal patterns of
expression and appear in partially overlapping domains. The early expression
pattern of mammalian HNF-3 beta in the node, notochord and midline neural plate
cells is similar to that of Pintallavis in frog embryos. There does not appear to
be a Pintallavis homologue in mice. This prompted us to isolate and analyze the
expression of the frog HNF-3 beta gene. In frog embryos, HNF-3 beta is expressed 
in the dorsal lip, pharyngeal endoderm and floor plate. In contrast to mammalian 
HNF-3 beta, the onset of frog HNF-3 beta expression in neural tissue occurs after
neural tube closure. Thus, the combined expression patterns of Pintallavis and
HNF-3 beta in frogs is equivalent to that of HNF-3 beta in rats and mice. Within 
neural tissue, the onset of expression of these regulatory genes define
successive stages in the differentiation of floor plate cells. The results
reported here show that closely related members of the HNF-3/fork head gene
family are expressed by axial midline cell groups involved in neural induction
and patterning and suggest the involvement of these genes in the development of
the vertebrate neuraxis.

PMID: 8155584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 15;90(22):10421-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head or "winged helix" proteins: a family of
transcription factors of diverse biologic function.

Lai E(1), Clark KL, Burley SK, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021.

A family of transcription factors, first identified as hepatocyte nuclear factors
(HNF-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma) and as a homeotic Drosophila mutant, fork
head, has been intensively studied for the past 4 years. Important findings have 
emerged about the structure of the DNA-binding portion of the proteins as well as
biologic discoveries about the diversity of the family and its implied role in
early development.

PMCID: PMC47788
PMID: 8248124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Development. 1993 Nov;119(3):567-78.

Postimplantation expression patterns indicate a role for the mouse forkhead/HNF-3
alpha, beta and gamma genes in determination of the definitive endoderm,
chordamesoderm and neuroectoderm.

Monaghan AP(1), Kaestner KH, Grau E, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma genes constitute a family of transcription
factors that are required for hepatocyte-specific gene expression of a number of 
genes, e.g. transthyretin, alpha-1 antitrypsin and tyrosine aminotransferase.
These genes share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain first found in the
Drosophila gene, forkhead, which is required for the normal patterning of the
developing gut and central nervous system in Drosophila. In adult mouse tissues, 
transcripts from HNF-3 alpha and beta have been localised to the liver, intestine
and lung, whereas HNF-3 gamma is found in the liver, intestine and testis. In
light of the early developmental significance of forkhead in Drosophila, we have 
compared the patterns of expression of HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma mRNAs during
murine embryogenesis. We find that these genes are sequentially activated during 
development in the definitive endoderm. HNF-3 beta mRNA is expressed in the node 
at the anterior end of the primitive streak in all three germ layers and is the
first gene of this family to be activated. Subsequently, HNF-3 alpha is
transcribed in the primitive endoderm in the region of the invaginating foregut
and HNF-3 gamma appears upon hindgut differentiation. These genes have different 
anterior boundaries of mRNA expression in the developing endoderm and transcripts
are found in all endoderm-derived structures that differentiate posterior to this
boundary. Therefore, we propose that these genes define regionalization within
the definitive endoderm. Furthermore, differential mRNA expression of HNF-3 alpha
and beta is detected in cells of the ventral neural epithelium, chordamesoderm
and notochord. In the neural epithelium, expression of HNF-3 alpha and beta mRNA 
becomes localised to cells of the floor plate. We propose that, in addition to
their characterised requirement for liver-specific gene expression, HNF-3 alpha
and beta are required for mesoderm and neural axis formation. We also conclude
that HNF-3 beta is the true orthologue of the Drosophila forkhead gene.

PMID: 8187630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochem J. 1993 Oct 1;295 ( Pt 1):227-32.

Identification of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 binding sites in the Clara cell
secretory protein gene.

Bingle CD(1), Gitlin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110.

To determine the mechanisms of cell-specific gene expression in the developing
pulmonary epithelium the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene promoter was
analysed by DNAase I footprinting. A prominent site of protein-DNA interaction
was detected from nucleotides -132 to -76 using nuclear extract from mouse lung
and human H441 cells. Mobility shift analysis revealed that an oligonucleotide
corresponding to this region interacted with multiple proteins from lung and H441
cell nuclear extracts. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of this region
identified two potential binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3),
and consistent with this finding binding to this CCSP oligonucleotide was
specifically competed for by an oligonucleotide corresponding to the
HNF-3-binding site from the mouse transthyretin gene. Mobility shift of the CCSP 
oligonucleotide was supershifted using antisera specific to HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3
beta, and HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3 beta translated in vitro were found to bind
specifically to this same oligonucleotide. Co-transfection of HNF-3 alpha- and
HNF-3 beta-expression plasmids increased cell-specific reporter gene activity in 
H441 cells transfected with a CCSP-CAT gene chimeric construct containing this
-132 to -76 region. Taken together, these results suggest a role for HNF-3 in
mediating cell-specific CCSP gene expression within the bronchiolar epithelium.
These findings support the hypothesis that members of the HNF-3 'forkhead' family
of transcription factors determine gene expression and cell fate in multiple cell
lineages derived from the primitive gut endoderm.

PMCID: PMC1134843
PMID: 8216221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Am J Physiol. 1993 Sep;265(3 Pt 1):G506-13.

HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta expression in mouse intestinal crypts.

Serfas MS(1), Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago
60612.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and 1 beta (HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta) are
homologous homeodomain-containing transcription factors that form homodimers or
heterodimers that bind the same consensus sequence in the promoters of several
genes expressed in liver. Many of these genes, including the mouse
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, are also expressed in the intestinal epithelium.
AFP expression is restricted to the enteroendocrine cell lineage in the adult
small intestine, and we have investigated the distribution of HNF-1 alpha and
HNF-1 beta mRNA in the mouse intestine to determine whether expression of either 
of these regulatory factors colocalizes with AFP. We found that transcripts
encoding both factors are expressed at the highest levels in crypts of small and 
large intestine. Quantitation shows that the relative ratio of HNF-1 alpha to
HNF-1 beta mRNAs appears lower in the colon, where AFP is not expressed.
Alterations in the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 beta along the length of the
intestine may influence HNF-1 dimer formation and expression of target genes.
Although HNF-1 is necessary for transcription of the AFP gene, other factors must
be involved in eliciting the cell type-specific pattern of AFP expression in the 
intestine.

PMID: 7692743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4494-504.

The distal enhancer implicated in the developmental regulation of the tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is bound by liver-specific and ubiquitous factors.

Nitsch D(1), Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Tyrosine aminotransferase gene expression is confined to parenchymal cells of the
liver, is inducible by glucocorticoids and glucagon, and is repressed by insulin.
Three enhancers control this tissue-specific and hormone-dependent activity, one 
of which, located at -11 kb, is implicated in establishing an active expression
domain. We have studied in detail this important regulatory element and have
identified a 221-bp fragment containing critical enhancer sequences which
stimulated the heterologous thymidine kinase promoter more than 100-fold in
hepatoma cells. Within this region, we have characterized two essential
liver-specific enhancer domains, one of which was bound by proteins of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family. Analyses with the dedifferentiated
hepatoma cell line HTC suggested that HNF3 alpha and/or -gamma, but not HNF3
beta, are involved in activating the tyrosine aminotransferase gene via the
-11-kb enhancer. Genomic footprinting and in vitro protein-DNA binding studies
documented cell-type-specific binding of ubiquitous factors to the second
essential enhancer domain, which by itself stimulated the thymidine kinase
promoter preferentially in hepatoma cells. These results will allow further
characterization of the role of these enhancer sequences in developmental
activation of the tyrosine aminotransferase gene.

PMCID: PMC360060
PMID: 8101632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. FEBS Lett. 1993 Jul 12;326(1-3):171-6.

MFH-1, a new member of the fork head domain family, is expressed in developing
mesenchyme.

Miura N(1), Wanaka A, Tohyama M, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Yamada-Oka,
Japan.

We have isolated a novel mouse gene, MFH-1 (mesenchyme fork head 1) that is
related to the Drosophila fork head and rat HNF3 genes. MFH-1 encodes a distinct 
fork head domain that is classified into a distinct subfamily. A recombinant
MFH-1 protein could bind to the HNF3 binding site. MFH-1 is expressed temporally 
in developing embryos, first in the non-notochordal mesoderm and later in areas
of mesenchymal condensation in the trunk, head, and limbs. Our results suggest
that MFH-1 might be involved in the formation of special mesenchymal tissues.

PMID: 8325367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):3860-71.

The lung-specific CC10 gene is regulated by transcription factors from the AP-1, 
octamer, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 families.

Sawaya PL(1), Stripp BR, Whitsett JA, Luse DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0524.

We have shown that a large fragment (-2339 to +57) from the rat CC10 gene
directed lung-specific expression of a reporter construct in transgenic animals. 
Upon transfection, a smaller fragment (-165 to +57) supported reporter gene
expression exclusively in the Clara cell-like NCI-H441 cell line, suggesting that
a Clara cell-specific transcriptional element resided on this fragment (B. R.
Stripp, P. L. Sawaya, D. S. Luse, K. A. Wikenheiser, S. E. Wert, J. A. Huffman,
D. L. Lattier, G. Singh, S. L. Katyal, and J. A. Whitsett, J. Biol. Chem.
267:14703-14712, 1992). The interactions of nuclear proteins with a particular
segment of the CC10 promoter which extends from 79 to 128 bp upstream of the CC10
transcription initiation site (CC10 region I) have now been studied. This
sequence can stimulate both in vitro transcription in H441 nuclear extract and
transient expression of reporter constructs in H441 cells. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using extracts from H441, HeLa, rat liver, and fetal sheep 
lung cells were used to demonstrate that members of the AP-1, octamer, and HNF-3 
families bind to CC10 region I. Transcription factors from H441 cells which are
capable of binding to CC10 region I are either absent in HeLa, rat liver, and
fetal sheep lung extracts or enriched in H441 extracts relative to extracts from 
non-Clara cells.

PMCID: PMC359916
PMID: 8321193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. FEBS Lett. 1993 May 24;323(1-2):4-10.

Liver-enriched HNF-3 alpha and ubiquitous factors interact with the human
transferrin gene enhancer.

Augé-Gouillou C(1), Petropoulos I, Zakin MM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Expression des Génes Eucaryotes, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The human transferrin gene enhancer is organized in two domains. Domain A
contains a single enhanson designated Ia. Domain B contains four enhansons named 
Ib, II, III and IV. We demonstrate here that the liver-enriched transcription
factor HNF-3 alpha interacts with enhanson Ia and that enhansons Ib and IV are
binding sites for members of the NF1 family. In addition, enhansons II and III
seem to be respectively the targets for the AP4 protein and for EIII, a factor
not yet completely identified. Analysis of mutated enhancer regions establishes
that each enhanson is required for full enhancer activity and that the proteins
binding to enhansons II, III and IV may interact within a multiprotein complex.
This enhancer region presents no activity in the Sertoli cells of testis, where
transferrin is also synthesized. We demonstrate that in Sertoli cells, the
members of the HNF-3 family are not expressed; this fact may account for the
inactivity of the enhancer in these cells.

PMID: 8495744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 1;90(9):3948-52.

Identification of nine tissue-specific transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3/forkhead DNA-binding-domain family.

Clevidence DE(1), Overdier DG, Tao W, Qian X, Pani L, Lai E, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma are liver
transcription factors that mediate the coordinate expression of a number of
hepatocyte-specific genes. The HNF-3 proteins share DNA-binding-domain homology
among themselves and with the Drosophila homeotic protein forkhead (fkh). The
HNF-3/fkh DNA-binding domain constitutes an uncharacterized protein motif that
recognizes its cognate DNA binding site as a monomer. Additional
HNF-3/fkh-related proteins are known to be required for determination events
during embryogenesis in Drosophila and Xenopus. In this report, we describe the
isolation of nine additional HNF-3/fkh homologue (HFH) clones from rodent tissue 
cDNAs by using both low-stringency hybridization and a polymerase chain reaction 
protocol. Many of the HFH genes exhibit a tissue-restricted expression pattern
and are transcribed in tissues other than liver, including brain, kidney, lung,
and intestine. The HNF-3/fkh motif therefore comprises a large gene family of
transcription factors that play a role in tissue-specific gene regulation and
development.

PMCID: PMC46423
PMID: 7683413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2401-10.

Modulation of liver-specific transcription by interactions between hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3 and nuclear factor 1 binding DNA in close apposition.

Jackson DA(1), Rowader KE, Stevens K, Jiang C, Milos P, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912.

The liver-specific enhancer of the serum albumin gene contains an essential
segment, designated eH, which binds the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha (HNF3
alpha) and ubiquitous nuclear factor 1/CCAAT transcription factor (NF1/CTF)
proteins in tight apposition. We previously showed that activation of
transcription by the eH site was correlated with an increase in intracellular
HNF3 alpha levels during the in vitro differentiation of the hepatic cell line
H2.35. We now show that transfection of an HNF3 alpha cDNA expression vector into
dedifferentiated H2.35 cells is sufficient to induce transcription from the eH
site. Mutational analysis of the enhancer demonstrates that NF1/CTF cooperates
with HNF3 alpha to induce enhancer activity. However, when the eH site is removed
from the context of the enhancer, NF1/CTF can inhibit transcriptional activation 
by HNF3 alpha. We conclude that the ternary complex of HNF3 alpha, NF1/CTF, and
the eH site forms a novel, composite regulatory element that is sensitive to the 
local DNA sequence environment and suggest that the transcriptional stimulatory
activity of NF1/CTF depends on its higher-order interactions with other proteins 
during hepatocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC359561
PMID: 8455618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1779-87.

A dosage-dependent suppressor of a temperature-sensitive calmodulin mutant
encodes a protein related to the fork head family of DNA-binding proteins.

Zhu G(1), Muller EG, Amacher SL, Northrop JL, Davis TN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195.

The cmd1-1 mutation of calmodulin causes temperature-sensitive growth in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We have isolated a dosage-dependent suppressor of
cmd1-1, designated HCM1. Twentyfold overexpression of HCM1 permits strains
carrying cmd1-1 to grow at temperatures up to and including 34 degrees C but does
not suppress the lethality of either cmd1-1 at higher temperatures or the
deletion of CMD1. Thus, overexpression of HCM1 does not bypass the requirement
for calmodulin but enhances the ability of the mutant calmodulin to function.
HCM1 is not essential for growth, but deletion of HCM1 exacerbates the phenotype 
of a strain carrying cmd1-1. HCM1 is located on chromosome III, which was
recently sequenced. Our results correct errors in the published DNA sequence. The
putative polypeptide encoded by HCM1 is 564 amino acids long and has a predicted 
molecular weight of 63,622. Antisera prepared against Hcm1p detect a protein that
is overproduced in yeast strains overexpressing HCM1 and has an apparent
molecular mass of 65 kDa. Eighty-six amino acid residues in the N terminus of
Hcm1p show 50% identity with a DNA-binding region of the fork head family of
DNA-binding proteins. When fused to the DNA-binding domain of Gal4p, residues 139
to 511 of Hcm1p can act as a strong activator of transcription. However,
overexpression of HCM1 does not affect the expression of calmodulin. Furthermore,
Hcm1p does not bind to calmodulin in a gel overlay assay. Thus, overexpression of
HCM1 enhances calmodulin function by an apparently indirect mechanism.

PMCID: PMC359490
PMID: 8441413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1534-46.

The mechanism by which the human apolipoprotein B gene reducer operates involves 
blocking of transcriptional activation by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3.

Paulweber B(1), Sandhofer F, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Landeskrankenanstalten Salzburg,
Austria.

Previously, we showed that when a DNA fragment extending from -3067 to -2734 of
the human apolipoprotein B (apo-B) gene is inserted immediately upstream of an
apo-B promoter segment (-139 to +121), transcription from this promoter is
reduced by about 10-fold in cultured colon carcinoma cells (CaCo-2) but not in
cultured hepatoma cells (HepG2). We postulated that this reducer operates by a
mechanism involving active repression of a transcriptional activator that binds
to the segment from -111 to -88 of the apo-B promoter (B. Paulweber and B.
Levy-Wilson, J. Biol. Chem. 266:24161-24168 1991). In the current study, the
reducer element has been localized to a 24-bp sequence from -2801 to -2778 of the
apo-B gene that contains a binding site for the negative regulatory protein
ARP-1. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3 alpha (HNF-3 alpha) binds to the sequence 5'-TGTTTGCTTTTC-3'
from -95 to -106 of the apo-B promoter, to stimulate transcription.
Transcriptional activation by HNF-3 is repressed when the reducer sequence is
inserted immediately upstream of the HNF-3 binding site, suggesting a mechanism
by which the reducer-bound protein blocks the activation promoted by HNF-3. Data 
from cotransfection experiments in which ARP-1 is overexpressed in the absence of
its binding site suggest that ARP-1 interacts either directly or via a mediator
protein with proteins recognizing the HNF-3 site and that this interaction is
sufficient to repress transcriptional activation by HNF-3. Because
transcriptional activation by Sp1 is not affected by the reducer, it is unlikely 
that the reducer interacts directly with basic components of the transcriptional 
machinery.

PMCID: PMC359465
PMID: 8441395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Sep 15;89(18):8754-8.

Developmentally regulated Drosophila gene family encoding the fork head domain.

Häcker U(1), Grossniklaus U, Gehring WJ, Jäckle H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für biophysikalische Chemie, Abteilung Molekulare
Entwicklungsbiologie, Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

We have isolated seven Drosophila genes by means of low-stringency hybridization 
to a DNA probe containing the coding sequence for the protein domain shared by
the rodent hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factor HNF3A (alpha) and the
product of the Drosophila region-specific homeotic gene fork head (fkh). The
previously unreported genes encode a 110-amino acid conserved sequence, which we 
call the fork head (fkh) domain. Two of these fkh-domain-encoding genes ("FD
genes") map to the sloppy paired locus (slp), which exerts segmentation gene
function. The expression patterns of the other FD genes suggest that their
protein products are likely to be involved in gut formation, mesoderm
specification, and some specific aspects of neural development. The FD gene
products presumably represent a family of transcription factors that, like the
previously identified DNA-binding proteins, contribute to early developmental
decisions in cell fates during embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC49999
PMID: 1356269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genomics. 1992 Jun;13(2):264-8.

Murine chromosomal location of four hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors:
HNF-3 alpha, HNF-3 beta, HNF-3 gamma, and HNF-4.

Avraham KB(1), Prezioso VR, Chen WS, Lai E, Sladek FM, Zhong W, Darnell JE Jr,
Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, National Cancer Institute--Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702.

The genes for rat hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 and 4 (HNF-3 alpha, HNF-3 beta,
HNF-3 gamma, and HNF-4) have been mapped in mouse by analysis of restriction
fragment length polymorphisms in interspecific backcross mice. These
hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors are positive-acting transcription
factors with binding sites in regulatory regions of many genes expressed in
hepatocytes. Both HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma and HNF-4 are also expressed in
intestine. They have recently been implicated as potential participants in
endodermal development from early gut cells because of their close homology to
Drosophila genes, which themselves are expressed in the developing gut. Despite
having similar functional roles and highly conserved DNA binding domains, the
three loci from the Hnf-3 family of genes mapped to three different mouse
chromosomes, suggesting that the Hnf-3 family has become widely dispersed during 
evolution and implying the necessity for independent activation of each member of
the HNF-3 family.

PMID: 1612587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Sep;11(9):4405-14.

The extracellular matrix coordinately modulates liver transcription factors and
hepatocyte morphology.

DiPersio CM(1), Jackson DA, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912.

The extracellular matrix (ECM) promotes tissue morphogenesis, cell migration, and
the differentiation of a variety of cell types. However, the mechanisms by which 
ECM causes differentiated gene expression have been unknown. In this report, we
show that culturing the hepatocyte-derived cell line H2.35 on an ECM gel changes 
cell morphology and selectively stimulates the transcription of a subset of
liver-specific genes, including serum albumin. Transcriptional activation by ECM 
also occurs with transfected plasmids bearing the transcriptional enhancer of the
albumin gene. ECM substrates of different composition activated the albumin
enhancer only when the ECM promoted a cuboidal, differentiated cell morphology.
Enhancer activation by the ECM was mediated by two liver transcription factors,
HNF3 alpha and eH-TF, which appear to be regulated differently by matrix.
Specifically, we found that a collagen gel substratum caused a selective increase
in the factor HNF3 alpha at the levels of mRNA accumulation and DNA-binding
activity in nuclear extracts, both in H2.35 cells and in the hepatoma cell line
HepG2. We conclude that the ECM can stimulate cell differentiation by selectively
activating transcriptional regulatory factors and that such regulation occurs
coordinately with ECM-promoted changes in cell shape.

PMCID: PMC361303
PMID: 1875930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 11;19(15):4139-45.

Site-directed mutagenesis of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) binding sites in the
mouse transthyretin (TTR) promoter reveal synergistic interactions with its
enhancer region.

Costa RH(1), Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois, College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

The transthyretin (TTR) gene is regulated by two DNA regions which elicit
hepatocyte-specific expression: a proximal promoter and distal enhancer. The TTR 
promoter and enhancer are composed of at least eight DNA binding sites for three 
different hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), and AP-1/cJun. Site directed mutations within each of the HNF binding
sites in the TTR promoter were introduced to evaluate their contribution to
transcriptional activity in hepatoma cells. The data indicate that the strong
affinity HNF-3-S binding site (-106 to -94) is absolutely required for TTR
promoter activity since several mutations in this site eliminate TTR expression
in the context of its enhancer. Conversion of a second weak affinity HNF3-W site 
(-140 to -131) in the TTR promoter to a high affinity site resulted in higher
levels of expression. TTR mutations that disrupted several weak affinity sites
(HNF1, HNF3-W, and HNF4) only slightly diminished expression levels in the
presence of the TTR enhancer. In contrast, when we deleted the TTR enhancer from 
these HNF mutant constructs, TTR expression decreased to undetectable levels.
This result suggests cooperation between the factors binding to the TTR promoter 
and enhancer regions. These results also demonstrate that the HNF3-S site alone
is not sufficient to activate TTR transcription, but rather requires the
participation of three cell-specific factors to elicit minimal promoter activity.
The complexity of this promoter design and the requirement for a minimal number
of cell-specific factors to achieve transcription allows us to propose a model
which may explain the maintenance of tissue-specific expression of TTR.

PMCID: PMC328553
PMID: 1870969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. New Biol. 1991 Mar;3(3):289-96.

Differential regulation of hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors explains
changes in albumin and transthyretin gene expression among hepatoma cells.

Herbst RS(1), Nielsch U, Sladek F, Lai E, Babiss LE, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

To investigate the regulation of genes whose expression is enriched in liver we
studied expression of the albumin and transthyretin (TTR) genes in a series of
rat hepatoma cell lines (FaO, C2, C2rev7, and H5) that express these genes at
different rates. The level of expression of albumin and TTR was compared to the
expression and DNA-binding activity of four transcription factors, HNF1/LFB1,
C/EBP, HNF3, and HNF4, that are found at high concentrations in liver. We
conclude that the levels of these factors are controlled both transcriptionally
(HNF-3, HNF-4, and C/EBP) and post-transcriptionally (HNF-1/LFB1), and that the
cellular concentration of these DNA-binding proteins helps explain the level of
transcriptional activity observed for the genes they regulate.

PMID: 1878351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Genes Dev. 1991 Mar;5(3):416-27.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha belongs to a gene family in mammals that is
homologous to the Drosophila homeotic gene fork head.

Lai E(1), Prezioso VR, Tao WF, Chen WS, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021.

By analysis of cDNA clones that cross-hybridized with a portion of the cDNA
encoding the recently described rat protein hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha
(HNF-3 alpha, previously called HNF-3A), we now describe two additional members, 
HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 gamma, of this gene family. A 110-amino-acid region in the
DNA-binding domain of this family is not only very highly conserved in rodents
(HNF-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma are identical in 93 of 110 amino acids in
this region) but also in Drosophila where the homeotic gene fork head has 88 of
the 93 residues that are identical in the three rat genes. The HNF-3 family in
rodents is expressed in cells that derive from the lining of the primitive gut;
some of the embryonic Drosophila cells in which fork head is expressed also give 
rise to gut and salivary glands. Thus, it appears that this gene family, the
DNA-binding portion of which is unlike that of any previously recognized
DNA-binding proteins, may contribute to differentiation of cells in internal
organs in both vertebrates and invertebrates.

PMID: 1672118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Cell. 1990 Nov 2;63(3):455-6.

The fork head domain: a novel DNA binding motif of eukaryotic transcription
factors?

Weigel D, Jäckle H.

PMID: 2225060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Genes Dev. 1990 Aug;4(8):1427-36.

HNF-3A, a hepatocyte-enriched transcription factor of novel structure is
regulated transcriptionally.

Lai E(1), Prezioso VR, Smith E, Litvin O, Costa RH, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021.

Hepatocyte-specific gene expression requires the interaction of many proteins
with multiple binding sites in the regulatory regions. HNF-3 is a site found to
be important in the maximal hepatocyte-specific expression of several genes. We
find that liver nuclear extracts contain three major binding activities for this 
site, which we call HNF-3A, HNF-3B, and HNF-3C. Purification from rat liver
nuclear extracts of HNF-3A and HNF-3C reveals that each activity corresponds to a
distinct polypeptide, as determined by SDS-PAGE. Peptide sequence derived from
the most abundant species, HNF-3A, was used for synthesizing probes with which to
isolate a cDNA clone of this protein. The encoded protein contains 466 amino
acids (48.7 kD) and has binding properties identical to those of the purified
protein. A 160-amino-acid region that does not resemble the binding domain of any
known transcription factor is essential for DNA binding. The mRNA for HNF-3A is
present in the rat liver but not in brain, kidney, intestine, or spleen, and the 
basis for this difference is cell-specific regulation of HNF-3A gene
transcription.

PMID: 2227418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Growth Differ. 1990 Jan;1(1):47-52.

Transcriptional activators in hepatocytes.

Johnson PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NCI-Frederick Cancer Research Facility BRI-Basic Research Program, Maryland
21701.

PMID: 2078499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Endocrinol. 1989 Dec;123(3):509-18.

Activity of 17 beta-hydroxysteroid oxidoreductase in tissues of the human fetus.

Milewich L(1), MacDonald PC, Carr BR.

Author information: 
(1)Cecil H. and Ida Green Center for Biology Sciences, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School, Dallas 75235.

The interconversion of oestrone and oestradiol, androstenedione and testosterone,
and dehydroepiandrosterone and 5-androstene-3 beta,17 beta-diol in mammalian
tissues is catalysed by 17 beta-hydroxysteroid oxidoreductase (17 beta-HSOR). To 
identify tissue sites of 17 beta-HSOR activity in the human fetus, microsomal
fractions from 15 different fetal tissues obtained from first and second
trimester pregnancies were used for evaluation of enzymatic activity by use of
[17 alpha-3H] oestradiol as the substrate and NADP+ as the co-factor. With these 
reagents, the enzyme-catalysed reaction led to the production of both
non-radiolabelled oestrone and NADP3H in equimolar amounts; the radioactivity
associated with NADP3H was used to quantify 17 beta-HSOR activity. Activity of 17
beta-HSOR was present in microsomes of all the tissues evaluated. The specific
activity of the enzyme was highest in liver and placental microsomes. The
interconversion of oestradiol and oestrone in microsomal fractions of nine
different fetal tissues was studied by the use of substrates labelled with
tritium at stable nuclear positions ([6,7-3H]oestradiol and [6,7-3H]oestrone).
The products, [3H]oestrone and [3H]oestradiol, were quantified by the use of
established techniques; other metabolites formed in these incubations were not
identified. The reductive pathway of metabolism (oestrone to oestradiol) appeared
to be favoured in microsomal fractions prepared from placenta, fetal zone of the 
adrenal gland and, possibly, lung. The oxidative pathway (oestradiol to oestrone)
appeared to be favoured in microsomes prepared from liver, intestine, stomach,
kidney, brain and heart. 17 beta-HSOR activity in fetal liver also was assessed
by the use of fresh and frozen-thawed tissue, homogenate, subcellular fractions, 
and, also, in primary hepatocytes maintained in culture; the specific activity of
the enzyme was highest in the microsomal fraction of liver tissue and 17
beta-HSOR activity in liver microsomes was linear with time of incubation up to 1
h. In hepatocytes, the enzymatic activity was linear with time of incubation up
to 2 h and with cell number up to 2.5 x 10(5) cells/ml; the apparent Michaelis
constant of hepatocyte 17 beta-HSOR for oestradiol was 11 mumol/l. The specific
activity of 17 beta-HSOR did not change after pretreatment of hepatocytes for 24 
h with insulin, glucagon or dexamethasone.

PMID: 2558148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


